The Project Gutenberg EBook of Barrington, by Charles James LeverThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: BarringtonVolume I (of II)Author: Charles James LeverIllustrator: Phiz.Release Date: January 8, 2011 [EBook #34882]Last Updated: February 27, 2018Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BARRINGTON ***Produced by David WidgerBARRINGTONVolume I.By Charles James LeverWith Illustrations By Phiz.Boston: Little, Brown, And Company.1907.[Illustration: frontispiece]BARRINGTON.CHAPTER I. THE FISHERMAN'S HOMEIf there should be, at this day we live in, any one bold enough toconfess that he fished the river Nore, in Ireland, some forty years ago,he might assist me by calling to mind a small inn, about two miles fromthe confluence of that river with the Barrow, a spot in great favor withthose who followed the "gentle craft."It was a very unpretending hostel, something wherein cottageand farmhouse were blended, and only recognizable as a place ofentertainment by a tin trout suspended over the doorway, with the modestinscription underneath,--"Fisherman's Home." Very seldom is it, indeed,that hotel pledges are as honestly fulfilled as they were in thissimple announcement. The house was, in all that quiet comfort andunostentatious excellence can make, a veritable Home! Standing in a fineold orchard of pear and damson trees, it was only approachable by a pathwhich led from the highroad, about two miles off, or by the river, whichwound round the little grassy promontory beneath the cottage. On theopposite side of the stream arose cliffs of considerable height, theirterraced sides covered with larch and ash, around whose stems theholly, the laurel, and arbutus grew in a wild and rich profusion. A highmountain, rugged with rock and precipice, shut in the picture, and gaveto the river all the semblance of a narrow lake.The Home, as may be imagined, was only resorted to by fishermen, andof these not many; for the chosen few who knew the spot, with thechurlishness of true anglers, were strenuously careful to keep thesecret to themselves. But another and stronger cause contributed to thisseclusion. The landlord was a reduced gentleman, who, only anxious toadd a little to his narrow fortune, would not have accepted a greaterprosperity at the cost of more publicity, and who probably onlyconsented to his occupation on finding how scrupulously his guestsrespected his position.Indeed, it was only on leave-taking, and then far from painfully, youwere reminded of being in an inn. There was no noise, no bustle; books,magazines, flowers, lay about; cupboards lay open, with all theircordials free to take. You might dine under the spreading sycamorebeside the well, and have your dessert for the plucking. No obsequiouswaiter shook his napkin as you passed, no ringleted barmaid crossed yourmusing steps, no jingling of bells, or discordant cries, or high-voicedremonstrances disturbed you. The hum of the summer bee, or the flappingplash of a trout, were about the only sounds in the stillness, and allwas as peaceful and as calm and as dreamy as the most world-weary couldhave wished it.Of those who frequented the spot, some merely knew that the host hadseen better days. Others, however, were aware that Peter Barringtonhad once been a man of large fortune, and represented his county in theIrish Parliament. Though not eminent as a politician, he was one ofthe great convivial celebrities of a time that boasted of Curran, andAvanmore, and Parsons, and a score of others, any one of whom, in ourday, would have made a society famous. Barrington, too, was the almonerof the monks of the screw, and "Peter's pence" was immortalized in asong by Ned Lysaght, of which I once possessed, but have lost a copy.One might imagine there could be no difficulty in showing how in thatwild period of riotous living and costly rivalry an Irish gentleman ranthrough all his property and left himself penniless. It was, indeed,a time of utter recklessness, many seeming possessed of thatdevil-may-care spirit that drives a drowning crew to break open thespirit-room and go down in an orgie. But Barrington's fortune was solarge, and his successes on the turf so considerable, that it appearedincredible, when his estates came to the hammer, and all his personalproperty was sold off; so complete his ruin, that, as he said himself,the "only shelter he had was an umbrella, and even that he borrowed fromDan Driscoll, the sheriff's officer."Of course there were theories in plenty to account for the disaster,and, as usual, so many knew, many a long day ago, how hard pressed hehad been for money, and what ruinous interest he was obliged to pay,till at last rumors filtered all down to one channel, and the worldagreed that it was all his son's doing, and that the scamp George hadruined his father. This son, his only child, had gone out to India ina cavalry regiment, and was celebrated all over the East for a costlysplendor that rivalled the great Government officials. From everyretired or invalided officer who came back from Bengal were heardstories of mad Barring-ton's extravagance: his palace on the Hooghly,his racing stud, his elephants, his army of retainers,--all narrativeswhich, no matter in what spirit retailed, seemed to delight old Peter,who, at every fresh story of his son's spendthrift magnificence, wouldbe sure to toast his health with a racy enthusiasm whose sincerity wasnot to be doubted.Little wonder need there be if in feeding such extravagance a vastestate melted away, and acre followed acre, till all that remained ofa property that ranked next to the Ormonds' was the little cottage overwhose door the tin-trout dangled, and the few roods of land around it:sorry remnant of a princely fortune!But Barrington himself had a passion, which, inordinately indulged, hasbrought many to their ruin. He was intensely fond of law. It was to himall that gambling is to other men. All that gamesters feel of hopeand fear, all the intense excitement they derive from the vacillatingfortunes of play, Barrington enjoyed in a lawsuit. Every step of theproceeding had for him an intense interest. The driest legal documents,musty declarations, demurrers, pleadings, replies, affidavits, andcounter-affidavits were his choicest reading; and never did a young ladyhurry to her room with the last new novel with a stronger anticipationof delight than did Barrington when carrying away to his little snuggerya roll of parchments or rough drafts, whose very iterations and jargonwould have driven most men half crazy. This same snuggery of his was acuriosity, too, the walls being all decorated with portraits of legalcelebrities, not selected with reference to their merit or distinction,but solely from their connection with some suit in which he had beenengaged; and thus under the likeness of Chief Baron O'Grady might beread, "Barring-ton versus Brazier, 1802; a juror withdrawn:" JusticeMoore's portrait was inscribed, "Argument in Chambers, 1808," and so on;even to the portraits of leading counsel, all were marked and dated onlyas they figured in the great campaign,--the more than thirty years' warhe carried on against Fortune.Let not my reader suppose for one moment that this litigious taste grewout of a spirit of jarring discontent or distrust. Nothing of the kind.Barrington was merely a gambler; and with whatever dissatisfaction thedeclaration may be met, I am prepared to show that gambling, howeverfaulty in itself, is not the vice of cold, selfish, and sordid men,but of warm, rash, sometimes over-generous temperaments. Be it wellremembered that the professional play-man is, of all others, the onewho has least of a gamester in his heart; his superiority lying in thesimple fact that his passions are never engaged, his interest neverstirred. Oh! beware of yourself in company with the polished antagonist,who only smiles when he loses, whom nothing adverse ever disturbs, butis calmly serene under the most pitiless pelting of luck. To come back:Barrington's passion for law was an intense thirst for a certain speciesof excitement; a verdict was to him the odd trick. Let him, however, butwin the game, there never was a man so indifferent about the stakes.For many a year back he had ceased to follow the great events of theworld. For the stupendous changes in Europe he cared next to nothing. Hescarcely knew who reigned over this empire or that kingdom. Indifferentto art, science, letters, and even society, his interest was intenseabout all that went on in the law courts, and it was an interest socatholic that it took in everything and everybody, from the great judgeupon the bench to the small taxing-officer who nibbled at the bill ofcosts.Fortunately for him, his sister, a maiden lady of some eighteen ortwenty years his junior, had imbibed nothing of this passion, and, byher prudent opposition to it, stemmed at least the force of that currentwhich was bearing him to ruin. Miss Dinah Barrington had been the greatbelle of the Irish court,--I am ashamed to say how long ago,--and thoughat the period my tale opens there was not much to revive the impression,her high nose, and full blue eyes, and a mass of wonderfully unchangedbrown hair, proclaimed her to be--what she was very proud to callherself--a thorough Barrington, a strong type of a frank nature, with abold, resolute will, and a very womanly heart beneath it.When their reverses of fortune first befell them, Miss Barrington wishedto emigrate. She thought that in Canada, or some other far-away land,their altered condition might be borne less painfully, and that theycould more easily bend themselves to humble offices where none butstrangers were to look on them; but Barrington clung to his countrywith the tenacity of an old captain to a wreck. He declared he could notbring himself to the thought of leaving his bones in a strange land,but he never confessed what he felt to be the strongest tie of all,two unfinished lawsuits, the old record of Barrington v. Brazier, anda Privy Council case of Barrington and Lot Rammadahn Mohr against theIndia Company. To have left his country with these still undecidedseemed to him--like the act of a commander taking flight on the morningof a general action--an amount of cowardice he could not contemplate.Not that he confided this opinion to his sister, though he did so in thevery fullest manner to his old follower and servant, Darby Cassan. Darbywas the last remnant of a once princely retinue, and in his master'schoice of him to accompany his fallen fortunes, there was somethingstrangely indicative of the man. Had Darby been an old butler or abody-servant, had he been a favorite groom, or, in some other capacity,one whose daily duties had made his a familiar face, and whose functionscould still be available in an humble state, there would have seemedgood reason for the selection; but Darby was none of these: he had neverserved in hall or pantry; he had never brushed the cobweb from a bottle,or led a nag to the door. Of all human professions his were about thelast that could address themselves to the cares of a little household;for Darby was reared, bred, and passed fifty-odd years of his life as anearth-stopper!A very ingenious German writer has attempted to show that the sympathiesof the humble classes with pursuits far above their own has alwaysits origin in something of their daily life and habits, just as thesacristan of a cathedral comes to be occasionally a tolerable art criticfrom his continual reference to Rubens and Vandyck. It is possiblethat Darby may have illustrated the theory, and that his avocations asearth-stopper may have suggested what he assuredly possessed, a perfectpassion for law. If a suit was a great game to Barrington, to Darbyit was a hunt! and though his personal experiences never soared beyondQuarter Sessions, he gloried in all he saw there of violence andaltercation, of vituperative language and impassioned abuse. Had he beena rich man, free to enjoy his leisure, he would have passed all hisdays listening to these hot discussions. They were to him a sort ofintellectual bull-fight, which never could be too bloody or too cruel.Have I said enough, therefore, to show the secret link which boundthe master to the man? I hope so; and that my reader is proud of aconfidence with which Miss Barrington herself was never intrusted.She believed that Darby had been taken into favor from some marvellousability he was supposed to possess, applicable to their new venture asinnkeepers. Phrenology would perhaps have pronounced Darby a heaven-bornhost, for his organ of acquisitiveness was grandly developed. Amidstthat great household, where the thriftless habits of the master haddescended to the servants, and rendered all reckless and wasteful alike,Darby had thriven and grown almost rich. Was it that the Irish climateused its influence over him; for in his practice to "put by somethingfor a rainy day," his savings had many promptings? As the reputationof having money soon attached to him, he was often applied to in thehunting-field, or at the kennel, for small loans, by the young bloodswho frequented the Hall, and, being always repaid three or four fold, hegrew to have a very high conception of what banking must be when doneon a large scale. Besides all this, he quickly learned that no characterattracts more sympathy, especially amongst the class of young squiresand sporting-men, than a certain quaint simplicity, so flattering in itscontrast to their own consummate acuteness. Now, he was simple to theirhearts' content. He usually spoke of himself as "Poor Darby, God helphim!" and, in casting up those wonderful accounts, which he kept bynotches on a tally-stick, nothing was more amusing than to witness hisbewilderment and confusion, the inconceivable blunders he wouldmake, even to his own disadvantage, all sure to end at last in theheart-spoken confession that it was "clean beyand him," and "he 'd leaveit all to your honor; pay just what ye plaze, and long life to ye!"Is it that women have some shrewd perception of character denied to men?Certainly Darby never imposed on Miss Barrington. She read him like abook, and he felt it. The consequence was a very cordial dislike, whichstrengthened with every year of their acquaintance.Though Miss Barrington ever believed that the notion of keeping an innoriginated with her brother, it was Darby first conceived the project,and, indeed, by his own skill and crafty intelligence was it carried on;and while the words "Peter Barrington" figured in very small letters, itis true, over the door to comply with a legal necessity, to most of thevisitors he was a mere myth. Now, if Peter Barrington was very happyto be represented by deputy,--or, better still, not represented atall,--Miss Dinah regarded the matter in a very different light. Hertheory was that, in accepting the humble station to which reverse offortune brought them, the world ought to see all the heroism and courageof the sacrifice. She insisted on being a foreground figure, just toshow them, as she said, "that I take nothing upon me. I am the hostessof a little wayside inn,--no more!" How little did she know of herown heart, and how far was she from even suspecting that it was theci-devant belle making one last throw for the admiration and homagewhich once were offered her freely.Such were the three chief personages who dwelt under that secluded roof,half overgrown with honeysuckle and dog-roses,--specimens of that widerworld without, where jealousies, and distrusts, and petty rivalriesare warring: for as in one tiny globule of water are represented theelements which make oceans and seas, so is it in the moral world; and"the family" is only humanity, as the artists say, "reduced."For years back Miss Barrington had been plotting to depose Darby. Withan ingenuity quite feminine, she managed to connect him with everychagrin that crossed and every annoyance that befell them. If the pigploughed up the new peas in the garden, it was Darby had left the gateopen; it was his hand overwound the clock; and a very significant hintshowed that when the thunder soured the beer, Mr. Darby knew more ofthe matter than he was likely to tell. Against such charges as these,iterated and reiterated to satiety, Barrington would reply by a smile,or a good-natured excuse, or a mere gesture to suggest patience, tillhis sister, fairly worn out, resolved on another line of action. "As shecould not banish the rats," to use her own words, "she would scuttle theship."To explain her project, I must go back in my story, and state that hernephew, George Barrington, had sent over to England, some fifteen yearsbefore, a little girl, whom he, called his daughter. She was consignedto the care of his banker in London, with directions that he shouldcommunicate with Mr. Peter Barrington, announce the child's safearrival, and consult with him as to her future destination. Now,when the event took place, Barrington was in the very crisis of hisdisasters. Overwhelmed with debts, pursued by creditors, regularlyhunted down, he was driven day by day to sign away most valuablesecurities for mere passing considerations, and obliged to accept anyconditions for daily support He answered the banker's letter, brieflystating his great embarrassment, and begging him to give the child hisprotection for a few weeks or so, till some arrangement of his affairsmight enable him to offer her a home.This time, however, glided over, and the hoped-for amendment nevercame,--far from it. Writs were out against him, and he was driven toseek a refuge in the Isle of Man, at that time the special sanctuary ofinsolvent sinners. Mr. Leonard Gower wrote again, and proposed that, ifno objection would be made to the plan, the child should be sent to acertain convent near Namur, in the Netherlands, where his own daughterwas then placed for her education. Aunt Dinah would have rejected,--ay,or would have resented such a proposal as an insult, had the world butgone on better with them. That her grand-niece should be brought up aCatholic was an outrage on the whole Barring-ton blood. But calamity hadbrought her low,--very low, indeed. The child, too, was a heathen,--aHindoo or a Buddhist, perhaps,--for the mother was a native woman,reputed, indeed, to be a princess. But who could know this? Who couldvouch that George was ever married at all, or if such a ceremony werepossible? All these were "attenuating circumstances," and as such sheaccepted them; and the measure of her submission was filled up when shereceived a portrait of the little girl, painted by a native artist. Itrepresented a dark-skinned, heavy-browed child, with wide, full eyes,thick lips, and an expression at once florid and sullen,--not any ofthe traits one likes to associate with infancy,--and it was with a halfshudder Aunt Dinah closed the miniature, and declared that "the sight ofthe little savage actually frightened her."Not so poor Barrington. He professed to see a great resemblance to hisson. It was George all over. To be sure, his eyes were deep blue, andhis hair a rich brown; but there was something in the nose, or perhapsit was in the mouth,--no, it was the chin,--ay, it was the chin wasGeorge's. It was the Barrington chin, and no mistake about it.At all events, no opposition was made to the banker's project, and thelittle girl was sent off to the convent of the Holy Cross, on the banksof the Meuse. She was inscribed on the roll as the Princess Doondiah,and bore the name till her father's death, when Mr. Gower suggested thatshe should be called by her family name. The letter with the proposal,by some accident, was not acknowledged, and the writer, taking silenceto mean consent, desired the superior to address her, henceforth, asMiss Barrington; the first startling intimation of the change beinga strangely, quaintly written note, addressed to her grand-aunt, andsigned "Josephine Barrington." It was a cold, formal letter,--so veryformal, indeed, as to read like the copy of a document,--askingfor leave to enter upon a novitiate of two years' duration, at theexpiration of which she would be nineteen years of age, and in aposition to decide upon taking the veil for life. The permission, veryurgently pressed for by Mr. Gower in another letter, was accorded,and now we have arrived at that period in which but three months onlyremained of the two years whose closure was to decide her fate forever.Barrington had long yearned to see her. It was with deep and bitterself-reproach he thought over the cold neglect they had shown her. Shewas all that remained of poor George, his boy,--for so he calledhim, and so he thought of him,--long after the bronzed cheek and theprematurely whitened hair had tempered his manhood. To be sure, all theworld said, and he knew himself, how it was chiefly through the "boy's"extravagance he came to ruin. But it was over now. The event that sobersdown reproach to sorrow had come. He was dead! All that arose to memoryof him were the traits that suggested hopes of his childhood, or gavetriumph in his riper years; and oh, is it not better thus? for whathearts would be left us if we were to carry in them the petty rancorsand jealousies which once filled them, but which, one day, we buried inthe cold clay of the churchyard.Aunt Dinah, moved by reasons long canvassed over in her own mind, atlast began to think of recalling her grand-niece. It was so very bold aproject that, at first, she could scarcely entertain it. The Popery wasvery dreadful! Her imagination conjured up the cottage converted into alittle Baal, with false gods and graven images, and holy-water fontsat every turn; but the doubtful legitimacy was worse again. She hada theory that it was by lapses of this kind the "blue blood" of oldfamilies grew deteriorated, and that the downfall of many an ancienthouse was traceable to these corruptions. Far better, she deemed it,that the Barringtons should die out forever than their line be continuedby this base and ignoble grafting.There is a contre for every pour in this world. It may be a weakand an insufficient one, it is true; but it is a certainty that all ourprojects must come to a debtor or creditor reckoning, and the very bestwe can do is to strike an honest balance!How Miss Dinah essayed to do this we shall learn in the next chapter andwhat follows it.CHAPTER II. A WET MORNING AT HOMEIf there was anything that possessed more than common terror forBarrington, it was a wet day at the cottage! It was on these drearyvisitations that his sister took the opportunity of going into"committee of supply,"--an occasion not merely for the discussionof fiscal matters, but for asking the most vexatious questions anddemanding the most unpleasant explanations.We can all, more or less, appreciate the happiness of that righthonorable gentleman on the Treasury bench who has to reply to the crudeand unmeaning inquiries of some aspiring Oppositionist, and who wishesto know if her Majesty's Government have demanded an indemnity from theKing of Dahomey for the consul's family eaten by him at the last courtceremonial? What compensation is to be given to Captain Balrothery forhis week's imprisonment at Leghorn, in consequence of his having thrownthe customs officer and a landing waiter into the sea? Or what mark ofher Majesty's favor will the noble lord recommend should be conferredupon Ensign Digges for the admirable imitation he gave of the dancingdervishes at Benares, and the just ridicule he thus threw upon thesedegrading and heathenish rites?It was to a torture of this order, far more reasonable and pertinent,however, that Barrington usually saw himself reduced whenever theweather was so decidedly unfavorable that egress was impossible. Poorfellow, what shallow pretexts would he stammer out for absenting himselffrom home, what despicable subterfuges to put off an audience! He hadforgotten to put down the frame on that melon-bed.There was that awning over the boat not taken in. He 'd step out tothe stable and give Billy, the pony, a touch of the white oils on thatswelled hock. He 'd see if they had got the young lambs under cover. Infact, from his perturbed and agitated manner, you would have imaginedthat rain was one of the rarest incidents of an Irish climate, and onlythe very promptest measures could mitigate the calamity."May I ask where you are off to in such haste, Peter?" asked Miss Dinahone morning, just as Barrington had completed all his arrangements fora retreat; far readier to brave the elements than the more pitilesspelting that awaited him within doors."I just remembered," said he, mildly, "that I had left two night-linesout at the point, and with this fresh in the river it would be as wellif I 'd step down and see--""And see if the river was where it was yesterday," broke she in,sneeringly."No, Dinah. But you see that there 's this to be remarked aboutnight-lines--""That they never catch any fish!" said she, sternly. "It's no weatherfor you to go tramping about in the wet grass. You made fuss enoughabout your lumbago last week, and I suppose you don't want it backagain. Besides,"--and here her tongue grew authoritative,--"I have gotup the books." And with these words she threw on the table a number oflittle greasy-looking volumes, over which poor Barrington's sad glanceswandered, pretty much as might a victim's over the thumb-screws and theflesh-nippers of the Holy Inquisition."I've a slight touch of a headache this morning, Dinah.""It won't be cured by going out in the rain. Sit down there," said she,peremptorily, "and see with your own eyes how much longer your meanswill enable you to continue these habits of waste and extravagance.""These what?" said he, perfectly astounded."These habits of waste and extravagance, Peter Barring-ton. I repeat mywords."Had a venerable divine, being asked on the conclusion of an edifyingdiscourse, for how much longer it might be his intention to persist insuch ribaldries, his astonishment could scarce have been greater thanBarrington's."Why, sister Dinah, are we not keeping an inn? Is not this the'Fisherman's Home'?""I should think it is, Peter," said she, with scorn. "I suspect he findsit so. A very excellent name for it it is!""Must I own that I don't understand you, Dinah?""Of course you don't. You never did all your life. You never knew youwere wet till you were half drowned, and that's what the world callshaving such an amiable disposition! Ain't your friends nice friends?They are always telling you how generous you are,--how free-handed,--howbenevolent. What a heart he has! Ay, but thank Providence there's verylittle of that charming docility about me, is there?""None, Dinah,--none," said he, not in the least suspecting to what hewas bearing testimony.She became crimson in a minute, and in a tone of some emotion said, "Andif there had been, where should you and where should I be to-day? On theparish, Peter Barrington,--on the parish; for it 's neither your headnor your hands would have saved us from it.""You're right, Dinah; you're right there. You never spoke a truer word."And his voice trembled as he said it."I did n't mean that, Peter," said she, eagerly; "but you are tooconfiding, too trustful. Perhaps it takes a woman to detect all thelittle wiles and snares that entangle us in our daily life?""Perhaps it does," said he, with a deep sigh."At all events, you needn't sigh over it, Peter Barring-ton. It's notone of those blemishes in human nature that have to be deplored sofeelingly. I hope women are as good as men.""Fifty thousand times better, in every quality of kindliness andgenerosity.""Humph!" said she, tossing her head impatiently. "We 're not here for aquestion in ethics; it is to the very lowly task of examining the houseaccounts I would invite your attention. Matters cannot go on as they donow, if we mean to keep a roof over us.""But I have always supposed we were doing pretty well, Dinah. You knowwe never promised ourselves to gain a fortune by this venture; the veryutmost we ever hoped for was to help us along,--to aid us to make bothends meet at the end of the year And as Darby tells me--""Oh, Darby tells you! What a reliable authority to quote from! Oh, don'tgroan so heavily! I forgot myself. I would n't for the world impeachsuch fidelity or honesty as his.""Be reasonable, sister Dinah,--do be reasonable; and if there isanything to lay to his charge--""You 'll hear the case, I suppose," cried she, in a voice high-pitchedin passion. "You 'll sit up there, like one of your favorite judges, andcall on Dinah Barrington against Cassan; and perhaps when the cause isconcluded we shall reverse our places, and I become the defendant! Butif this is your intention, brother Barrington, give me a little time. Ibeg I may have a little time."Now, this was a very favorite request of Miss Barring-ton's, and sheusually made it in the tone of a martyr; but truth obliges us to ownthat never was a demand less justifiable. Not a three-decker of theChannel fleet was readier for a broadside than herself. She was alwaysat quarters and with a port-fire burning.Barrington did not answer this appeal; he never moved,--he scarcelyappeared to breathe, so guarded was he lest his most unintentionalgesture should be the subject of comment."When you have recovered from your stupefaction," said she, calmly,"will you look over that line of figures, and then give a glance at thistotal? After that I will ask you what fortune could stand it.""This looks formidable, indeed," said he, poring over the page throughhis spectacles."It is worse, Peter. It is formidable.""After all, Dinah, this is expenditure. Now for the incomings!""I suspect you 'll have to ask your prime minister for them. Perhapshe may vouchsafe to tell you how many twenty-pound notes have gone toAmerica, who it was that consigned a cargo of new potatoes to Liverpool,and what amount he invested in yarn at the last fair of Graigue? andwhen you have learned these facts, you will know all you are ever likelyto know of your profits!" I have no means of conveying the intensescorn with which she uttered the last word of this speech."And he told me--not a week back--that we were going on famously!""Why wouldn't he? I 'd like to hear what else he could say. Famously,indeed, for him with a strong balance in the savings-bank, and a goldwatch--yes, Peter, a gold watch--in his pocket. This is no delusion,nor illusion, or whatever you call it, of mine, but a fact,--a downrightfact.""He has been toiling hard many a year for it, Dinah, don't forget that.""I believe you want to drive me mad, Peter. You know these are thingsthat I can't bear, and that's the reason you say them. Toil, indeed! Inever saw him do anything except sit on a gate at the Lock Meadows, witha pipe in his mouth; and if you asked him what he was there for, it wasa 'track' he was watching, a 'dog-fox that went by every afternoon tothe turnip field.' Very great toil that was!""There was n't an earth-stopper like him in the three next counties; andif I was to have a pack of foxhounds tomorrow--""You 'd just be as great a foot as ever you were, and the more sorry Iam to hear it; but you 're not going to be tempted, Peter Barrington.It's not foxes we have to think of, but where we 're to find shelter forourselves.""Do you know of anything we could turn to, more profitable, Dinah?"asked he, mildly."There 's nothing could be much less so, I know that! You are notvery observant, Peter, but even to you it must have become apparent thatgreat changes have come over the world in a few years. The persons whoformerly indulged their leisure were all men of rank and fortune. Whoare the people who come over here now to amuse themselves? Staleybridgeand Manchester creatures, with factory morals and bagman manners;treating our house like a commercial inn, and actually disputing thebill and asking for items. Yes, Peter, I overheard a fellow tellingDarby last week that the ''ouse was dearer than the Halbion!'""Travellers will do these things, Dinah.""And if they do, they shall be shown the door for it, as sure as my nameis Dinah Barrington.""Let us give up the inn altogether, then," said he, with a suddenimpatience."The very thing I was going to propose, Peter," said she, solemnly."What!--how?" cried he, for the acceptance of what only escaped him ina moment of anger overwhelmed and stunned him. "How are we to live,Dinah?""Better without than with it,--there's my answer to that. Let uslook the matter fairly in the face, Peter," said she, with a calm andmeasured utterance. "This dealing with the world 'on honor' must everbe a losing game. To screen ourselves from the vulgar necessities of ourcondition, we must submit to any terms. So long as our intercoursewith life gave us none but gentlemen to deal with, we escaped well andsafely. That race would seem to have thinned off of late, however; or,what comes to the same, there is such a deluge of spurious coin onenever knows what is real gold.""You may be right, Dinah; you may be right.""I know I am right; the experience has been the growth of years too. Allour efforts to escape the odious contact of these people have multipliedour expenses. Where one man used to suffice, we keep three. Youyourself, who felt it no indignity to go out a-fishing formerly with achance traveller, have to own with what reserve and caution you wouldaccept such companionship now.""Nay, nay, Dinah, not exactly so far as that--""And why not? Was it not less than a fortnight ago three Birmingham mencrossed the threshold, calling out for old Peter,--was old Peter to thegood yet?""They were a little elevated with wine, sister, remember that; and,besides, they never knew, never had heard of me in my once condition.""And are we so changed that they cannot recognize the class we pertainto?""Not you, Dinah, certainly not you; but I frankly own I can put upwith rudeness and incivility better than a certain showy courtesy somevulgar people practise towards me. In the one case I feel I am notknown, and my secret is safe. In the other, I have to stand out asthe ruined gentleman, and I am not always sure that I play the part asgracefully as I ought.""Let us leave emotions, Peter, and descend to the lowland of arithmetic,by giving up two boatmen, John and Terry--""Poor Terry!" sighed he, with a faint, low accent"Oh! if it be 'poor Terry!' I 've done," said she, closing the book, andthrowing it down with a slap that made him start."Nay, dear Dinah; but if we could manage to let him have something,--sayfive shillings a week,--he 'd not need it long; and the port wine thatwas doing his rheumatism such good is nearly finished; he'll miss itsorely.""Were you giving him Henderson's wine,--the '11 vintage?" cried she,pale with indignation."Just a bottle or two, Dinah; only as medicine.""As a fiddlestick, sir! I declare I have no patience with you; there's no excuse for such folly, not to say the ignorance of giving thesecreatures what they never were used to. Did not Dr. Dill tell you thattonics, to be effective, must always have some relation to the dailyhabits of the patient?""Very true, Dinah; but the discourse was pronounced when I saw himputting a bottle of old Madeira in his gig that I had left for AnneM'Cafferty, adding, he 'd send her something far more strengthening.""Right or wrong, I don't care; but this I know, Terry Dogherty is n'tgoing to finish off Henderson's port. It is rather too much to stand,that we are to be treating beggars to luxuries, when we can't sayto-morrow where we shall find salt for our potatoes." This was asomewhat favorite illustration of Miss Barrington,--either implying thatthe commodity was an essential to human life, or the use of it an emblemof extreme destitution."I conclude we may dispense with Tom Divett's services," resumed she."We can assuredly get on without a professional rat-catcher.""If we should, Dinah, we'll feel the loss; the rats make sad havoc ofthe spawn, and destroy quantities of the young fish, besides.""His two ugly terriers eat just as many chickens, and never leave us anegg in the place. And now for Mr. Darby--""You surely don't think of parting with Darby, sister Dinah?""He shall lead the way," replied she, in a firm and peremptory voice;"the very first of the batch! And it will, doubtless, be a great comfortto you to know that you need not distress yourself about any provisionfor his declining years. It is a care that he has attended to on his ownpart. He 'll go back to a very well-feathered nest, I promise you."Barrington sighed heavily, for he had a secret sorrow on that score.He knew, though his sister did not, that he had from year to year beenborrowing every pound of Darby's savings to pay the cost of law charges,always hoping and looking for the time when a verdict in his favor wouldenable him to restore the money twice told. With a very dreary sigh,then, did he here allude "to the well-feathered nest" of one he had leftbare and destitute. He cleared his throat, and made an effort to avowthe whole matter; but his courage failed him, and he sat mournfullyshaking his head, partly in sorrow, partly in shame. His sister noticednone of these signs; she was rapidly enumerating all the reductionsthat could be made,--all the dependencies cut off; there were theboats, which constantly required repairs; the nets, eternally beingrenewed,--all to be discarded; the island, a very pretty little objectin the middle of the river, need no longer be rented. "Indeed," saidshe, "I don't know why we took it, except it was to give those memorablepicnics you used to have there.""How pleasant they were, Dinah; how delightful!" said he, totallyoverlooking the spirit of her remark."Oh! they were charming, and your own popularity was boundless; but I'd have you to bear in mind, brother Peter, that popularity is no morea poor man's luxury than champagne. It is a very costly indulgence, andcan rarely be had on 'credit.'"Miss Barrington had pared down retrenchment to the very quick. Shehad shown that they could live not only without boatmen, rat-catchers,gardener, and manservant, but that, as they were to give up their dailynewspaper, they could dispense with a full ration of candle-light;and yet, with all these reductions, she declared that there was stillanother encumbrance to be pruned away, and she proudly asked her brotherif he could guess what it was?Now Barrington felt that he could not live without a certain allowanceof food, nor would it be convenient, or even decent, to dispense withraiment; so he began, as a last resource, to conjecture that his sisterwas darkly hinting at something which might be a substitute for a home,and save house-rent; and he half testily exclaimed, "I suppose we 're tohave a roof over us, Dinah!""Yes," said she, dryly, "I never proposed we should go and live in thewoods. What I meant had a reference, to Josephine--"Barrington's cheek flushed deeply in an instant, and, with a voicetrembling with emotion, he said,--"If you mean, Dinah, that I'm to cut off that miserable pittance--thatforty pounds a year--I give to poor George's girl--" He stopped, for hesaw that in his sister's face which might have appalled a bolder heartthan his own; for while her eyes flashed fire, her thin lips trembledwith passion; and so, in a very faltering humility, he added: "But younever meant that sister Dinah. You would be the very last in the worldto do it.""Then why impute it to me; answer me that?" said she, crossing her handsbehind her back, and staring haughtily at him."Just because I 'm clean at my wits' end,--just because I neitherunderstand one word I hear, or what I say in reply. If you 'll just tellme what it is you propose, I 'll do my best, with God's blessing,to follow you; but don't ask me for advice, Dinah, and don't fly outbecause I 'm not as quick-witted and as clever as yourself."There was something almost so abject in his misery that she seemedtouched by it, and, in a voice of a very calm and kindly meaning, shesaid,--"I have been thinking a good deal over that letter of Josephine's; shesays she wants our consent to take the veil as a nun; that, by the rulesof the order, when her novitiate is concluded, she must go into theworld for at least some months,--a time meant to test her faithfulnessto her vows, and the tranquillity with which she can renounce foreverall the joys and attractions of life. We, it is true, have no means ofsurrounding her with such temptations; but we might try and supply theirplace by some less brilliant but not less attractive ones. We mightoffer her, what we ought to have offered her years ago,--a home! What doyou say to this, Peter?""That I love you for it, sister Dinah, with all my heart," said he,kissing her on each cheek; "that it makes me happier than I knew I everwas to be again.""Of course, to bring Josephine here, this must not be an inn, Peter.""Certainly not, Dinah,--certainly not. But I can think of nothing butthe joy of seeing her,--poor George's child I How I have yearned to knowif she was like him,--if she had any of his ways, any traits of thatquaint, dry humor he had, and, above all, of that disposition that madehim so loved by every one.""And cheated by every one too, brother Peter; don't forget that!""Who wants to think of it now?" said he, sorrowfully."I never reject a thought because it has unpleasant associations. Itwould be but a sorry asylum which only admitted the well-to-do and thehappy.""How are we to get the dear child here, Dinah? Let us consider thematter. It is a long journey off.""I have thought of that too," said she, sententiously, "but not made upmy mind.""Let us ask M'Cormick about it, Dinah; he's coming up this eveningto play his Saturday night's rubber with Dill. He knows the Continentwell.""There will be another saving that I did n't remember, Peter. The weeklybottle of whiskey, and the candles, not to speak of the four or fiveshillings your pleasant companions invariably carry away with them,--allmay be very advantageously dispensed with.""When Josephine 's here, I 'll not miss it," said he, good-humoredly.Then suddenly remembering that his sister might not deem the speecha gracious one to herself, he was about to add something; but she wasgone.CHAPTER III. OUR NEXT NEIGHBORSShould there be amongst my readers any one whose fortune it has beenin life only to associate with the amiable, the interesting, and theagreeable, all whose experiences of mankind are rose-tinted, to him Iwould say, Skip over two people I am now about to introduce, and takeup my story at some later stage, for I desire to be truthful, and, as isthe misfortune of people in my situation, I may be very disagreeable.After all, I may have made more excuses than were needful. The personsI would present are in that large category, the commonplace, and only asuninviting and as tiresome as we may any day meet in a second-class onthe railroad. Flourish, therefore, penny trumpets, and announce MajorM'Cormick. The Major, so confidently referred to by Barringtonin our last chapter as a high authority on matters continental, was avery shattered remnant of the unhappy Walcheren expedition. He was asmall, mean-looking, narrow-faced man, with a thin, bald head, and redwhiskers. He walked very lame from an injury to his hip; "his wound,"he called it, though his candor did not explain that it was incurred bybeing thrown down a hatchway by a brother officer in a drunken brawl.In character he was a saving, penurious creature, without one singlesympathy outside his own immediate interests. When some sixteen oreighteen years before the Barringtons had settled in the neighborhood,the Major began to entertain thoughts of matrimony. Old soldiers arerather given to consider marriage as an institution especially intendedto solace age and console rheumatism, and so M'Cormick debated withhimself whether he had not arrived at the suitable time for thisindulgence, and also whether Miss Dinah Barrington was not theindividual destined to share his lot and season his gruel.But a few years back and his ambition would as soon have aspired to anarchduchess as to the sister of Barrington, of Barrington Hall, whoserealms of social distinction separated them; but now, fallen from theirhigh estate, forgotten by the world, and poor, they had come down--atleast, he thought so--to a level in which there would be no presumptionin his pretensions. Indeed, I half suspect that he thought there wassomething very high-minded and generous in his intentions with regard tothem. At all events, there was a struggle of some sort in his mind whichwent on from year to year undecided. Now, there are men--for the mostpart old bachelors--to whom an unfinished project is a positive luxury,who like to add, day by day, a few threads to the web of fate, but nomore. To the Major it was quite enough that "some fine day or other"--sohe phrased it--he 'd make his offer, just as he thought how, in the samepropitious weather, he 'd put a new roof on his cottage, and fill upthat quarry-hole near his gate, into which he had narrowly escapedtumbling some half-dozen times. But thanks to his caution andprocrastination, the roof, and the project, and the quarry-hole wereexactly, or very nearly, in the same state they had been eighteen yearsbefore.Rumor said--as rumor will always say whatever has a tinge of ill-naturein it--that Miss Barrington would have accepted him; vulgar reportdeclared that she would "jump at the offer." Whether this be, or not,the appropriate way of receiving a matrimonial proposal, the lady wasnot called upon to display her activity. He never told his love.It is very hard to forgive that secretary, home or foreign, who in theday of his power and patronage could, but did not, make us easy for lifewith this mission or that com-missionership. It is not easy to believethat our uncle the bishop could not, without any undue strain upon hisconscience, have made us something, albeit a clerical error, in hisdiocese, but infinitely more difficult is it to pardon him who, havingsuggested dreams of wedded happiness, still stands hesitating, doubting,and canvassing,--a timid bather, who shivers on the beach, and then putson his clothes again.It took a long time--it always does in such cases--ere Miss Barringtoncame to read this man aright. Indeed, the light of her own hopes haddazzled her, and she never saw him clearly till they were extinguished;but when the knowledge did come, it came trebled with compound interest,and she saw him in all that displayed his miserable selfishness; andalthough her brother, who found it hard to believe any one bad who hadnot been tried for a capital felony, would explain away many a meannessby saying, "It is just his way,--a way, and no more!" she spoke outfearlessly, if not very discreetly, and declared she detested him. Ofcourse she averred it was his manners, his want of breeding, andhis familiarity that displeased her. He might be an excellentcreature,--perhaps he was; that was nothing to her. All his moralqualities might have an interest for his friends; she was a mereacquaintance, and was only concerned for what related to his bearing insociety. Then Walcheren was positively odious to her. Some littlesolace she felt at the thought that the expedition was a failure andinglorious; but when she listened to the fiftieth time-told tale offever and ague, she would sigh, not for those who suffered, but over theone that escaped. It is a great blessing to men of uneventful lives andscant imagination when there is any one incident to which memory canrefer unceasingly. Like some bold headland last seen at sea, it lives inthe mind throughout the voyage. Such was this ill-starred expeditionto the Major. It dignified his existence to himself, though his memorynever soared above the most ordinary details and vulgar incidents. Thushe would maunder on for hours, telling how the ships sailed and partedcompany, and joined again; how the old "Brennus" mistook a signal andput back to Hull, and how the "Sarah Reeves," his own transport, wassent after her. Then he grew picturesque about Flushing, as firstseen through the dull fogs of the Scheldt, with village spires peepingthrough the heavy vapor, and the strange Dutch language, with its queernames for the vegetables and fruit brought by the boats alongside."You won't believe me, Miss Dinah, but, as I sit here, the peaches waslike little melons, and the cherries as big as walnuts.""They made cherry-bounce out of them, I hope, sir," said she, with ascornful smile."No, indeed, ma'am," replied he, dull to the sarcasm; "they ate them ina kind of sauce with roast-pig, and mighty good too!"But enough of the Major; and now a word, and only a word, for hiscompanion, already alluded to by Barrington.Dr. Dill had been a poor "Dispensary Doctor" for some thirty years, witha small practice, and two or three grand patrons at some miles off, whoemployed him for the servants, or for the children in "mild cases," andwho even extended to him a sort of contemptuous courtesy that serves tomake a proud man a bear, and an humble man a sycophant.Dill was the reverse of proud, and took to the other line with muchkindliness. To have watched him in his daily round you would have saidthat he liked being trampled on, and actually enjoyed being crushed. Hesmiled so blandly, and looked so sweetly under it all, as though it wasa kind of moral shampooing, from which he would come out all the fresherand more vigorous.The world is certainly generous in its dealings with these temperaments;it indulges them to the top of their hearts, and gives them humiliationsto their heart's content. Rumor--the same wicked goddess who libelledMiss Barrington--hinted that the doctor was not, within his own wallsand under his own roof, the suffering angel the world saw him, andthat he occasionally did a little trampling there on his own account.However, Mrs. Dill never complained; and though the children wore atremulous terror and submissiveness in their looks, they were onlysuitable family traits, which all redounded to their credit, and madethem "so like the doctor."Such were the two worthies who slowly floated along on the currentof the river of a calm summer's evening, to visit the Barringtons. Asusual, the talk was of their host. They discussed his character and hishabits and his debts, and the difficulty he had in raising that littleloan; and in close juxtaposition with this fact, as though pinned on theback of it, his sister's overweening pride and pretension. It had beenthe Major's threat for years that he 'd "take her down a peg one ofthese days." But either he was mercifully unwilling to perform the act,or that the suitable hour for it had not come; but there she remained,and there he left her, not taken down one inch, but loftier andhaughtier than ever. As the boat rounded the point from which thecottage was visible through the trees and some of the outhouses couldbe descried, they reverted to the ruinous state everything was fallinginto. "Straw is cheap enough, anyhow," said the Major. "He might put anew thatch on that cow-house, and I 'm sure a brush of paint would n'truin any one." Oh, my dear reader! have you not often heard--I know thatI have--such comments as these, such reflections on the indolence orindifference which only needed so very little to reform, done, too,without trouble or difficulty, habits that could be corrected, evil waysreformed, and ruinous tendencies arrested, all as it were by a "rush ofpaint," or something just as uncostly?"There does n't seem to be much doing here, Dill," said M'Cormick, asthey landed. "All the boats are drawn up ashore. And faith! I don'twonder, that old woman is enough to frighten the fish out of the river.""Strangers do not always like that sort of thing," modestly remarked thedoctor,--the "always" being peculiarly marked for emphasis. "Some willsay, an inn should be an inn.""That's my view of it. What I say is this: I want my bit of fish, andmy beefsteak, and my pint of wine, and I don't want to know that thelandlord's grandfather entertained the king, or that his aunt was alady-in-waiting. 'Be' as high as you like,' says I, 'but don't makethe bill so,'--eh, Dill?" And he cackled the harsh ungenial laugh whichseems the birthright of all sorry jesters; and the doctor gave a littlelaugh too, more from habit, however, than enjoyment."Do you know, Dill," said the Major, disengaging himself from the armwhich his lameness compelled him to lean on, and standing still in thepathway,--"do you know that I never reach thus far without having a sortof struggle with myself whether I won't turn back and go home again. Canyou explain that, now?""It is the wound, perhaps, pains you, coming up the hill.""It is not the wound. It's that woman!""Miss Barrington?""Just so. I have her before me now, sitting up behind the urn there, andsaying, 'Have you had tea, Major M'Cormick?' when she knows well she didn't give it to me. Don't you feel that going up to the table for yourcup is for all the world like doing homage?""Her manners are cold,--certainly cold.""I wish they were. It's the fire that's in her I 'm afraid of! She has aswicked an eye in her head as ever I saw.""She was greatly admired once, I 'm told; and she has many remains ofbeauty.""Oh! for the matter of looks, there's worse. It's her nature, hertemper,--herself, in fact, I can't endure.""What is it you can't endure, M'Cormick?" cried Barrington, emergingfrom a side walk where he had just caught the last words. "If it beanything in this poor place of mine, let me hear, that I may have itamended.""How are ye,--how are ye?" said the Major, with a very confused manner."I was talking politics with Dill. I was telling him how I hated themTories.""I believe they are all pretty much alike," said Barring-ton; "at least,I knew they were in my day. And though we used to abuse him, and drinkall kind of misfortunes to him every day of our lives, there was n't atruer gentleman nor a finer fellow in Ireland than Lord Castlereagh.""I'm sure of it. I've often heard the same remark," chimed in Dill."It's a pity you didn't think so at the time of the Union," saidM'Cormick, with a sneer."Many of us did; but it would not make us sell our country. But whatneed is there of going back to those times, and things that can't behelped now? Come in and have a cup of tea. I see my sister is waitingfor us."Why was it that Miss Barrington, on that evening, was grander andstatelier than ever? Was it some anticipation of the meditated change intheir station had impressed her manner with more of pride? I knownot; but true it is she received her visitors with a reserve that wasactually chilling. To no end did Barrington exert himself to conceal orcounteract this frigidity. In all our moral chemistry we have never yethit upon an antidote to a chilling reception.[Illustration: 046]The doctor was used to this freezing process, and did not sufferlike his companion. To him, life was a huge ice-pail; but he defiedfrost-bite, and bore it. The Major, however chafed and fidgeted underthe treatment, and muttered to himself very vengeful sentiments aboutthat peg he had determined to take her down from."I was hoping to be able to offer you a nosegay, dear lady," saidDill,--this was his customary mode of address to her, an ingeniousblending of affection with deference, but in which the stronger accenton the last word showed the deference to predominate,--"but the rain hascome so late, there's not a stock in the garden fit to present to you.""It is just as well, sir. I detest gillyflowers."The Major's eyes sparkled with a spiteful delight, for he was sorelyjealous of the doctor's ease under difficulties."We have, indeed, a few moss-roses.""None to be compared to our own, sir. Do not think of it."The Major felt that his was not a giving disposition, and consequentlyit exempted him from rubs and rebuffs of this sort. Meanwhile, unabashedby failure, the doctor essayed once more: "Mrs. Dill is only waiting tohave the car mended, to come over and pay her dutiful respects to you,Miss Dinah.""Pray tell her not to mind it, Dr. Dill," replied she, sharply, "or towait till the fourth of next month, which will make it exactly a yearsince her last visit; and her call can be then an annual one, like thetax-gatherer's.""Bother them for taxes altogether," chimed in Barrington, whose earonly caught the last word. "You haven't done with the county cess whenthere's a fellow at you for tithes; and they're talking of a poor-rate.""You may perceive, Dr. Dill, that your medicines have not achieved agreat success against my brother's deafness.""We were all so at Walcheren," broke in M'Cormick; "when we 'd come outof the trenches, we could n't hear for hours.""My voice may be a shrill one, Major M'Cormick, but I'll have you tobelieve that it has not destroyed my brother's tympanum.""It's not the tympanum is engaged, dear lady; it's the Eustachian tubeis the cause here. There's a passage leads down from the internal ear--""I declare, sir, I have just as little taste for anatomy as forfortification; and though I sincerely wish you could cure my brother, asI also wish these gentlemen could have taken Walcheren, I have not theslightest desire to know how.""I 'll beg a little more tea in this, ma'am," said the Major, holdingout his cup."Do you mean water, sir? Did you say it was too strong?""With your leave, I 'll take it a trifle stronger," said he, with amalicious twinkle in his eye, for he knew all the offence his speechimplied."I'm glad to hear you say so, Major M'Cormick. I'm happy to know thatyour nerves are stronger than at the time of that expedition you quotewith such pleasure. Is yours to your liking, sir?""I 'll ask for some water, dear lady," broke in Dill, who began to thinkthat the fire was hotter than usual. "As I said to Mrs. Dill, 'Molly,'says I, 'how is it that I never drink such tea anywhere as at the--'" Hestopped, for he was going to say, the Harringtons', and he trembled atthe liberty; and he dared not say the Fisherman's Home, lest it shouldbe thought he was recalling their occupation; and so, after a pauseand a cough, he stammered out--"'at the sweet cottage.'" Nor was hisconfusion the less at perceiving how she had appreciated his difficulty,and was smiling at it."Very few strangers in these parts lately, I believe," said M'Cormick,who knew that his remark was a dangerous one."I fancy none, sir," said she, calmly. "We, at least, have no customers,if that be the name for them.""It's natural, indeed, dear lady, you shouldn't know how they arecalled," began the doctor, in a fawning tone, "reared and brought up asyou were."The cold, steady stare of Miss Barrington arrested his speech; andthough he made immense efforts to recover himself, there was that in herlook which totally overcame him. "Sit down to your rubber, sir," saidshe, in a whisper that seemed to thrill through his veins. "You willfind yourself far more at home at the odd trick there, than attemptingto console me about my lost honors." And with this fierce admonition,she gave a little nod, half in adieu, half in admonition, and swepthaughtily out of the room.M'Cormick heaved a sigh as the door closed after her, which very plainlybespoke how much he felt the relief."My poor sister is a bit out of spirits this evening," said Barrington,who merely saw a certain show of constraint over his company, and neverguessed the cause. "We've had some unpleasant letters, and one thingor another to annoy us, and if she does n't join us at supper, you 'llexcuse her, I know, M'Cormick.""That we will, with--" He was going to add, "with a heart and a half,"for he felt, what to him was a rare sentiment, "gratitude;" but Dillchimed in,--"Of course, we couldn't expect she'd appear. I remarked she was nervouswhen we came in. I saw an expression in her eye--""So did I, faith," muttered M'Cormick, "and I'm not a doctor.""And here's our whist-table," said Barrington, bustling about; "andthere 's a bit of supper ready there for us in that room, and we 'llhelp ourselves, for I 've sent Darby to bed. And now give me a hand withthese cards, for they 've all got mixed together."Barrington's task was the very wearisome one of trying to sort out anavailable pack from some half-dozen of various sizes and colors."Is n't this for all the world like raising a regiment out of twentyvolunteer corps?" said M'Cormick."Dill would call it an hospital of incurables," said Barrington. "Haveyou got a knave of spades and a seven? Oh dear, dear! the knave, withthe head off him! I begin to suspect we must look up a new pack."There was a tone of misgiving in the way he said this; for it implied areference to his sister, and all its consequences. Affecting to searchfor new cards in his own room, therefore, he arose and went out."I wouldn't live in a slavery like that," muttered the Major, "to beKing of France.""Something has occurred here. There is some latent source ofirritation," said Dill, cautiously. "Barrington's own manner is fidgetyand uneasy. I have my suspicion matters are going on but poorly withthem."While this sage diagnosis was being uttered, M'Cormick had taken a shortexcursion into the adjoining room, from which he returned, eating apickled onion. "It's the old story; the cold roast loin and the dish ofsalad. Listen! Did you hear that shout?""I thought I heard one awhile back; but I fancied afterwards it was onlythe noise of the river over the stones.""It is some fellows drawing the river; they poach under his verywindows, and he never sees them.""I 'm afraid we 're not to have our rubber this evening," said Dill,mournfully."There's a thing, now, I don't understand!" said M'Cormick, in a low butbitter voice. "No man is obliged to see company, but when he does doit, he oughtn't to be running about for a tumbler here and a mustard-potthere. There's the noise again; it's fellows robbing the salmon-weir!""No rubber to-night, I perceive that," reiterated the doctor, stillintent upon the one theme."A thousand pardons I ask from each of you," cried Barrington, cominghurriedly in, with a somewhat flushed face; "but I 've had such a huntfor these cards. When I put a thing away nowadays, it's as good as goneto me, for I remember nothing. But here we are, now, all right."The party, like men eager to retrieve lost time, were soon deep in theirgame, very little being uttered, save such remarks as the contest calledfor. The Major was of that order of players who firmly believe fortunewill desert them if they don't whine and complain of their luck, and soeverything from him was a lamentation. The doctor, who regarded whistpathologically, no more gave up a game than he would a patient. He hadwitnessed marvellous recoveries in the most hopeless cases, and he hadbeen rescued by a "revoke" in the last hour. Unlike each, Barrington wasone who liked to chat over his game, as he would over his wine. Not thathe took little interest in it, but it had no power to absorb and engrosshim. If a man derive very great pleasure from a pastime in which, afteryears and years of practice, he can attain no eminence nor any mastery,you may be almost certain he is one of an amiable temperament Nothingshort of real goodness of nature could go on deriving enjoyment from apursuit associated with continual defeats. Such a one must be hopeful,he must be submissive, he must have no touch of ungenerous jealousy inhis nature, and, withal, a zealous wish to do better. Now he who can beall these, in anything, is no bad fellow.If Barrington, therefore, was beaten, he bore it well. Cards were oftenenough against him, his play was always so; and though the doctor hadwords of bland consolation for disaster, such as the habits of his crafttaught him, the Major was a pitiless adversary, who never omitted theopportunity of disinterring all his opponents' blunders, and singing asong of triumph over them. But so it is,--tot genera hominum,--so manykinds of whist-players are there!Hour after hour went over, and it was late in the night. None feltdisposed to sup; at least, none proposed it. The stakes were small,it is true, but small things are great to little men, and Barrington'sguests were always the winners."I believe if I was to be a good player,--which I know in my heart Inever shall," said Barrington,--"that my luck would swamp me, after all.Look at that hand now, and say is there a trick in it?" As he saidthis, he spread out the cards of his "dummy" on the table, with thedis-consolation of one thoroughly beaten."Well, it might be worse," said Dill, consolingly. "There's a queen ofdiamonds; and I would n't say, if you could get an opportunity to trumpthe club--""Let him try it," broke in the merciless Major; "let him just try it! Myname isn't Dan M'Cormick if he'll win one card in that hand. There, now,I lead the ace of clubs. Play!""Patience, Major, patience; let me look over my hand. I 'm bad enough atthe best, but I 'll be worse if you hurry me. Is that a king or a knaveI see there?""It's neither; it 's the queen!" barked out the Major."Doctor, you 'll have to look after my eyes as well as my ears. Indeed,I scarcely know which is the worst. Was not that a voice outside?"[Illustration: 052]"I should think it was; there have been fellows shouting there the wholeevening. I suspect they don't leave you many fish in this part of theriver.""I beg your pardon," interposed Dill, blandly, "but you 've taken up mycard by mistake."While Barrington was excusing himself, and trying to recover his lostclew to the game, there came a violent knocking at the door, and a loudvoice called out, "Holloa! Will some of ye open the door, or must I putmy foot through it?""There is somebody there," said Barrington, quietly, for he had nowcaught the words correctly; and taking a candle, he hastened out.[Illustration: 052]"At last," cried a stranger, as the door opened,--"at last! Do you knowthat we've been full twenty minutes here, listening to your animateddiscussion over the odd trick?--I fainting with hunger, and my friendwith pain." And so saying, he assisted another to limp forward, wholeaned on his arm and moved with the greatest difficulty.The mere sight of one in suffering repressed any notion of a rejoinderto his somewhat rude speech, and Barrington led the way into the room."Have you met with an accident?" asked he, as he placed the sufferer ona sofa."Yes," interposed the first speaker; "he slipped down one of those rocksinto the river, and has sprained, if he has not broken, something.""It is our good fortune to have advice here; this gentleman is adoctor.""Of the Royal College, and an M.D. of Aberdeen, besides," said Dill,with a professional smile, while, turning back his cuffs, he proceededto remove the shoe and stocking of his patient."Don't be afraid of hurting, but just tell me at once what's thematter," said the young fellow, down whose cheeks great drops wererolling in his agony."There is no pronouncing at once; there is great tumefaction here. Itmay be a mere sprain, or it may be a fracture of the fibula simple, or afracture with luxation.""Well, if you can't tell the injury, tell us what's to be done for it.Get him to bed, I suppose, first?" said the friend."By all means, to bed, and cold applications on the affected part.""Here's a room all ready, and at hand," said Barrington, opening thedoor into a little chamber replete with comfort and propriety."Come," said the first speaker, "Fred, all this is very snug; one mighthave fallen upon worse quarters." And so saying, he assisted his friendforward, and deposited him upon the bed.While the doctor busied himself with the medical cares for his patient,and arranged with due skill the appliances to relieve his presentsuffering, the other stranger related how they had lost their way,having first of all taken the wrong bank of the river, and been obligedto retrace their steps upwards of three miles to retrieve their mistake."Where were you going to?" asked Barringtou."We were in search of a little inn they had told us of, called the'Fisherman's Home.' I conclude we have reached it at last, and you arethe host, I take it?"Barrington bowed assent."And these gentlemen are visitors here?" But without waiting for anyreply,--difficult at all times, for he spoke with great rapidity andcontinual change of topic,--he now stooped down to whisper something tothe sick man. "My friend thinks he'll do capitally now, and, if we leavehim, that he'll soon drop asleep; so I vote we give him the chance."Thus saying, he made a gesture for the others to leave, following themup as they went, almost like one enforcing an order."If I am correct in my reading, you are a soldier, sir," saidBarrington, when they reached the outer room, "and this gentleman hereis a brother officer,--Major M'Cor-mick.""Full pay, eh?""No, I am an old Walcheren man.""Walcheren--Walcheren--why, that sounds like Malplaquet or Blenheim!Where the deuce was Walcheren? Did n't believe that there was an oldtumbril of that affair to the fore still. You were all licked there, oryou died of the ague, or jaundice? Oh, dummy whist, as I live! Who's theunlucky dog has got the dummy?--bad as Walcheren, by Jove! Is n't that asupper I see laid out there? Don't I smell Stilton from that room?""If you 'll do us the honor to join us--""That I will, and astonish you with an appetite too! We breakfasted ata beastly hole called Graigue, and tasted nothing since, except a fewpeaches I stole out of an old fellow's garden on the riverside,--'OldDan the miser,' a country fellow called him.""I have the honor to have afforded you the entertainment you speak of,"said M'Cormick, smarting with anger."All right! The peaches were excellent,--would have been better ifriper. I 'm afraid I smashed a window of yours; it was a stone I shiedat a confounded dog,--a sort of terrier. Pickled onions and walnuts, byall that 's civilized! And so this is the 'Fisherman's Home,' and youthe fisherman, eh? Well, why not show a light or a lantern over thedoor? Who the deuce is to know that this is a place of entertainment? Weonly guessed it at last.""May I help you to some mutton?" said Barrington, more amused than putout by his guest's discursiveness."By all means. But don't carve it that way; cut it lengthwise, as if itwere the saddle, which it ought to have been. You must tell me whereyou got this sherry. I have tasted nothing like it for many a day,--realbrown sherry. I suppose you know how they brown it? It's not done bysugar,--that's a vulgar error. It's done by boiling; they boil down somany butts and reduce them to about a fourth or a fifth. You haven't gotany currant-jelly, have you? it is just as good with cold mutton as hot.And then it is the wine thus reduced they use for coloring matter. I gotup all my sherry experiences on the spot.""The wine you approve of has been in my cellar about five-and-fortyyears.""It would not if I 'd have been your neighbor, rely upon that. I'd havesecured every bottle of it for our mess; and mind, whatever remains ofit is mine.""Might I make bold to remark," said Dill, interposing, "that we are theguests of my friend here on this occasion?""Eh, what,--guests?""I am proud enough to believe that you will not refuse me the honor ofyour company; for though an innkeeper, I write myself gentleman," saidBarrington, blandly, though not without emotion."I should think you might," broke in the stranger, heartily; "and I'dsay the man who had a doubt about your claims had very little of hisown. And now a word of apology for the mode of our entrance here, and tointroduce myself. I am Colonel Hunter, of the 21st Hussars; my friend isa young subaltern of the regiment."A moment before, and all the awkwardness of his position was painfulto Barrington. He felt that the traveller was there by a right, freeto order, condemn, and criticise as he pleased. The few words ofexplanation, given in all the frankness of a soldier, and with the tactof a gentleman, relieved this embarrassment, and he was himself again.As for M'Cormick and Dill, the mere announcement of the regiment hecommanded seemed to move and impress them. It was one of those corpsespecially known in the service for the rank and fortune of itsofficers. The Prince himself was their colonel, and they had acquireda wide notoriety for exclusiveness and pride, which, when treated byunfriendly critics, assumed a shape less favorable still.Colonel Hunter, if he were to be taken as a type of his regiment, mighthave rebutted a good deal of this floating criticism; he had a finehonest countenance, a rich mellow voice, and a sort of easy jollity inmanner, that spoke well both for his spirits and his temper. He did, itis true, occasionally chafe against some susceptible spot or other ofthose around him, but there was no malice prepense in it, any more thanthere is intentional offence in the passage of a strong man through acrowd; so he elbowed his way, and pushed on in conversation, never somuch as suspecting that he jostled any one in his path.Both Barrington and Hunter were inveterate sportsmen, and they rangedover hunting-fields and grouse mountains and partridge stubble and troutstreams with all the zest of men who feel a sort of mesmeric brotherhoodin the interchange of their experiences. Long after the Major and thedoctor had taken their leave, they sat there recounting stories of theirseveral adventures, and recalling incidents of flood and field.In return for a cordial invitation to Hunter to stay and fish the riverfor some days, Barrington pledged himself to visit the Colonel the firsttime he should go up to Kilkenny."And I 'll mount you. You shall have a horse I never lent in my life. I'll put you on Trumpeter,--sire Sir Hercules,--no mistake there; wouldcarry sixteen stone with the fastest hounds in England."Barrington shook his head, and smiled, as he said, "It's two-and-twentyyears since I sat a fence. I 'm afraid I 'll not revive the fame of myhorsemanship by appearing again in the saddle.""Why, what age do you call yourself?""Eighty-three, if I live to August next.""I 'd not have guessed you within ten years of it. I 've just passedfifty, and already I begin to look for a horse with more bone beneaththe knee, and more substance across the loins.""These are only premonitory symptoms, after all," said Barrington,laughing. "You've many a day before you come to a fourteen-hand cob anda kitchen chair to mount him."Hunter laughed at the picture, and dashed away, in his own half-recklessway, to other topics. He talked of his regiment proudly, and toldBarrington what a splendid set of young fellows were his officers. "I'll show you such a mess," said he, "as no corps in the service canmatch." While he talked of their high-hearted and generous natures,and with enthusiasm of the life of a soldier, Barrington could scarcelyrefrain from speaking of his own "boy," the son from whom he had hopedso much, and whose loss had been the death-blow to all his ambitions.There were, however, circumstances in that story which sealed his lips;and though the father never believed one syllable of the allegationsagainst his son, though he had paid the penalty of a King's Benchmandamus and imprisonment for horsewhipping the editor who had aspersedhis "boy," the world and the world's verdict were against him, andhe did not dare to revive the memory of a name against which all theseverities of the press had been directed, and public opinion hadcondemned with all its weight and power."I see that I am wearying you," said Hunter, as he remarked the graveand saddened expression that now stole over Barrington's face. "I oughtto have remembered what an hour it was,--more than half-past two." Andwithout waiting to hear a reply, he shook his host's hand cordially andhurried off to his room.While Barrington busied himself in locking up the wine, and puttingaway half-finished decanters,--cares that his sister's watchfulness veryimperatively exacted,--he heard, or fancied he heard, a voice from theroom where the sick man lay. He opened the door very gently and lookedin."All right," said the youth. "I 'm not asleep, nor did I want to sleep,for I have been listening to you and the Colonel these two hours,and with rare pleasure, I can tell you. The Colonel would have gone ahundred miles to meet a man like yourself, so fond of the field and sucha thorough sportsman.""Yes, I was so once," sighed Barrington, for already had come a sort ofreaction to the late excitement."Isn't the Colonel a fine fellow?" said the young man, as eager torelieve the awkwardness of a sad theme as to praise one he loved. "Don'tyou like him?""That I do!" said Barrington, heartily. "His fine genial spirit has putme in better temper with myself than I fancied was in my nature to be.We are to have some trout-fishing together, and I promise you it sha'n'tbe my fault if he doesn't like me.""And may I be of the party?--may I go with you?""Only get well of your accident, and you shall do whatever you like. Bythe way, did not Colonel Hunter serve in India?""For fifteen years. He has only left Bengal within a few months.""Then he can probably help me to some information. He may be able totell me--Good-night, good-night," said he, hurriedly; "to-morrow will betime enough to think of this."CHAPTER IV. FRED CONYERSVery soon after daybreak the Colonel was up and at the bedside of hisyoung friend."Sorry to wake you, Fred," said he, gently; "but I have just got anurgent despatch, requiring me to set out at once for Dublin, and I didn't like to go without asking how you get on.""Oh, much better, sir. I can move the foot a little, and I feel assuredit 's only a severe sprain." #"That's all right. Take your own time, and don't attempt to move abouttoo early. You are in capital quarters here, and will be well lookedafter. There is only one difficulty, and I don't exactly see how to dealwith it. Our host is a reduced gentleman, brought down to keep an innfor support, but what benefit he can derive from it is not so veryclear; for when I asked the man who fetched me hot water this morningfor my bill, he replied that his master told him I was to be his guesthere for a week, and not on any account to accept money from me. Irelandis a very strange place, and we are learning something new in it everyday; but this is the strangest thing I have met yet.""In my case this would be impossible. I must of necessity give a dealof trouble,--not to say that it would add unspeakably to my annoyance tofeel that I could not ask freely for what I wanted.""I have no reason to suppose, mind you, that you are to be dealt withas I have been, but it would be well to bear in mind who and what thesepeople are.""And get away from them as soon as possible," added the young fellow,half peevishly."Nay, nay, Fred; don't be impatient. You'll be delighted with the oldfellow, who is a heart-and-soul sportsman. What station he once occupiedI can't guess; but in the remarks he makes about horses and hounds,all his knowing hints on stable management and the treatment of youngcattle, one would say that he must have had a large fortune and kept alarge establishment."In the half self-sufficient toss of the head which received this speech,it was plain that the young man thought his Colonel was easily imposedon, and that such pretensions as these would have very little successwith him."I have no doubt some of your brother officers will take a run down tosee how you get on, and, if so, I 'll send over a hamper of wine, orsomething of the kind, that you can manage to make him accept.""It will not be very difficult, I opine," said the young man,laughingly."No, no," rejoined the other, misconstruing the drift of his words. "Youhave plenty of tact, Fred. You 'll do the thing with all due delicacy.And now, good-bye. Let me hear how you fare here." And with a heartyfarewell they parted.There was none astir in the cottage but Darby as the Colonel set outto gain the high-road, where the post-horses awaited him. From Darby,however, as he went along, he gathered much of his host's formerhistory. It was with astonishment he learned that the splendid house ofBarring-ton Hall, where he had been dining with an earl a few days ago,was the old family seat of that poor innkeeper; that the noble deer-parkhad once acknowledged him for master. "And will again, plase God!" burstin Darby, who thirsted for an opportunity to launch out into law, andall its bright hopes and prospects."We have a record on trial in Trinity Term, and an argument before thetwelve Judges, and the case is as plain as the nose on your honor'sface; for it was ruled by Chief Baron Medge, in the great cause of'Peter against Todd, a widow,' that a settlement couldn't be broke by anestreat.""You are quite a lawyer, I see," said the Colonel."I wish I was. I 'd rather be a judge on the bench than a king on histhrone.""And yet I am beginning to suspect law may have cost your masterdearly.""It is not ten, or twenty--no, nor thirty--thousand pounds would seehim through it!" said Darby, with a triumph in his tone that seemedto proclaim a very proud declaration. "There 's families would becomfortable for life with just what we spent upon special juries.""Well, as you tell me he has no family, the injury has been all hisown.""That's true. We're the last of the ould stock," said he, sorrowfully;and little more passed between them, till the Colonel, on parting, put acouple of guineas in his hand, and enjoined him to look after the youngfriend he had left behind him.It is now my task to introduce this young gentleman to my readers.Frederick Conyers, a cornet in his Majesty's Hussars, was the only sonof a very distinguished officer, Lieutenant-General Conyers, a manwho had not alone served with great reputation in the field, but heldoffices of high political trust in India, the country where all his lifehad been passed. Holding a high station as a political resident at anative court, wielding great power, and surrounded by an undeviatinghomage, General Conyers saw his son growing up to manhood witheverything that could foster pride and minister to self-exaltationaround him. It was not alone the languor and indolence of an Easternlife that he had to dread for him, but the haughty temper andoverbearing spirit so sure to come out of habits of domination in veryearly life.Though he had done all that he could to educate his son, by mastersbrought at immense cost from Europe, the really important element ofeducation,--the self-control and respect for other's rights,--only tobe acquired by daily life and intercourse with equals, this he could notsupply; and he saw, at last, that the project he had so long indulged,of keeping his son with him, must be abandoned. Perhaps the rough speechof an old comrade helped to dispel the illusion, as he asked, "Are youbringing up that boy to be a Rajah?" His first thought was to send himto one of the Universities, his great desire being that the young manshould feel some ambition for public life and its distinctions. Hebethought him, however, that while the youth of Oxford and Cambridgeenter upon a college career, trained by all the discipline of our publicschools, Fred would approach the ordeal without any such preparationwhatever. Without one to exert authority over him, little accustomed tothe exercise of self-restraint, the experiment was too perilous.To place him, therefore, where, from the very nature of his position,some guidance and control would be exercised, and where by theworking of that model democracy--a mess--he would be taught to repressself-sufficiency and presumption, he determined on the army, andobtained a cornetcy in a regiment commanded by one who had long servedon his own staff. To most young fellows such an opening in life wouldhave seemed all that was delightful and enjoyable. To be just twenty,gazetted to a splendid cavalry corps, with a father rich enough andgenerous enough to say, "Live like the men about you, and don't beafraid that your checks will come back to you," these are great aidsto a very pleasant existence. Whether the enervation of that life ofOriental indulgence had now become a nature to him, or whether he had noliking for the service itself, or whether the change from a condition ofalmost princely state to a position of mere equality with others, chafedand irritated him, but so is it, he did not "take to" the regiment, northe regiment to him.Now it is a fact, and not a very agreeable fact either, that a man witha mass of noble qualities may fail to attract the kindliness and goodfeeling towards him which a far less worthy individual, merely bycertain traits, or by the semblance of them, of a yielding, passivenature is almost sure to acquire.Conyers was generous, courageous, and loyal, in the most chivalroussense of that word, to every obligation of friendship. He was eminentlytruthful and honorable; but he had two qualities whose baneful influencewould disparage the very best of gifts. He was "imperious," and, inthe phrase of his brother officers, "he never gave in." Some absurdimpression had been made on him, as a child, that obstinacy andpersistency were the noblest of attributes, and that, having said athing, no event or circumstance could ever occur to induce a change ofopinion.Such a quality is singularly unfitted to youth, and marvellously out ofplace in a regiment; hence was it that the "Rajah," as he was generallycalled by his comrades, had few intimates, and not one friend amongstthem.If I have dwelt somewhat lengthily on these traits, it is because theirpossessor is one destined to be much before us in this history. I willbut chronicle one other feature. I am sorry it should be a disqualifyingone. Owing in great measure, perhaps altogether, to his havingbeen brought up in the East, where Hindoo craft and subtlety werefamiliarized to his mind from infancy, he was given to suspect that fewthings were ever done from the motives ascribed to them, and that underthe open game of life was another concealed game, which was the realone. As yet, this dark and pernicious distrust had only gone the lengthof impressing him with a sense of his own consummate acuteness, anamount of self-satisfaction, which my reader may have seen tingeing thefew words he exchanged with his Colonel before separating.Let us see him now as he sits in a great easy-chair, his sprained ankleresting on another, in a little honeysuckle-covered arbor of the garden,a table covered with books and fresh flowers beside him, while Darbystands ready to serve him from the breakfast-table, where a verytempting meal is already spread out."So, then, I can't see your master, it seems," said Con-yers, halfpeevishly."Faix you can't; he's ten miles off by this. He got a letter by thepost, and set out half an hour after for Kilkenny. He went to yourhonor's door, but seeing you was asleep he would n't wake you; 'but,Darby,' says he, 'take care of that young gentleman, and mind,' says he,'that he wants for nothing.'""Very thoughtful of him,--very considerate indeed," said the youth;but in what precise spirit it is not easy to say."Who lives about here? What gentlemen's places are there, I mean?""There's Lord Carrackmore, and Sir Arthur Godfrey, and Moore ofBallyduff, and Mrs. Powerscroft of the Grove--""Do any of these great folks come down here?"[Illustration: 064]Darby would like to have given a ready assent,--he would have beencharmed to say that they came daily, that they made the place acontinual rendezvous; but as he saw no prospect of being able to givehis fiction even twenty-four hours' currency, he merely changed from oneleg to the other, and, in a tone of apology, said, "Betimes they does,when the sayson is fine.""Who are the persons who are most frequently here?""Those two that you saw last night,--the Major and Dr. Dill. They 'reup here every second day, fishing, and eating their dinner with themaster.""Is the fishing good?""The best in Ireland.""And what shooting is there,--any partridges?""Partridges, be gorra! You could n't see the turnips for them.""And woodcocks?""Is it woodcocks! The sky is black with the sight of them.""Any lions?""Well, maybe an odd one now and then," said Darby, half apologizing forthe scarcity.There was an ineffable expression of self-satisfaction in Conyers's faceat the subtlety with which he had drawn Darby into this admission; andthe delight in his own acuteness led him to offer the poor fellow acigar, which he took with very grateful thanks."From what you tell me, then, I shall find this place stupid enough tillI am able to be up and about, eh? Is there any one who can play chesshereabout?""Sure there's Miss Dinah; she's a great hand at it, they tell me.""And who is Miss Dinah? Is she young,--is she pretty?"Darby gave a very cautious look all around him, and then closing oneeye, so as to give his face a look of intense cunning, he nodded verysignificantly twice."What do you mean by that?""I mane that she'll never see sixty; and for the matter of beauty--""Oh, you have said quite enough; I 'm not curious about her looks. Nowfor another point. If I should want to get away from this, what otherinn or hotel is there in the neighborhood?""There's Joe M'Cabe's, at Inistioge; but you are better where you are.Where will you see fresh butter like that? and look at the cream, thespoon will stand in it. Far and near it's given up to her that nobodycan make coffee like Miss Dinah; and when you taste them trout, you 'lltell me if they are not fit for the king.""Everything is excellent,--could not be better; but there's adifficulty. There's a matter which to me at least makes a stay here mostunpleasant. My friend tells me that he could not get his bill,--that hewas accepted as a guest. Now I can't permit this--""There it is, now," said Darby, approaching the table, and dropping hisvoice to a confidential whisper. "That's the master's way. If he gets astranger to sit down with him to dinner or supper, he may eat and drinkas long as he plases, and sorra sixpence he'll pay; and it's that sameruins us, nothing else, for it's then he 'll call for the best sherry,and that ould Maderia that's worth a guinea a bottle. What's the use,after all, of me inflaming the bill of the next traveller, and puttingdown everything maybe double? And worse than all," continued he, in atone of horror, "let him only hear any one complain about his bill orsaying, 'What's this?' or 'I didn't get that,' out he'll come, as mightyand as grand as the Lord-Liftinint, and say, 'I 'm sorry, sir, that wefailed to make this place agreeable to you. Will you do me the favor notto mind the bill at all?' and with that he'd tear it up in little bitsand walk away.""To me that would only be additional offence. I 'd not endure it.""What could you do? You'd maybe slip a five-pound note into my hand, andsay, 'Darby my man, settle this little matter for me; you know the waysof the place.'""I 'll not risk such an annoyance, at all events; that I 'm determinedon."Darby began now to perceive that he had misconceived his brief, andmust alter his pleadings as quickly as possible; in fact, he saw he was"stopping an earth" he had meant merely to mask. "Just leave it all tome, your honor,--leave it all to me, and I 'll have your bill for youevery morning on the breakfast-table. And why would n't you? Why woulda gentleman like your honor be behouldin' to any one for his meat anddrink?" burst he in, with an eager rapidity. "Why would n't you say,'Darby, bring me this, get me that, fetch me the other; expinse is noobject in life tome'?"There was a faint twinkle of humor in the eye of Conyers, and Darbystopped short, and with that half-lisping simplicity which a fewIrishmen understand to perfection, and can exercise whenever theoccasion requires, he said: "But sure is n't your honor laughing at me,is n't it just making fun of me you are? All because I'm a poor ignorantcrayture that knows no better!""Nothing of that kind," said Conyers, frankly. "I was only smiling atthoughts that went through my head at the moment.""Well, faix! there's one coming up the path now won't make you laugh,"said Darby, as he whispered, "It's Dr. Dill."The doctor was early with his patient; if the case was not one ofurgency, the sufferer was in a more elevated rank than usually fell tothe chances of Dispensary practice. Then, it promised to be one of thenice chronic cases, in which tact and personal agreeability--the twogreat strongholds of Dr. Dill in his own estimation--were of far moreimportance than the materia medica. Now, if Dill's world was not a verybig one, he knew it thoroughly. He was a chronicle of all the familyincidents of the county, and could recount every disaster of every housefor thirty miles round.When the sprain had, therefore, been duly examined, and all the pangs ofthe patient sufficiently condoled with to establish the physician asa man of feeling, Dill proceeded to his task as a man of the world.Conyers, however, abruptly stopped him, by saying, "Tell me how I'm toget out of this place; some other inn, I mean.""You are not comfortable here, then?" asked Dill."In one sense, perfectly so. I like the quietness, the delightfultranquillity, the scenery,--everything, in short, but one circumstance.I 'm afraid these worthy people--whoever they are--want to regard meas a guest. Now I don't know them,--never saw them,--don't care to seethem. My Colonel has a liking for all this sort of thing. It has to hismind a character of adventure that amuses him. It would n't in the leastamuse me, and so I want to get away.""Yes," repeated Dill, blandly, after him, "wants to get away; desires tochange the air.""Not at all," broke in Conyers, peevishly; "no question of air whatever.I don't want to be on a visit. I want an inn. What is this place theytell me of up the river,--Inis--something?""Inistioge. M'Cabe's house; the 'Spotted Duck;' very small, very poor,far from clean, besides.""Is there nothing else? Can't you think of some other place? For I can'thave my servant here, circumstanced as I am now."The doctor paused to reply. The medical mind is eminently ready-witted,and Dill at a glance took in all the dangers of removing his patient.Should he transfer him to his own village, the visit which now had tobe requited as a journey of three miles and upwards, would then be anaffair of next door. Should he send him to Thomastown, it would be worseagain, for then he would be within the precincts of a greater than Dillhimself,--a practitioner who had a one-horse phaeton, and whose name waswritten on brass. "Would you dislike a comfortable lodging in a privatefamily,--one of the first respectability, I may make bold to call it?""Abhor it!--couldn't endure it! I'm not essentially troublesome orexacting, but I like to be able to be either, whenever the humor takesme.""I was thinking of a house where you might freely take theseliberties--""Liberties! I call them rights, doctor, not liberties! Can't you imaginea man, not very wilful, not very capricious, but who, if the whimtook him, would n't stand being thwarted by any habits of a so-calledrespectable family? There, don't throw up your eyes, and misunderstandme. All I mean is, that my hours of eating and sleeping have no rule.I smoke everywhere; I make as much noise as I please; and I never brookany impertinent curiosity about what I do, or what I leave undone.""Under all the circumstances, you had, perhaps, better remain where youare," said Dill, thoughtfully."Of course, if these people will permit me to pay for my board andlodging. If they 'll condescend to let me be a stranger, I ask fornothing better than this place.""Might I offer myself as a negotiator?" said Dill, insinuatingly; "forI opine that the case is not of the difficulty you suppose. Will youconfide it to my hands?""With all my heart. I don't exactly see why there should be anegotiation at all; but if there must, pray be the special envoy."When Dill arose and set out on his mission, the young fellow lookedafter him with an expression that seemed to say, "How you all imagineyou are humbugging me, while I read every one of you like a book!"Let us follow the doctor, and see how he acquitted himself in hisdiplomacy.CHAPTER V. DILL AS A DIPLOMATISTDr. Dill had knocked twice at the door of Miss Barrington's littlesitting-room, and no answer was returned to his summons."Is the dear lady at home?" asked he, blandly. But, though he waited forsome seconds, no reply came."Might Dr. Dill be permitted to make his compliments?""Yes, come in," said a sharp voice, very much with the expression of onewearied out by importunity. Miss Barrington gave a brief nod in returnfor the profound obeisance of her visitor, and then turned again to alarge map which covered the table before her."I took the opportunity of my professional call here this morning--""How is that young man,--is anything broken?""I incline to say there is no fracture. The flexors, and perhaps,indeed, the annular ligament, are the seat of all the mischief.""A common sprain, in fact; a thing to rest for one day, and hold underthe pump the day after.""The dear lady is always prompt, always energetic; but these sort ofcases are often complicated, and require nice management.""And frequent visits," said she, with a dry gravity."All the world must live, dear lady,--all the world must live.""Your profession does not always sustain your theory, sir; at least,popular scandal says you kill as many as you cure." "I know the dearlady has little faith in physic.""Say none, sir, and you will be nearer the mark; but, remember, I seekno converts; I ask nobody to deny himself the luxuries of senna andgamboge because I prefer beef and mutton. You wanted to see my brother,I presume," added she, sharply, "but he started early this morning forKilkenny. The Solicitor-General wanted to say a few words to him on hisway down to Cork.""That weary law! that weary law!" ejaculated Dill, fervently; for hewell knew with what little favor Miss Barrington regarded litigation."And why so, sir?" retorted she, sharply. "What greater absurdity isthere in being hypochondriac about your property than your person? Mybrother's taste inclines to depletion by law; others prefer the lancet.""Always witty, always smart, the dear lady," said Dill, with a sadattempt at a smile. The flattery passed without acknowledgment of anykind, and he resumed: "I dropped in this morning to you, dear lady, on amatter which, perhaps, might not be altogether pleasing to you.""Then don't do it, sir.""If the dear lady would let me finish--""I was warning you, sir, not even to begin.""Yes, madam," said he, stung into something like resistance; "but Iwould have added, had I been permitted, without any due reason fordispleasure on your part.""And are you the fitting judge of that, sir? If you know, as you sayyou know, that you are about to give me pain, by what presumption do youassert that it must be for my benefit? What's it all about?""I come on the part of this young gentleman, dear lady, who, havinglearned--I cannot say where or how--that he is not to consider himselfhere at an inn, but, as a guest, feels, with all the gratitude that theoccasion warrants, that he has no claim to the attention, and that it isone which would render his position here too painful to persist in.""How did he come by this impression, sir? Be frank and tell me.""I am really unable to say, Miss Dinah.""Come, sir, be honest, and own that the delusion arose fromyourself,--yes, from yourself. It was in perceiving the courteousdelicacy with which you declined a fee that he conceived this flatteringnotion of us; but go back to him, doctor, and say it is a pure mistake;that his breakfast will cost him one shilling, and his dinner two; theprice of a boat to fetch him up to Thomastown is half a crown, and thatthe earlier he orders one the better. Listen to me, sir," said she, andher lips trembled with passion,--"listen to me, while I speak of thisfor the first and last time. Whenever my brother, recurring to what heonce was, has been emboldened to treat a passing stranger as his guest,the choice has been so judiciously exercised as to fall upon one whocould respect the motive and not resent the liberty; but never tillthis moment has it befallen us to be told that the possibility--the barepossibility--of such a presumption should be met by a declaration ofrefusal. Go back, then, to your patient, sir; assure him that he is atan inn, and that he has the right to be all that his purse and his wantof manners can insure him.""Dear lady, I'm, maybe, a bad negotiator.""I trust sincerely, sir, you are a better doctor.""Nothing on earth was further from my mind than offence--""Very possibly, sir; but, as you are aware, blisters will occasionallyact with all the violence of caustics, so an irritating theme may bepressed at a very inauspicious moment. My cares as a hostess are not invery good favor with me just now. Counsel your young charge to a changeof air, and I 'll think no more of the matter."Had it been a queen who had spoken, the doctor could not more palpablyhave felt that his audience had terminated, and his only duty was towithdraw.And so he did retire, with much bowing and graciously smiling, andindicating, by all imaginable contortions, gratitude for the past andhumility forever.I rejoice that I am not obliged to record as history the low but ferventmutterings that fell from his lips as he closed the door after him,and by a gesture of menace showed his feelings towards her he had justquitted. "Insolent old woman!" he burst out as he went along, "how canshe presume to forget a station that every incident of her daily liferecalls? In the rank she once held, and can never return to, suchmanners would be an outrage; but I 'll not endure it again. It is yourlast triumph, Miss Dinah; make much of it." Thus sustained by a veryDutch courage,--for this national gift can come of passion as well asdrink,--he made his way to his patient's presence, smoothing hisbrow, as he went, and recalling the medico-chimrgical serenity of hisfeatures."I have not done much, but I have accomplished something," said he,blandly. "I am at a loss to understand what they mean by introducingall these caprices into their means of life; but, assuredly, it will notattract strangers to the house.""What are the caprices you allude to?""Well, it is not very easy to say; perhaps I have not expressed mymeaning quite correctly; but one thing is clear, a stranger likes tofeel that his only obligation in an inn is to discharge the bill.""I say, doctor," broke in Conyers, "I have been thinking the matterover. Why should I not go back to my quarters? There might surely besome means contrived to convey me to the high-road; after that, therewill be no difficulty whatever."The doctor actually shuddered at the thought. The sportsman who seesthe bird he has just winged flutter away to his neighbor's preserve mayunderstand something, at least, of Dr. Dill's discomfiture as he saw hiswealthy patient threatening a departure. He quickly, therefore, summonedto his aid all those terrors which had so often done good serviceon like occasions. He gave a little graphic sketch of every evilconsequence that might come of an imprudent journey. The catalogue wasa bulky one; it ranged over tetanus, mortification, and disease of thebones. It included every sort and description of pain as classifiedby science, into "dull, weary, and incessant," or "sharp lancinatingagony." Now Conyers was as brave as a lion, but had, withal, one ofthose temperaments which are miserably sensitive under suffering, andto which the mere description of pain is itself an acute pang. When,therefore, the doctor drew the picture of a case very like the presentone, where amputation came too late, Conyers burst in with, "For mercy'ssake, will you stop! I can't sit here to be cut up piece-meal; there'snot a nerve in my body you haven't set ajar." The doctor blandly tookout his massive watch, and laid his fingers on the young man's pulse."Ninety-eight, and slightly intermittent," said he, as though tohimself."What does that mean?" asked Conyers, eagerly."The irregular action of the heart implies abnormal condition ofthe nervous system, and indicates, imperatively, rest, repose, andtranquillity.""If lethargy itself be required, this is a capital place for it," sighedConyers, drearily."You have n't turned your thoughts to what I said awhile ago, beingdomesticated, as one might call it, in a nice quiet family, with all thetender attentions of a home, and a little music in the evening."Simple as these words were, Dill gave to each of them an almost honeyedutterance."No; it would bore me excessively. I detest to be looked after; I abhorwhat are called attentions.""Unobtrusively offered,--tendered with a due delicacy and reserve?""Which means a sort of simpering civility that one has to smirk forin return. No, no; I was bred up in quite a different school, where weclapped our hands twice when we wanted a servant, and the fellow's headpaid for it if he was slow in coming. Don't tell me any more about yourpleasant family, for they 'd neither endure me, nor I them. Get me wellas fast as you can, and out of this confounded place, and I 'll give youleave to make a vascular preparation of me if you catch me here again!"The doctor smiled, as doctors know how to smile when patients think theyhave said a smartness, and now each was somewhat on better terms withthe other."By the way, doctor," said Conyers, suddenly, "you have n't told me whatthe old woman said. What arrangement did you come to?""Your breakfast will cost one shilling, your dinner two. She made nomention of your rooms, but only hinted that, whenever you took yourdeparture, the charge for the boat was half a crown.""Come, all this is very business-like, and to the purpose; but where, inHeaven's name, did any man live in this fashion for so little? We havea breakfast-mess, but it's not to be compared with this,--such a varietyof bread, such grilled trout, such a profusion of fruit. After all,doctor, it is very like being a guest, the nominal charge being toescape the sense of a favor. But perhaps one can do here as at one ofthose 'hospices' in the Alps, and make a present at parting to requitethe hospitality.""It is a graceful way to record gratitude," said the doctor, who likedto think that the practice could be extended to other reminiscences."I must have my servant and my books, my pipes and my Spitz terrier.I 'll get a target up, besides, on that cherry-tree, and practisepistol-shooting as I sit here. Could you find out some idle fellow whowould play chess or cart with me,--a curate or a priest,--I 'mnot particular; and when my man Holt comes, I 'll make him string mygrass-mat hammock between those two elms, so that I can fish without thebore of standing up for it. Holt is a rare clever fellow, and you 'llsee how he'll get things in order here before he's a day in the place."The doctor smiled again, for he saw that his patient desired to bedeemed a marvel of resources and a mine of original thought. Thedoctor's smile was apportioned to his conversation, just as he addedsyrups in his prescriptions. It was, as he himself called it, the"vehicle," without special efficacy in itself, but it aided to get downthe "active principle." But he did more than smile. He promised allpossible assistance to carry out his patient's plans. He wasalmost certain that a friend of his, an old soldier, too,--a MajorM'Cormick,--could play cart, though, perhaps, it might be cribbage;and then Father Cody, he could answer for it, was wonderful at skittles,though, for the present, that game might not be practicable; and as forbooks, the library at Woodstay was full of them, if the key could onlybe come at, for the family was abroad; and, in fact, he displayed a mostgenerous willingness to oblige, although, when brought to the rude testof reality, his pictures were only dissolving views of pleasures tocome.When he took his leave at last, he left Conyers in far better spiritsthan he found him. The young fellow had begun to castle-build about howhe should pass his time, and in such architecture there is no room forennui. And what a rare organ must constructiveness be, when even in itsmockery it can yield such pleasure! We are very prone to envy the richman, whose wealth sets no limit to his caprices; but is not a richfancy, that wondrous imaginative power which unweariedly invents newincidents, new personages, new situations, a very covetable possession?And can we not, in the gratification of the very humblest exercise ofthis quality, rudely approximate to the ecstasy of him who wields itin all its force? Not that Fred Conyers was one of these; he was a meretyro in the faculty, and could only carry himself into a region wherehe saw his Spitz terrier jump between the back rails of a chair, andhimself sending bullet after bullet through the very centre of thebull's eye.Be it so. Perhaps you and I, too, my reader, have our Spitz terrier andbull's-eye days, and, if so, let us be grateful for them.CHAPTER VI. THE DOCTOR'S DAUGHTERWhether it was that Dr. Dill expended all the benevolence of hisdisposition in the course of his practice, and came home utterlyexhausted, but so it was, that his family never saw him in those moodsof blandness which he invariably appeared in to his patients. In fact,however loaded he went forth with these wares of a morning, he disposedof every item of his stock before he got back at night; and when poorMrs. Dill heard, as she from time to time did hear, of the doctor'sgentleness, his kindness in suffering, his beautiful and touchingsympathy with sorrow, she listened with the same sort of semi-stupidastonishment she would have felt on hearing some one eulogizing theclimate of Ireland, and going rapturous about the blue sky and theglorious sunshine. Unhappy little woman, she only saw him in his darkdays of cloud and rain, and she never came into his presence except in asort of moral mackintosh made for the worst weather.The doctor's family consisted of seven children, but our concern is onlywith the two eldest,--a son and a daughter. Tom was two years youngerthan his sister, who, at this period of our story, was verging onnineteen. He was an awkward, ungainly youth, large-jointed, but weakly,with a sandy red head and much-freckled face, just such a disparagingcounterpart of his sister as a coarse American piracy often presents ofone of our well-printed, richly papered English editions. "It was allthere," but all unseemly, ungraceful, undignified; for Polly Dill waspretty. Her hair was auburn, her eyes a deep hazel, and her skin amarvel of transparent whiteness. You would never have hesitated to callher a very pretty girl if you had not seen her brother, but, havingseen him, all the traits of her good looks suffered in the same way thatGrisi's "Norma" does from the horrid recollection of Paul Bedford's.After all, the resemblance went very little further than this"travestie," for while he was a slow, heavy-witted, loutish creature,with low tastes and low ambitions, she was a clever, intelligent girl,very eagerly intent on making something of her advantages. Though thedoctor was a general practitioner, and had a shop, which he called"Surgery," in the village, he was received at the great houses in a sortof half-intimate, half-patronizing fashion; as one, in short, with whomit was not necessary to be formal, but it might become very inconvenientto have a coldness. These were very sorry credentials for acceptance,but he made no objection to them.A few, however, of the "neighbors"--it would be ungenerous to inquirethe motive, for in this world of ours it is just as well to regardone's five-pound note as convertible into five gold sovereigns, and notspeculate as to the kind of rags it is made of--were pleased to noticeMiss Dill, and occasionally invite her to their larger gatherings, sothat she not only gained opportunities of cultivating her social gifts,but, what is often a greater spur to ambition, of comparing them withthose of others.Now this same measuring process, if only conducted without any envy orungenerous rivalry, is not without its advantage. Polly Dill made itreally profitable. I will not presume to say that, in her heartof hearts, she did not envy the social accidents that gave othersprecedence before her, but into her heart of hearts neither you norI have any claim to enter. Enough that we know nothing in her outwardconduct or bearing revealed such a sentiment. As little did she maintainher position by flattery, which many in her ambiguous station would haverelied upon as a stronghold. No; Polly followed a very simple policy,which was all the more successful that it never seemed to be a policy atall. She never in any way attracted towards her the attentions of thosemen who, in the marriageable market, were looked on as the choice lots;squires in possession, elder sons, and favorite nephews, she regardedas so much forbidden fruit. It was a lottery in which she never took aticket It is incredible how much kindly notice and favorable recognitionaccrued to her from this line.We all know how pleasant it is to be next to the man at a promiscuousdinner who never eats turtle nor cares for "Cliquot;" and in the worldat large there are people who represent the calabash and the champagne.Then Polly played well, but was quite as ready to play as to dance. Shesang prettily, too, and had not the slightest objection that one of hersimple ballads should be the foil to a grand performance of some younglady, whose artistic agonies rivalled Alboni's. So cleverly did Pollydo all this, that even her father could not discover the secret of hersuccess; and though he saw "his little girl" as he called her, more andmore sought after and invited, he continued to be persuaded that allthis favoritism was only the reflex of his own popularity. How, then,could mere acquaintances ever suspect what to the eye of those nearerand closer was so inscrutable?Polly Dill rode very well and very fearlessly, and occasionally wasassisted to "a mount" by some country gentleman, who combined gallantrywith profit, and knew that the horse he lent could never be seento greater advantage. Yet, even in this, she avoided display, quitesatisfied, as it seemed, to enjoy herself thoroughly, and not attractany notice that could be avoided. Indeed, she never tried for "a place,"but rather attached herself to some of the older and heavier weights,who grew to believe that they were especially in charge of her, andnothing was more common, at the end of a hard run, than to hear suchself-gratulations as, "I think I took great care of you, Miss Dill?""Eh, Miss Polly! you see I'm not such a bad leader!" and so on.Such was the doctor's "little girl," whom I am about to present tomy readers under another aspect. She is at home, dressed in a neatlyfitting but very simple cotton dress, her hair in two plain bands, andshe is seated at a table, at the opposite of which lounges her brotherTom with an air of dogged and sleepy indolence, which extends from hisill-trimmed hair to his ill-buttoned waistcoat."Never mind it to-day, Polly," said he, with a yawn. "I've been up allnight, and have no head for work. There's a good girl, let's have a chatinstead.""Impossible, Tom," said she, calmly, but with decision. "To-day isthe third. You have only three weeks now and two days before yourexamination. We have all the bones and ligaments to go over again, andthe whole vascular system. You 've forgotten every word of Harrison.""It does n't signify, Polly. They never take a fellow on anything buttwo arteries for the navy. Grove told me so.""Grove is an ass, and got plucked twice. It is a perfect disgrace toquote him.""Well, I only wish I may do as well. He's assistant-surgeon to the'Taurus' gun-brig on the African station; and if I was there, it'slittle I 'd care for the whole lot of bones and balderdash.""Come, don't be silly. Let us go on with the scapula. Describe theglenoid cavity.""If you were the girl you might be, I'd not be bored with all thisstupid trash, Polly.""What do you mean? I don't understand you.""It's easy enough to understand me. You are as thick as thieves, you andthat old Admiral,--that Sir Charles Cobham. I saw you talking to theold fellow at the meet the other morning. You 've only to say, 'There'sTom--my brother Tom--wants a navy appointment; he's not passed yet, butif the fellows at the Board got a hint, just as much as, "Don't be hardon him--"'""I 'd not do it to make you a post-captain, sir," said she, severely."You very much overrate my influence, and very much underrate myintegrity, when you ask it.""Hoity-toity! ain't we dignified! So you'd rather see me plucked, eh?""Yes, if that should be the only alternative.""Thank you, Polly, that's all! thank you," said he; and he drew hissleeve across his eyes."My dear Tom," said she, laying her white soft hand on his coarsebrown fingers, "can you not see that if I even stooped to anything sounworthy, that it would compromise your whole prospects in life? You'dobtain an assistant-surgeoncy, and never rise above it.""And do I ask to rise above it? Do I ask anything beyond getting out ofthis house, and earning bread that is not grudged me?""Nay, nay; if you talk that way, I've done.""Well, I do talk that way. He sent me off to Kilkenny last week--you sawit yourself--to bring out that trash for the shop, and he would n't paythe car hire, and made me carry two stone of carbonate of magnesia anda jar of leeches fourteen miles. You were just taking that post and railout of Nixon's lawn as I came by. You saw me well enough.""I am glad to say I did not," said she, sighing."I saw you, then, and how that gray carried you! You were waving ahandkerchief in your hand; what was that for?""It was to show Ambrose Bushe that the ground was good; he was afraid ofbeing staked!"[Illustration: 084]"That's exactly what I am. I 'm afraid of being 'staked up' at the Hall,and if you 'd take as much trouble about your brother as you did forAmbrose Bushe--""Tom, Tom, I have taken it for eight weary months. I believe I know Bellon the bones, and Harrison on the arteries, by heart!""Who thanks you?" said he, doggedly. "When you read a thing twice, younever forget it; but it's not so with me.""Try what a little work will do, Tom; be assured there is not halfas much disparity between people's brains as there is between theirindustry.""I'd rather have luck than either, I know that. It's the only thing,after all."She gave a very deep sigh, and leaned her head on her hand."Work and toil as hard as you may," continued he, with all the fervor ofone on a favorite theme, "if you haven't luck you 'll be beaten. Can youdeny that, Polly?""If you allow me to call merit what you call luck, I'll agree with you.But I 'd much rather go on with our work. What is the insertion of thedeltoid? I'm sure you know that!"[Illustration: 84]"The deltoid! the deltoid!" muttered he. "I forget all about thedeltoid, but, of course, it's like the rest of them. It's inserted intoa ridge or a process, or whatever you call it--""Oh, Tom, this is very hopeless. How can you presume to face yourexaminers with such ignorance as this?""I'll tell you what I'll do, Polly; Grove told me he did it,--if I findmy pluck failing me, I 'll have a go of brandy before I go in."She found it very hard not to laugh at the solemn gravity of thisspeech, and just as hard not to cry as she looked at him who spoke it Atthe same moment Dr. Dill opened the door, calling out sharply, "Where'sthat fellow, Tom? Who has seen him this morning?""He's here, papa," said Polly. "We are brushing up the anatomy for thelast time.""His head must be in capital order for it, after his night's exploit.I heard of you, sir, and your reputable wager. Noonan was up here thismorning with the whole story!""I 'd have won if they 'd not put snuff in the punch--""You are a shameless hound--""Oh, papa! If you knew how he was working,--how eager he is to passhis examination, and be a credit to us all, and owe his independence tohimself--""I know more of him than you do, miss,--far more, too, than he is awareof,--and I know something of myself also; and I tell him now, that ifhe's rejected at the examination, he need not come back here with thenews.""And where am I to go, then?" asked the young fellow, half insolently."You may go--" Where to, the doctor was not suffered to indicate, foralready Polly had thrown herself into his arms and arrested the speech."Well, I suppose I can 'list; a fellow need not know much aboutgallipots for that." As he said this, he snatched up his tattered oldcap and made for the door."Stay, sir! I have business for you to do," cried Dill, sternly."There's a young gentleman at the 'Fisherman's Home' laid up with a badsprain. I have prescribed twenty leeches on the part. Go down and applythem.""That's what old Molly Day used to do," said Tom, angrily.'"Yes, sir, and knew more of the occasion that required it than you willever do. See that you apply them all to the outer ankle, and attend wellto the bleeding; the patient is a young man of rank, with whom you hadbetter take no liberties.""If I go at all--""Tom, Tom, none of this!" said Polly, who drew very close to him, andlooked up at him with eyes full of tears."Am I going as your son this time? or did you tell him--as you told Mr.Nixon--that you 'd send your young man?""There! listen to that!" cried the doctor, turning to Polly. "I hope youare proud of your pupil."She made no answer, but whispering some hurried words in her brother'sear, and pressing at the same time something into his hand, she shuffledhim out of the room and closed the door.The doctor now paced the room, so engrossed by passion that he forgot hewas not alone, and uttered threats and mumbled out dark predictions witha fearful energy. Meanwhile Polly put by the books and drawings, andremoved everything which might recall the late misadventure."What's your letter about, papa?" said she, pointing to a square-shapedenvelope which he still held in his hand."Oh, by the way," said he, quietly, "this is from Cob-ham. They ask usup there to dinner to-day, and to stop the night." The doctor tried veryhard to utter this speech with the unconcern of one alluding to someevery-day occurrence. Nay, he did more; he endeavored to throw into ita certain air of fastidious weariness, as though to say, "See how thesepeople will have me; mark how they persecute me with their attentions!"Polly understood the "situation" perfectly, and it was with actualcuriosity in her tone she asked, "Do you mean to go, sir?""I suppose we must, dear," he said, with a deep sigh. "A professionalman is no more the arbiter of his social hours than of his businessones. Cooper always said dining at home costs a thousand a year.""So much, papa?" asked she, with much semblance of innocence."I don't mean to myself," said he, reddening, "nor to any physician incountry practice; but we all lose by it, more or less."Polly, meanwhile, had taken the letter, and was reading it over. It wasvery brief. It had been originally begun, "Lady Cobham presents," but apen was run through the words, and it ran,--"Dear Dr. Dill,--If a short notice will not inconvenienceyou, will you and your daughter dine here to-day at seven?There is no moon, and we shall expect you to stay the night."Truly yours,"Georgiana Cobham."The Admiral hopes Miss D. will not forget to bring her music.""Then we go, sir?" asked she, with eagerness; for it was a house towhich she had never yet been invited, though she had long wished for theentre."I shall go, certainly," said he. "As to you, there will be the olddiscussion with your mother as to clothes, and the usual declarationthat you have really nothing to put on.""Oh! but I have, papa. My wonderful-worked muslin, that was to haveastonished the world at the race ball, but which arrived too late, isnow quite ready to captivate all beholders; and I have just learned thatnew song, 'Where's the slave so lowly?' which I mean to give with amost rebellious fervor; and, in fact, I am dying to assault this samefortress of Cobham, and see what it is like inside the citadel.""Pretty much like Woodstay, and the Grove, and Mount Kelly, and theother places we go to," said Dill, pompously."The same sort of rooms, the same sort of dinner, the same company;nothing different but the liveries.""Very true, papa; but there is always an interest in seeing howpeople behave in their own house, whom you have never seen except instrangers'. I have met Lady Cobham at the Beachers', where she scarcelynoticed me. I am curious to see what sort of reception she willvouchsafe me at home.""Well, go and look after your things, for we have eight miles to drive,and Billy has already been at Dangan and over to Mooney's Mills, and he's not the fresher for it.""I suppose I 'd better take my hat and habit, papa?""What for, child?""Just as you always carry your lancets, papa,--you don't know what mayturn up." And she was off before he could answer her.CHAPTER VII. TOM DILL'S FIRST PATIENTBefore Tom Dill had set out on his errand he had learned all about hisfather and sister's dinner engagement; nor did the contrast with theway in which his own time was to be passed at all improve his temper.Indeed, he took the opportunity of intimating to his mother how fewfavors fell to her share or his own,--a piece of information she veryphilosophically received, all her sympathies being far more interestedfor the sorrows of "Clarissa Harlowe" than for any incident thatoccurred around her. Poor old lady! she had read that story over andover again, till it might seem that every word and every comma in it hadbecome her own; but she was blessed with a memory that retained nothing,and she could cry over the sorrowful bits, and pant with eagerness atthe critical ones, just as passionately, just as fervently, as she haddone for years and years before. Dim, vague perceptions she mighthave retained of the personages, but these only gave them a strongertruthfulness, and made them more like the people of the real world, whomshe had seen, passingly, once, and was now to learn more about. Idoubt if Mezzofanti ever derived one tenth of the pleasure from all hismarvellous memory that she did from the want of one.Blessed with that one book, she was proof against all the commonaccidents of life. It was her sanctuary against duns, and difficulties,and the doctor's temper. As the miser feels a sort of ecstasy inthe secret of his hoarded wealth, so had she an intense enjoyment inthinking that all dear Clarissa's trials and sufferings were only knownto her. Neither the doctor, nor Polly, nor Tom, so much as suspectedthem. It was like a confidence between Mr. Richardson and herself, andfor nothing on earth would she have betrayed it.Tom had no such resources, and he set out on his mission with no veryremarkable good feeling towards the world at large. Still, Polly hadpressed into his hand a gold half-guinea,--some very long-treasuredkeepsake, the birthday gift of a godmother in times remote, and now tobe converted into tobacco and beer, and some articles of fishing-gearwhich he greatly needed.Seated in one of those light canoe-shaped skiffs,--"cots," as they arecalled on these rivers,--he suffered himself to be carried lazily alongby the stream, while he tied his flies and adjusted his tackle. Thereis, sometimes, a stronger sense of unhappiness attached to what iscalled being "hardly used" by the world, than to a direct palpablemisfortune; for though the sufferer may not be able, even to his ownheart, to set out, with clearness, one single count in the indictment,yet a general sense of hard treatment, unfairness, and so forth, bringswith it great depression, and a feeling of desolation.Like all young fellows of his stamp, Tom only saw his inflictions, notone of his transgressions. He knew that his father made a common drudgeof him, employed him in all that was wearisome and even menial in hiscraft, admitted him to no confidences, gave him no counsels, and treatedhim in every way like one who was never destined to rise above themeanest cares and lowest duties. Even those little fleeting glances ata brighter future which Polly would now and then open to his ambition,never came from his father, who would actually ridicule the notion ofhis obtaining a degree, and make the thought of a commission in theservice a subject for mockery.He was low in heart as he thought over these things. "If it were not forPolly," so he said to himself, "he 'd go and enlist;" or, as his boatslowly floated into a dark angle of the stream where the water was stilland the shadow deep, he even felt he could do worse. "Poor Polly!" saidhe, as he moved his hand to and fro in the cold clear water, "you 'd bevery, very sorry for me. You, at least, knew that I was not all bad, andthat I wanted to be better. It was no fault of mine to have a head thatcould n't learn. I 'd be clever if I could, and do everything as well asshe does; but when they see that I have no talents, that if they put thetask before me I cannot master it, sure they ought to pity me, not blameme." And then he bent over the boat and looked down eagerly into thewater, till, by long dint of gazing, he saw, or he thought he saw, thegravelly bed beneath; and again he swept his hand through it,--it wascold, and caused a slight shudder. Then, suddenly, with some freshimpulse, he threw off his cap, and kicked his shoes from him. Histrembling hands buttoned and unbuttoned his coat with some infirm,uncertain purpose. He stopped and listened; he heard a sound; there wassome one near,--quite near. He bent down and peered under the branchesthat hung over the stream, and there he saw a very old and infirm man,so old and infirm that he could barely creep. He had been carrying alittle bundle of fagots for firewood, and the cord had given way, andhis burden fallen, scattered, to the ground. This was the noise Tomhad heard. For a few minutes the old man seemed overwhelmed with hisdisaster, and stood motionless, contemplating it; then, as it were,taking courage, he laid down his staff, and bending on his knees, setslowly to work to gather up his fagots.There are minutes in the lives of all of us when some simpleincident will speak to our hearts with a force that human words nevercarried,--when the most trivial event will teach a lesson that all ourwisdom never gave us. "Poor old fellow," said Tom, "he has a stout heartleft to him still, and he 'll not leave his load behind him!" And thenhis own craven spirit flashed across him, and he hid his face in hishand and cried bitterly.Suddenly rousing himself with a sort of convulsive shake, he sentthe skiff with a strong shove in shore, and gave the old fellow whatremained to him of Polly's present; and then, with a lighter spirit thanhe had known for many a day, rowed manfully on his way.The evening--a soft, mellow, summer evening--was just falling as Tomreached the little boat quay at the "Fisherman's Home,"--a spot it wasseldom his fortune to visit, but one for whose woodland beauty and trimcomfort he had a deep admiration. He would have liked to have lingered alittle to inspect the boat-house, and the little aviary over it, and thesmall cottage on the island, and the little terrace made to fish from;but Darby had caught sight of him as he landed, and came hurriedlydown to say that the young gentleman was growing very impatient for hiscoming, and was even hinting at sending for another doctor if he shouldnot soon appear.If Conyers was as impatient as Darby represented, he had, at least,surrounded himself with every appliance to allay the fervor of thatspirit He had dined under a spreading sycamore-tree, and now sat with atable richly covered before him. Fruit, flowers, and wine abounded,with a profusion that might have satisfied several guests; for, as heunderstood that he was to consider himself at an inn, he resolved, byordering the most costly things, to give the house all the advantage ofhis presence. The most delicious hothouse fruit had been procured fromthe gardener of an absent proprietor in the neighborhood, and severalkinds of wine figured on the table, over which, and half shadowed bythe leaves, a lamp had been suspended, throwing a fitful light over all,that imparted a most picturesque effect to the scene.And yet, amidst all these luxuries and delights, Bal-shazzar wasdiscontented; his ankle pained him; he had been hobbling about on it allday, and increased the inflammation considerably; and, besides this, hewas lonely; he had no one but Darby to talk to, and had grown to feelfor that sapient functionary a perfect abhorrence,--his everlastingcompliance, his eternal coincidence with everything, being a tormentinfinitely worse than the most dogged and mulish opposition. When,therefore, he heard at last the doctor's son had come with the leeches,he hailed him as a welcome guest."What a time you have kept me waiting!" said he, as the loutish youngman came forward, so astounded by the scene before him that he lost allpresence of mind. "I have been looking out for you since three o'clock,and pottering down the river and back so often, that I have made the legtwice as thick again.""Why didn't you sit quiet?" said Tom, in a hoarse, husky tone."Sit quiet!" replied Conyers, staring half angrily at him; and then asquickly perceiving that no impertinence had been intended, which theother's changing color and evident confusion attested, he begged him totake a chair and fill his glass. "That next you is some sort of Rhinewine: this is sherry; and here is the very best claret I ever tasted.""Well, I 'll take that," said Tom, who, accepting the recommendationamidst luxuries all new and strange to him, proceeded to fill his glass,but so tremblingly that he spilled the wine all about the table, andthen hurriedly wiped it up with his handkerchief.Conyers did his utmost to set his guest at his ease. He passed hiscigar-case across the table, and led him on, as well as he might, totalk. But Tom was awestruck, not alone by the splendors around him, butby the condescension of his host; and he could not divest himself of thenotion that he must have been mistaken for somebody else, to whom allthese blandishments might be rightfully due."Are you fond of shooting?" asked Conyers, trying to engage aconversation."Yes," was the curt reply."There must be good sport hereabouts, I should say. Is the game wellpreserved?""Too well for such as me. I never get a shot without the risk of a jail,and it would be cheaper for me to kill a cow than a woodcock!" There wasa stern gravity in the way he said this that made it irresistibly comic,and Conyers laughed out in spite of himself."Have n't you a game license?" asked he."Haven't I a coach-and-six? Where would I get four pounds seven and tento pay for it?"The appeal was awkward, and for a moment Conyers was silent At last hesaid, "You fish, I suppose?""Yes; I kill a salmon whenever I get a quiet spot that nobody sees me,and I draw the river now and then with a net at night.""That's poaching, I take it.""It 's not the worse for that!" said Tom, whose pluck was by this timeconsiderably assisted by the claret."Well, it's an unfair way, at all events, and destroys real sport""Real sport is filling your basket.""No, no; there's no real sport in doing anything that'sunfair,--anything that's un----" He stopped short, and swallowed off aglass of wine to cover his confusion."That's all mighty fine for you, who can not only pay for a license, butyou 're just as sure to be invited here, there, and everywhere there'sgame to be killed. But think of me, that never snaps a cap, never throwsa line, but he knows it's worse than robbing a hen-roost, and often,maybe, just as fond of it as yourself!"Whether it was that, coming after Darby's mawkish and servile agreementwith everything, this rugged nature seemed more palatable, I cannotsay; but so it was, Con-yers felt pleasure in talking to this roughunpolished creature, and hearing his opinions in turn. Had there beenin Tom Dill's manner the slightest shade of any pretence, was there anyelement of that which, for want of a better word, we call "snobbery,"Conyers would not have endured him for a moment, but Tom was perfectlydevoid of this vulgarity. He was often coarse in his remarks, hisexpressions were rarely measured by any rule of good manners; but itwas easy to see that he never intended offence, nor did he so much assuspect that he could give that weight to any opinion which he utteredto make it of moment.Besides these points in Tom's favor, there was another, which also ledConyers to converse with him. There is some very subtle self-flatteryin the condescension of one well to do in all the gifts of fortuneassociating, in an assumed equality, with some poor fellow to whom fatehas assigned the shady side of the highway. Scarcely a subject canbe touched without suggesting something for self-gratulation; everycomparison, every contrast is in his favor, and Conyers, without beingmore of a puppy than the majority of his order, constantly felt howimmeasurably above all his guest's views of his life and the world werehis own,--not alone that he was more moderate in language and less proneto attribute evil, but with a finer sense of honor and a wider feelingof liberality.When Tom at last, with some shame, remembered that he had forgotten allabout the real object of his mission, and had never so much as alludedto the leeches, Conyers only laughed and said, "Never mind themto-night. Come back to-morrow and put them on; and mind,--come tobreakfast at ten or eleven o'clock.""What am I to say to my father?""Say it was a whim of mine, which it is. You are quite ready to do thismatter now. I see it; but I say no. Is n't that enough?""I suppose so!" muttered Tom, with a sort of dogged misgiving."It strikes me that you have a very respectable fear of your governor.Am I right?""Ain't you afraid of yours?" bluntly asked the other."Afraid of mine!" cried Conyers, with a loud laugh; "I should think not.Why, my father and myself are as thick as two thieves. I never was in ascrape that I did n't tell him. I 'd sit down this minute and write tohim just as I would to any fellow in the regiment.""Well, there 's only one in all the world I 'd tell a secret to, and itis n't My father!""Who is it, then?""My sister Polly!" It was impossible to have uttered these words with astronger sense of pride. He dwelt slowly upon each of them, and, when hehad finished, looked as though he had said something utterly undeniable."Here's her health,--in a bumper too!" cried Conyers."Hurray, hurray!" shouted out Tom, as he tossed off his full glass, andset it on the table with a bang that smashed it. "Oh, I beg pardon! Ididn't mean to break the tumbler.""Never mind it, Dill; it's a trifle. I half hoped you had done it onpurpose, so that the glass should never be drained to a less honoredtoast. Is she like you?""Like me,--like me?" asked he, coloring deeply. "Polly like me?""I mean is there a family resemblance? Could you be easily known asbrother and sister?""Not a bit of it. Polly is the prettiest girl in this county, and she 'sbetter than she 's handsome. There's nothing she can't do. I taught herto tie flies, and she can put wings on a green-drake now that would takein any salmon that ever swam. Martin Keene sent her a pound-note for abook of 'brown hackles,' and, by the way, she gave it to me. And ifyou saw her on the back of a horse!--Ambrose Bushe's gray mare, thewickedest devil that ever was bridled, one buck jump after anotherthe length of a field, and the mare trying to get her head between herfore-legs, and Polly handling her so quiet, never out of temper, neverhot, but always saying, 'Ain't you ashamed of yourself, Dido? Don't yousee them all laughing at us?'""I am quite curious to see her. Will you present me one of these days?"Tom mumbled out something perfectly unintelligible."I hope that I may be permitted to make her acquaintance," repeated he,not feeling very certain that his former speech was quite understood."Maybe so," grumbled he out at last, and sank back in his chair with alook of sulky ill-humor; for so it was that poor Tom, in his ignoranceof life and its ways, deemed the proposal one of those free-and-easysuggestions which might be made to persons of very inferior station,and to whom the fact of acquaintanceship should be accounted as a greathonor.Conyers was provoked at the little willingness shown to meet hisoffer,--an offer he felt to be a very courteous piece of condescensionon his part,--and now both sat in silence. At last Tom Dill, longstruggling with some secret impulse, gave way, and in a tone far moredecided and firm than heretofore, said, "Maybe you think, from seeingwhat sort of a fellow I am, that my sister ought to be like me; andbecause I have neither manners nor education, that she 's the same?But listen to me now; she 's just as little like me as you are yourself.You 're not more of a gentleman than she's a lady!""I never imagined anything else.""And what made you talk of bringing her up here to present her to you,as you called it? Was she to be trotted out in a cavasin, like a filly?""My dear fellow," said Conyers, good-humoredly, "you never made agreater mistake. I begged that you would present me to your sister.I asked the sort of favor which is very common in the world, and inthe language usually employed to convey such a request. I observed therecognized etiquette--""What do I know about etiquette? If you'd have said, 'Tom Dill, I wantto be introduced to your sister,' I 'd have guessed what you were at,and I 'd have said, 'Come back in the boat with me to-morrow, and so youshall.'""It's a bargain, then, Dill. I want two or three things in the village,and I accept your offer gladly."Not only was peace now ratified between them, but a closer feeling ofintimacy established; for poor Tom, not much spoiled by any excess ofthe world's sympathy, was so delighted by the kindly interest shown him,that he launched out freely to tell all about himself and his fortunes,how hardly treated he was at home, and how ill usage had made himdespondent, and despondency made him dissolute. "It's all very well torate a fellow about his taste for low pleasures and low companions; butwhat if he's not rich enough for better? He takes them just as hesmokes cheap tobacco, because he can afford no other. And do you know,"continued he, "you are the first real gentleman that ever said a kindword to me, or asked me to sit down in his company. It's even so strangeto me yet, that maybe when I 'm rowing home to-night I 'll think it'sall a dream,--that it was the wine got into my head.""Is not some of this your own fault?" broke in Conyers. "What if you hadheld your head higher--""Hold my head higher!" interrupted Tom. "With this on it, eh?" And hetook up his ragged and worn cap from the ground, and showed it. "Prideis a very fine thing when you can live up to it; but if you can't it'sonly ridiculous. I don't say," added he, after a few minutes of silence,"but if I was far away from this, where nobody knew me, where I did n'towe little debts on every side, and was n't obliged to be intimatewith every idle vagabond about--I don't say but I'd try to be somethingbetter. If, for instance, I could get into the navy--""Why not the army? You 'd like it better.""Ay! but it 's far harder to get into. There's many a rough fellow likemyself aboard ship that they would n't take in a regiment. Besides, howcould I get in without interest?""My father is a Lieutenant-General. I don't know whether he could be ofservice to you.""A Lieutenant-General!" repeated Tom, with the reverential awe of onealluding to an actual potentate."Yes. He has a command out in India, where I feel full sure he couldgive you something. Suppose you were to go out there? I 'd write aletter to my father and ask him to befriend you.""It would take a fortune to pay the journey," said Tom, despondingly."Not if you went out on service; the Government would send you free ofcost. And even if you were not, I think we might manage it. Speak toyour father about it.""No," said he, slowly. "No; but I 'll talk it over with Polly. Not butI know well she'll say, 'There you are, castle-building and romancing.It's all moonshine! Nobody ever took notice of you,--nobody said he 'dinterest himself about you.'""That's easily remedied. If you like it, I 'll tell your sister allabout it myself. I 'll tell her it's my plan, and I 'll show her what Ithink are good reasons to believe it will be successful.""Oh! would you--would you!" cried he, with a choking sensation in thethroat; for his gratitude had made him almost hysterical."Yes," resumed Conyers. "When you come up here tomorrow, we 'll arrangeit all. I 'll turn the matter all over in my mind, too, and I havelittle doubt of our being able to carry it through.""You 'll not tell my father, though?""Not a word, if you forbid it. At the same time, you must see that he'llhave to hear it all later on.""I suppose so," muttered Tom, moodily, and leaned his head thoughtfullyon his hand. But one half-hour back and he would have told Conyers whyhe desired this concealment; he would have declared that his father,caring more for his services than his future good, would have thrownevery obstacle to his promotion, and would even, if need were, have sorepresented him to Conyers that he would have appeared utterly unworthyof his interest and kindness; but now not one word of all this escapedhim. He never hinted another reproach against his father, for already apurer spring had opened in his nature, the rocky heart had been smittenby words of gentleness, and he would have revolted against that whichshould degrade him in his own esteem."Good night," said Conyers, with a hearty shake of the hand, "and don'tforget your breakfast engagement tomorrow.""What 's this?" said Tom, blushing deeply, as he found a crumpledbank-note in his palm."It's your fee, my good fellow, that's all," said the other, laughingly."But I can't take a fee. I have never done so. I have no right to one. Iam not a doctor yet.""The very first lesson in your profession is not to anger your patient;and if you would not provoke me, say no more on this matter." There wasa half-semblance of haughtiness in these words that perhaps the speakernever intended; at all events, he was quick enough to remedy the effect,for he laid his hand good-naturedly on the other's shoulder and said,"For my sake, Dill,--for my sake.""I wish I knew what I ought to do," said Tom, whose pale cheek actuallytrembled with agitation. "I mean," said he, in a shaken voice, "I wish Iknew what would make you think best of me.""Do you attach so much value to my good opinion, then?""Don't you think I might? When did I ever meet any one that treated methis way before?"The agitation in which he uttered these few words imparted such asemblance of weakness to him that Conyers pressed him down into a chair,and filled up his glass with wine."Take that off, and you 'll be all right presently," said he, in a kindtone.Tom tried to carry the glass to his lips, but his hand trembled so thathe had to set it down on the table."I don't know how to say it," began he, "and I don't know whether Iought to say it, but somehow I feel as if I could give my heart's bloodif everybody would behave to me the way you do. I don't mean, mind you,so generously, but treating me as if--as if--as if--" gulped he out atlast, "as if I was a gentleman.""And why not? As there is nothing in your station that should deny thatclaim, why should any presume to treat you otherwise?""Because I'm not one!" blurted he out; and covering his face with hishands, he sobbed bitterly."Come, come, my poor fellow, don't be down-hearted. I 'm not much olderthan yourself, but I 've seen a good deal of life; and, mark my words,the price a man puts on himself is the very highest penny the world willever bid for him; he 'll not always get that, but he 'll never--no,never, get a farthing beyond it!"Tom stared vacantly at the speaker, not very sure whether he understoodthe speech, or that it had any special application to him."When you come to know life as well as I do," continued Conyers, who hadnow launched into a very favorite theme, "you'll learn the truth of whatI say. Hold your head high; and if the world desires to see you, it mustat least look up!""Ay, but it might laugh too!" said Tom, with a bitter gravity, whichconsiderably disconcerted the moralist, who pitched away his cigarimpatiently, and set about selecting another."I suspect I understand your nature. For," said he, after a moment ortwo, "I have rather a knack in reading people. Just answer me frankly afew questions.""Whatever you like," said the other, in a half-sulky sort of manner."Mind," said Conyers, eagerly, "as there can be no offence intended,you'll not feel any by whatever I may say.""Go on," said Tom, in the same dry tone."Ain't you obstinate?""I am.""I knew it. We had not talked half an hour together when I detectedit, and I said to myself, 'That fellow is one so rooted in his ownconvictions, it is scarcely possible to shake him.'""What next?" asked Tom."You can't readily forgive an injury; you find it very hard to pardonthe man who has wronged you.""I do not; if he did n't go on persecuting me, I would n't think of himat all.""Ah, that's a mistake. Well, I know you better than you know yourself;you do keep up the memory of an old grudge,--you can't help it.""Maybe so, but I never knew it.""You have, however, just as strong a sentiment of gratitude.""I never knew that, either," muttered he; "perhaps because it has had solittle provocation!""Bear in mind," said Conyers, who was rather disconcerted by the want ofconcurrence he had met with, "that I am in a great measure referring tolatent qualities,--things which probably require time and circumstancesto develop.""Oh, if that's it," said Dili, "I can no more object than I could if youtalked to me about what is down a dozen fathoms in the earth under ourfeet. It may be granite or it may be gold, for what I know; the onlything that I see is the gravel before me.""I 'll tell you a trait of your character you can't gainsay,"said Conyers, who was growing more irritated by the opposition sounexpectedly met with, "and it's one you need not dig a dozen fathomsdown to discover,--you are very reckless.""Reckless--reckless,--you call a fellow reckless that throws away hischance, I suppose?""Just so.""But what if he never had one?""Every man has a destiny; every man has that in his fate which he mayhelp to make or to mar as he inclines to. I suppose you admit that?""I don't know," was the sullen reply."Not know? Surely you needn't be told such a fact to recognize it!""All I know is this," said Tom, resolutely, "that I scarcely ever didanything in my life that it was n't found out to be wrong, so that atlast I 've come to be pretty careless what I do; and if it was n't forPolly,--if it was n't for Polly--" He stopped, drew his sleeve acrosshis eyes, and turned away, unable to finish."Come, then," said Conyers, laying his hand affectionately on theother's shoulder, "add my friendship to her love for you, and see ifthe two will not give you encouragement; for I mean to be your friend,Dill.""Do you?" said Tom, with the tears in his eyes."There 's my hand on it."CHAPTER VIII. FINE ACQUAINTANCESThere is a law of compensation even for the small things of this life,and by the wise enactments of that law, human happiness, on the whole,is pretty equally distributed. The rich man, probably, never felt onetithe of the enjoyment in his noble demesne that it yielded to some poorartisan who strolled through it on a holiday, and tasted at once thecharms of a woodland scene with all the rapturous delight of a day ofrest.Arguing from these premises, I greatly doubt if Lady Cobham, at thehead of her great household, with her house crowded with distinguishedvisitors, surrounded by every accessory of luxury and splendor, tastedanything approaching to the delight felt by one, the very humblestof her guests, and who for a brief twenty-four hours partook of herhospitality.Polly Dill, with all her desire and ambition for notice amongstthe great people of the county, had gone to this dinner-party withconsiderable misgivings. She only knew the Admiral in the hunting-field;of her Ladyship she had no knowledge whatever, save in a few drysentences uttered to her from a carriage one day at "the meet," when theAdmiral, with more sailor-like frankness than politeness, presented herby saying, "This is the heroine of the day's run, Dr. Dill's daughter."And to this was responded a stare through a double eye-glass, and acold smile and a few still colder words, affecting to be compliment, butsounding far more like a correction and a rebuke.No wonder, then, if Polly's heart was somewhat faint about approachingas a hostess one who could be so repelling as a mere acquaintance.Indeed, one less resolutely bent on her object would not haveencountered all the mortification and misery her anticipation pictured;but Polly fortified herself by the philosophy that said, "There isbut one road to this goal; I must either take that one, or abandon thejourney." And so she did take it.Either, however, that she had exaggerated the grievance to her own mind,or that her Ladyship was more courteous at home than abroad; but Pollywas charmed with the kindness of her reception. Lady Cobham had shakenhands with her, asked her had she been hunting lately, and was aboutto speak of her horsemanship to a grim old lady beside her, when thearrival of other guests cut short the compliment, and Polly passedon--her heart lightened of a great load--to mix with the generalcompany.I have no doubt it was a pleasant country-house; it was called thepleasantest in the county. On the present occasion it counted amongstits guests not only the great families of the neighborhood, but severaldistinguished visitors from a distance, of whom two, at least, arenoteworthy,--one, the great lyric poet; the other, the first tragicactress of her age and country. The occasion which assembled them wasa project originally broached at the Admiral's table, and so frequentlydiscussed afterwards that it matured itself into a congress. The planwas to get up theatricals for the winter season at Kilkenny, inwhich all the native dramatic ability should be aided by the firstprofessional talent. Scarcely a country-house that could not boast of,at least, one promising performer. Ruthven and Campion and Probart hadin their several walks been applauded by the great in art, and therewere many others who in the estimation of friends were just as certainof a high success.Some passing remark on Polly's good looks, and the suitability ofher face and style for certain small characters in comedy,--the pinkribboned damsels who are made love to by smart valets,--inducedLady Cobham to include her in her list; and thus, on these meagrecredentials, was she present. She did not want notice or desirerecognition; she was far too happy to be there, to hear and see and markand observe all around her, to care for any especial attention. If thehaughty Arabellas and Georgianas who swept past her without so much asa glance, were not, in her own estimation, superior in personalattractions, she knew well that they were so in all the accidentsof station and the advantages of dress; and perhaps--who knows?--thereflection was not such a discouraging one.No memorable event, no incident worth recording, marked her visit. Inthe world of such society the machinery moves with regularity andlittle friction. The comedy of real life is admirably played out bythe well-bred, and Polly was charmed to see with what courtesy, whatconsideration, what deference people behaved to each other; and allwithout an effort,--perhaps without even a thought.It was on the following day, when she got home and sat beside hermother's chair, that she related all she had seen. Her heart was filledwith joy; for, just as she was taking her leave, Lady Cobham had said,"You have been promised to us for Tuesday next, Miss Dill. Pray don'tforget it!" And now she was busily engaged in the cares of toilette; andthough it was a mere question of putting bows of a sky-blue ribbon ona muslin dress,--one of those little travesties by which rustic beautyemulates ball-room splendor,--to her eyes it assumed all the importanceof a grand preparation, and one which she could not help occasionallyrising to contemplate at a little distance."Won't it be lovely, mamma," she said, "with a moss-rose--a mere bud--oneach of those bows? But I have n't told you of how he sang. He was thesmallest little creature in the world, and he tripped across the roomwith his tiny feet like a bird, and he kissed Lady Cobham's hand with asort of old-world gallantry, and pressed a little sprig of jasmine shegave him to his heart,--this way,--and then he sat down to the piano. Ithought it strange to see a man play!""Effeminate,--very," muttered the old lady, as she wiped her spectacles."Well, I don't know, mamma,--at least, after a moment, I lost allthought of it, for I never heard anything like his singing before.He had not much voice, nor, perhaps, great skill, but there was anexpression in the words, a rippling melody with which the verses ranfrom his lips, while the accompaniment tinkled on beside them, perfectlyrapturous. It all seemed as if words and air were begotten of themoment, as if, inspired on the instant, he poured forth the verses, onwhich he half dwelt, while thinking over what was to follow, impartingan actual anxiety as you listened, lest he should not be ready with hisrhyme; and through all there was a triumphant joy that lighted up hisface and made his eyes sparkle with a fearless lustre, as of one whofelt the genius that was within him, and could trust it." And then hehad been so complimentary to herself, called her that charming little"rebel," after she had sung "Where 's the Slave," and told her thatuntil he had heard the words from her lips he did not know they werehalf so treasonable. "But, mamma dearest, I have made a conquest; andsuch a conquest,--the hero of the whole society,--a Captain Stapylton,who did something or captured somebody at Waterloo,--a bold dragoon,with a gorgeous pelisse all slashed with gold, and such a mass ofsplendor that he was quite dazzling to look upon." She went on, stillvery rapturously, to picture him. "Not very young; that is to say, hemight be thirty-five, or perhaps a little more,--tall, stately, evendignified in appearance, with a beard and moustache almost white,--forhe had served much in India, and he was dark-skinned as a native." Andthis fine soldier, so sought after and so courted, had been markedlyattentive to her, danced with her twice, and promised she should havehis Arab, "Mahmoud," at her next visit to Cobham. It was very evidentthat his notice of her had called forth certain jealousies from youngladies of higher social pretensions, nor was she at all indifferent tothe peril of such sentiments, though she did not speak of them to hermother, for, in good truth, that worthy woman was not one to investigatea subtle problem, or suggest a wise counsel; not to say that herinterests were far more deeply engaged for Miss Harlowe than for herdaughter Polly, seeing that in the one case every motive, and the springto every motive, was familiar to her, while in the other she possessedbut some vague and very strange notions of what was told her. Clarissahad made a full confidence to her: she had wept out her sorrows onher bosom, and sat sobbing on her shoulder. Polly came to her withthe frivolous narrative of a ball-room flirtation, which threatened nodespair nor ruin to any one. Here were no heart-consuming miseries,no agonizing terrors, no dreadful casualties that might darken a wholeexistence; and so Mrs. Dill scarcely followed Polly's story at all, andnever with any interest.Polly went in search of her brother, but he had left home early thatmorning with the boat, no one knew whither, and the doctor was in atowering rage at his absence. Tom, indeed, was so full of his successwith young Conyers that he never so much as condescended to explain hisplans, and simply left a message to say, "It was likely he 'd be backby dinner-time." Now Dr. Dill was not in one of his blandest humors.Amongst the company at Cobham, he had found a great physician fromKilkenny, plainly showing him that all his social sacrifices were not tohis professional benefit, and that if colds and catarrhs were going, hisown services would never be called in. Captain Stapylton, too, towhom Polly had presented him, told him that he "feared a young brotherofficer of his, Lieutenant Conyers, had fallen into the hands of somesmall village practitioner, and that he would take immediate measuresto get him back to headquarters," and then moved off, without giving himthe time for a correction of the mistake.He took no note of his daughter's little triumphs, the admiration thatshe excited, or the flatteries that greeted her. It is true he did notpossess the same means of measuring these that she had, and in all thatdreary leisure which besets an unhonored guest, he had ample time tomope and fret and moralize, as gloomily as might be. If, then, hedid not enjoy himself on his visit, he came away from it soured andill-humored.He denounced "junketings"--by which unseemly title he designated thelate entertainment--as amusements too costly for persons of his means.He made a rough calculation--a very rough one--of all that the"precious tomfoolery" had cost: the turnpike which he had paid, andthe perquisites to servants--which he had not; the expense of Polly'sfinery,--a hazarded guess she would have been charmed to have hadconfirmed; and, ending the whole with a startling total, declared that areign of rigid domestic economy must commence from that hour. The edictwas something like what one reads from the French Government, whenabout to protest against some license of the press, and which opens byproclaiming that "the latitude hitherto conceded to public discussionhas not been attended with those gratifying results so eagerlyanticipated by the Imperial administration." Poor Mrs. Dill--like a merejournalist--never knew she had been enjoying blessings till she wastold she had forfeited them forever, and she heard with a confusedastonishment that the household charges would be still further reduced,and yet food and fuel and light be not excluded from the supplies.He denounced Polly's equestrianism as a most ruinous and extravagantpursuit. Poor Polly, whose field achievements had always been on aborrowed mount! Tom was a scapegrace, whose debts would have beggaredhalf-a-dozen families,--wretched dog, to whom a guinea was a gold-mine;and Mrs. Dill, unhappy Mrs. Dill, who neither hunted, nor smoked,nor played skittles, after a moment's pause, he told her that hishard-earned pence should not be wasted in maintaining a "circulatinglibrary." Was there ever injustice like this? Talk to a man with onemeal a day about gluttony, lecture the castaway at sea about not givingway to his appetites, you might just as well do so as to preach toMrs. Dill--with her one book, and who never wanted another--about thediscursive costliness of her readings.Could it be that, like the cruel jailer, who killed the spider theprisoner had learned to love, he had resolved to rob her of Clarissa?The thought was so overwhelming that it stunned her; and thus stupefied,she saw the doctor issue forth on his daily round, without venturingone word in answer. And he rode on his way,--on that strange missionof mercy, meanness, of honest sympathy, or mock philanthropy, as men'shearts and natures make of it,--and set out for the "Fisherman's Home."CHAPTER IX. A COUNTRY DOCTORIn a story, as in a voyage, one must occasionally travel withuncongenial companions. Now I have no reason for hoping that any of myreaders care to keep Dr. Dill's company, and yet it is with Dr. Dill wemust now for a brief space foregather. He was on his way to visit hispatient at the "Fisherman's Home," having started, intentionally veryearly, to be there before Stapylton could have interposed with anycounsels of removing him to Kilkenny.The world, in its blind confidence in medical skill, and its unboundedbelief in certain practitioners of medicine, is but scantily just to thehumbler members of the craft in regard to the sensitiveness withwhich they feel the withdrawal of a patient from their care, and thesubstitution of another physician. The doctor who has not only heard,but felt Babington's adage, that the difference between a good physicianand a bad one is only "the difference between a pound and a guinea,"naturally thinks it a hard thing that his interests are to be sacrificedfor a mere question of five per cent. He knows, besides, that they caneach work on the same materials with the same tools, and it can be onlythrough some defect in his self-confidence that he can bring himself tobelieve that the patient's chances are not pretty much alike in hishands or his rival's. Now Dr. Dill had no feelings of this sort; noundervaluing of himself found a place in his nature. He regarded medicalmen as tax-gatherers, and naturally thought it mattered but little whichreceived the impost; and, thus reflecting, he bore no good will towardsthat gallant Captain, who, as we have seen, stood so well in hisdaughter's favor. Even hardened men of the world--old footsore pilgrimsof life--have their prejudices, and one of these is to be pleased atthinking they had augured unfavorably of any one they had afterwardslearned to dislike. It smacks so much of acuteness to be able to say,"I was scarcely presented to him; we had not exchanged a dozensentences when I saw this, that, and t' other." Dill knew this manwas overbearing, insolent, and oppressive, that he was meddlesome andinterfering, giving advice unasked for, and presuming to direct where noguidance was required. He suspected he was not a man of much fortune; hedoubted he was a man of good family. All his airs of pretensions--veryhigh and mighty they were--did not satisfy the doctor. As he saidhimself, he was a very old bird, but he forgot to add that he had alwayslived in an extremely small cage.The doctor had to leave his horse on the high-road and take a smallfootpath, which led through some meadows till it reached the littlecopse of beech and ilex that sheltered the cottage and effectually hidit from all view from the road. The doctor had just gained the laststile, when he suddenly came upon a man repairing a fence, and whoselabors were being overlooked by Miss Barrington. He had scarcely utteredhis most respectful salutations, when she said, "It is, perhaps, thelast time you will take that path through the Lock Meadow, Dr. Dill. Wemean to close it up after this week.""Close it up, dear lady!--a right of way that has existed Heaven knowshow long. I remember it as a boy myself.""Very probably, sir, and what you say vouches for great antiquity; butthings may be old and yet not respectable. Besides, it never was whatyou have called it,--a right of way. If it was, where did it go to?""It went to the cottage, dear lady. The 'Home' was a mill in thosedays.""Well, sir, it is no longer a mill, and it will soon cease to be aninn.""Indeed, dear lady! And am I to hope that I may congratulate such kindfriends as you have ever been to me on a change of fortune?""Yes, sir; we have grown so poor that, to prevent utter destitution, wehave determined to keep a private station; and with reference to that,may I ask you when this young gentleman could bear removal withoutinjury?""I have not seen him to-day, dear lady; but judging from theinflammatory symptoms I remarked yesterday, and the great nervousdepression--""I know nothing about medicine, sir; but if the nervous depression beindicated by a great appetite and a most noisy disposition, his casemust be critical.""Noise, dear lady!""Yes, sir; assisted by your son, he sat over his wine till pastmidnight, talking extremely loudly, and occasionally singing. They havenow been at breakfast since ten o'clock, and you will very soon beable to judge by your own ears of the well-regulated pitch of theconversation.""My son, Miss Dinah! Tom Dill at breakfast here?""I don't know whether his name be Tom or Harry, sir, nor is it to thepurpose; but he is a red-haired youth, with a stoop in the shoulders,and a much-abused cap."Dill groaned over a portrait which to him was a photograph."I 'll see to this, dear lady. This shall be looked into," muttered he,with the purpose of a man who pledged himself to a course of action; andwith this he moved on. Nor had he gone many paces from the spot when heheard the sound of voices, at first in some confusion, but afterwardsclearly and distinctly."I 'll be hanged if I 'd do it, Tom," cried the loud voice of Conyers."It's all very fine talking about paternal authority and all that, andso long as one is a boy there's no help for it; but you and I are men.We have a right to be treated like men, have n't we?""I suppose so," muttered the other, half sulkily, and not exactly seeingwhat was gained by the admission."Well, that being so," resumed Conyers, "I'd say to the governor, 'Whatallowance are you going to make me?'""Did you do that with your father?" asked Tom, earnestly."No, not exactly," stammered out the other. "There was not, in fact, anyneed for it, for my governor is a rare jolly fellow,--such a trump! Whathe said to me was, 'There's a check-book, George; don't spare it.'""Which was as much as to say, 'Draw what you like.'""Yes, of course. He knew, in leaving it to my honor, there was no riskof my committing any excess; so you see there was no necessity to makemy governor 'book up.' But if I was in your place I 'd do it. I pledgeyou my word I would."Tom only shook his head very mournfully, and made no answer. He felt,and felt truly, that there is a worldly wisdom learned only in povertyand in the struggles of narrow fortune, of which the well-to-do knowabsolutely nothing. Of what avail to talk to him of an unlimited credit,or a credit to be bounded only by a sense of honor? It presupposed somuch that was impossible, that he would have laughed if his heart hadbeen but light enough."Well, then," said Conyers, "if you have n't courage for this, let me doit; let me speak to your father.""What could you say to him?" asked Tom, doggedly."Say to him?--what could I say to him?" repeated he, as he lighted afresh cigar, and affected to be eagerly interested in the process. "It'sclear enough what I 'd say to him.""Let us hear it, then," growled out Tom, for he had a sort of coarseenjoyment at the other's embarrassment. "I 'll be the doctor now, andlisten to you." And with this he squared his chair full in front ofConyers, and crossed his arms imposingly on his chest "You said youwanted to speak to me about my son Tom, Mr. Conyers; what is it you haveto say?""Well, I suppose I'd open the matter delicately, and, perhaps, adroitly.I 'd say, 'I have remarked, doctor, that your son is a young fellow ofvery considerable abilities--'""For what?" broke in Tom, huskily."Come, you 're not to interrupt in this fashion, or I can't continue. I'd say something about your natural cleverness; and what a pity itwould be if, with very promising talents, you should not have those fairadvantages which lead a man to success in life.""And do you know what he 'd say to all that?""No.""Well, I'll tell you. He'd say 'Bother!' Just 'bother.'""What do you mean by 'bother'?""That what you were saying was all nonsense. That you did n't know, noryou never could know, the struggles of a man like himself, just to makethe two ends meet; not to be rich, mind you, or lay by money, or haveshares in this, or stocks in that, but just to live, and no more.""Well, I'd say, 'Give him a few hundred pounds, and start him.'""Why don't you say a few thousands? It would sound grander, and be justas likely. Can't you see that everybody hasn't a Lieutenant-General fora father? and that what you 'd give for a horse--that would, maybe,be staked to-morrow--would perhaps be a fortune for a fellow like me?What's that I hear coming up the river? That's the doctor, I 'm sure.I 'll be off till he's gone." And without waiting to hear a word, hesprang from his chair and disappeared in the wood.Dr. Dill only waited a few seconds to compose his features, somewhatexcited by what he had overheard; and then coughing loudly, to announcehis approach, moved gravely along the gravel path."And how is my respected patient?" asked he, blandly. "Is theinflammation subsiding, and are our pains diminished?""My ankle is easier, if you mean that," said Conyers, bluntly."Yes, much easier,--much easier," said the doctor, examining the limb;"and our cellular tissue has less effusion, the sheaths of the tendonsfreer, and we are generally better. I perceive you have had the leechesapplied. Did Tom--my son--give you satisfaction? Was he as attentive andas careful as you wished?""Yes, I liked him. I wish he 'd come up every day while I remain. Isthere any objection to that arrangement?""None, dear sir,--none. His time is fully at your service; he ought tobe working hard. It is true he should be reading eight or ten hours aday, for his examination; but it is hard to persuade him to it. Youngmen will be young men!""I hope so, with all my heart. At least, I, for one, don't want to bean old one. Will you do me a favor, doctor? and will you forgive me ifI don't know how to ask it with all becoming delicacy? I'd like to giveTom a helping hand. He's a good fellow,--I 'm certain he is. Will youlet me send him out to India, to my father? He has lots of places togive away, and he 'd be sure to find something to suit him. You haveheard of General Conyers, perhaps, the political resident at Delhi?That's my governor." In the hurry and rapidity with which he spoke, itwas easy to see how he struggled with a sense of shame and confusion.Dr. Dill was profuse of acknowledgments; he was even moved as heexpressed his gratitude. "It was true," he remarked, "that his life hadbeen signalled by these sort of graceful services, or rather offers ofservices; for we are proud if we are poor, sir. 'Dill aut nil' is thelegend of our crest, which means that we are ourselves or nothing.""I conclude everybody else is in the same predicament," broke inConyers, bluntly."Not exactly, young gentleman,--not exactly. I think I could, perhaps,explain--""No, no; never mind it. I 'm the stupidest fellow in the world at a nicedistinction; besides, I'll take your word for the fact. You have heardof my father, have n't you?""I heard of him so late as last night, from a brother officer of yours,Captain Stapylton.""Where did you meet Stapylton?" asked Conyers, quickly."At Sir Charles Cobham's. I was presented to him by my daughter, and hemade the most kindly inquiries after you, and said that, if possible,he'd come over here to-day to see you.""I hope he won't; that's all," muttered Conyers. Then, correctinghimself suddenly, he said: "I mean, I scarcely know him; he has onlyjoined us a few months back, and is a stranger to every one in theregiment. I hope you did n't tell him where I was.""I'm afraid that I did, for I remember his adding, 'Oh! I must carry himoff. I must get him back to headquarters.'""Indeed! Let us see if he will. That's the style of these 'Company's'officers,--he was in some Native corps or other,--they always fancy theycan bully a subaltern; but Black Stapylton will find himself mistakenthis time.""He was afraid that you had not fallen into skilful hands; and, ofcourse, it would not have come well from me to assure him of theopposite.""Well, but what of Tom, doctor? You have given me no answer.""It is a case for reflection, my dear young friend, if I may beemboldened to call you so. It is not a matter I can say yes or no to onthe instant. I have only two grown-up children: my daughter, the mostaffectionate, the most thoughtful of girls, educated, too, in a way tograce any sphere--""You need n't tell me that Tom is a wild fellow," broke in Conyers,--forhe well understood the antithesis that was coming; "he owned it all tome, himself. I have no doubt, too, that he made the worst of it; for,after all, what signifies a dash of extravagance, or a mad freak or two?You can't expect that we should all be as wise and as prudent and ascool-headed as Black Stapylton.""You plead very ably, young gentleman," said Dill, with his smoothestaccent, "but you must give me a little time.""Well, I'll give you till to-morrow,--to-morrow, at this hour; forit wouldn't be fair to the poor fellow to keep him in a state ofuncertainty. His heart is set on the plan; he told me so.""I 'll do my best to meet your wishes, my dear young gentleman; butplease to bear in mind that it is the whole future fate of my son Iam about to decide. Your father may not, possibly, prove so deeplyinterested as you are; he may--not unreasonably, either--take a colderview of this project; he may chance to form a lower estimate of my poorboy than it is your good nature to have done.""Look here, doctor; I know my governor something better than you do, andif I wrote to him, and said, 'I want this fellow to come home with a lacof rupees,' he 'd start him to-morrow with half the money. If I were tosay, 'You are to give him the best thing in your gift,' there's nothinghe 'd stop at; he 'd make him a judge, or a receiver, or some one ofthose fat things that send a man back to England with a fortune. What'sthat fellow whispering to you about? It's something that concerns me."This sudden interruption was caused by the approach of Darby, who hadcome to whisper something in the doctor's ear."It is a message he has brought me; a matter of little consequence.I 'll look to it, Darby. Tell your mistress it shall be attended to."Darby lingered for a moment, but the doctor motioned him away, and didnot speak again till he had quitted the spot. "How these fellows willwait to pick up what passes between their betters," said Dill, while hecontinued to follow him with his eyes. "I think I mentioned to you once,already, that the persons who keep this house here are reduced gentry,and it is now my task to add that, either from some change of fortune orfrom caprice, they are thinking of abandoning the inn, and resuming--sofar as may be possible for them--their former standing. This projectdates before your arrival here; and now, it would seem, they aregrowing impatient to effect it; at least, a very fussy old lady--MissBarrington--has sent me word by Darby to say her brother will be backhere tomorrow or next day, with some friends from Kilkenny, and she asksat what time your convalescence is likely to permit removal.""Turned out, in fact, doctor,--ordered to decamp! You must say, I 'mready, of course; that is to say, that I 'll go at once. I don't exactlysee how I 'm to be moved in this helpless state, as no carriage cancome here; but you 'll look to all that for me. At all events, goimmediately, and say I shall be off within an hour or so.""Leave it all to me,--leave it in my hands. I think I see what is tobe done," said the doctor, with one of his confident little smiles, andmoved away.There was a spice of irritation in Conyers's manner as he spoke. He wasvery little accustomed to be thwarted in anything, and scarcely knew thesensation of having a wish opposed, or an obstacle set against him, butsimply because there was a reason for his quitting the place, grew allthe stronger his desire to remain there. He looked around him, and neverbefore had the foliage seemed so graceful; never had the tints of thecopper-beech blended so harmoniously with the stone-pine and thelarch; never had the eddies of the river laughed more joyously, nor theblackbirds sung with a more impetuous richness of melody. "And to saythat I must leave all this, just when I feel myself actually clingingto it. I could spend my whole life here. I glory in this quiet, unbrokenease; this life, that slips along as waveless as the stream there! Whyshould n't I buy it; have it all my own, to come down to whenever I wassick and weary of the world and its dissipations? The spot is small; itcouldn't be very costly; it would take a mere nothing to maintain. Andto have it all one's own!" There was an actual ecstasy in the thought;for in that same sense of possession there is a something that resemblesthe sense of identity. The little child with his toy, the aged man withhis proud demesne, are tasters of the same pleasure."You are to use your own discretion, my dear young gentleman, andgo when it suits you, and not before," said the doctor, returningtriumphantly, for he felt like a successful envoy. "And now I will leaveyou. To-morrow you shall have my answer about Tom."Conyers nodded vaguely; for, alas! Tom, and all about him, hadcompletely lapsed from his memory.CHAPTER X. BEING "BORED"It is a high testimony to that order of architecture which we callcastle-building, that no man ever lived in a house so fine he could notbuild one more stately still out of his imagination. Nor is it only tograndeur and splendor this superiority extends, but it can invest lowlysituations and homely places with a charm which, alas! no reality canrival.Conyers was a fortunate fellow in a number of ways; he was young,good-looking, healthy, and rich. Fate had made place for him on the verysunniest side of the causeway, and, with all that, he was happier onthat day, through the mere play of his fancy, than all his wealth couldhave made him. He had fashioned out a life for himself in that cottage,very charming, and very enjoyable in its way. He would make it such aspot that it would have resources for him on every hand, and he huggedhimself in the thought of coming down here with a friend, or, perhaps,two friends, to pass days of that luxurious indolence so fascinating tothose who are, or fancy they are, wearied of life's pomps and vanities.Now there are no such scoffers at the frivolity and emptiness of humanwishes as the well-to-do young fellows of two or three-and-twenty.They know the "whole thing," and its utter rottenness. They smilecompassionately at the eagerness of all around them; they look withbland pity at the race, and contemptuously ask, of what value the prizewhen it is won? They do their very best to be gloomy moralists, but theycannot. They might as well try to shiver when they sit in the sunshine.The vigorous beat of young hearts, and the full tide of young pulses,will tell against all the mock misanthropy that ever was fabricated! Itwould not be exactly fair to rank Conyers in this school, and yet he wasnot totally exempt from some of its teachings. Who knows if these littleimaginary glooms, these brain-created miseries, are not a kind ofmoral "alterative" which, though depressing at the instant, render theconstitution only more vigorous after?At all events, he had resolved to have the cottage, and, goingpractically to work, he called Darby to his counsels to tell him theextent of the place, its boundaries, and whatever information he couldafford as to the tenure and its rent."You 'd be for buying it, your honor!" said Darby, with the keenquick-sightedness of his order."Perhaps I had some thoughts of the kind; and, if so, I should keep youon."Darby bowed his gratitude very respectfully. It was too long a vistafor him to strain his eyes at, and so he made no profuse display ofthankfulness. With all their imaginative tendencies, the lower Irish area very bird-in-the-hand sort of people."Not more than seventeen acres!" cried Conyers, in astonishment. "Why, Ishould have guessed about forty, at least. Isn't that wood there part ofit?""Yes, but it's only a strip, and the trees that you see yonder is inCarriclough; and them two meadows below the salmon weir is n't ours atall; and the island itself we have only a lease of it.""It's all in capital repair, well kept, well looked after?""Well, it is, and isn't!" said he, with a look of disagreement. "He'dhave one thing, and she'd have another; he 'd spend every shilling hecould get on the place, and she 'd grudge a brush of paint, or a coatof whitewash, just to keep things together.""I see nothing amiss here," said Conyers, looking around him. "Nobodycould ask or wish a cottage to be neater, better furnished, or morecomfortable. I confess I do not perceive anything wanting.""Oh, to be sure, it's very nate, as your honor says; but then--" And hescratched his head, and looked confused."But then, what--out with it?""The earwigs is dreadful; wherever there 's roses and sweetbrier there'sno livin' with them. Open the window and the place is full of them."Mistaking the surprise he saw depicted in his hearer's face for terror,Darby launched forth into a description of insect and reptile torturesthat might have suited the tropics; to hear him, all the stories of thewhite ant of India, or the gallinipper of Demerara, were nothing to thedestructive powers of the Irish earwig. The place was known for them allover the country, and it was years and years lying empty, "by rayson ofthim plagues."Now, if Conyers was not intimidated to the full extent Darby intended bythis account, he was just as far from guessing the secret cause ofthis representation, which was simply a long-settled plan of succeedinghimself to the ownership of the "Fisherman's Home," when, either fromthe course of nature or an accident, a vacancy would occur. It was thegrand dream of Darby's life, the island of his Government, his seat inthe Cabinet, his Judgeship, his Garter, his everything, in short, thatmakes human ambition like a cup brimful and overflowing; and what aterrible reverse would it be if all these hopes were to be dashed justto gratify the passing caprice of a mere traveller!"I don't suppose your honor cares for money, and, maybe, you 'd as soonpay twice over the worth of anything; but here, between our two selves,I can tell you, you 'd buy an estate in the county cheaper than thislittle place. They think, because they planted most of the trees andmade the fences themselves, that it's like the King's Park. It's a fancyspot, and a fancy price, they'll ask for it But I know of another worthten of it,--a real, elegant place; to be sure, it's a trifle out ofrepair, for the ould naygur that has it won't lay out a sixpence, butthere 's every con-vaniency in life about it. There's the finest cuppotatoes, the biggest turnips ever I see on it, and fish jumpin' intothe parlor-window, and hares runnin' about like rats.""I don't care for all that; this cottage and these grounds here havetaken my fancy.""And why would n't the other, when you seen it? The ould Major thatlives there wants to sell it, and you 'd get it a raal bargain. Let merow your honor up there this evening. It's not two miles off, and theriver beautiful all the way."Conyers rejected the proposal abruptly, haughtily. Darby had dared tothrow down a very imposing card-edifice, and for the moment the fellowwas odious to him. All the golden visions of his early morning, thatpoetized life he was to lead, that elegant pastoralism, which was toblend the splendor of Lucullus with the simplicity of a Tityrus, allrent, torn, and scattered by a vile hind, who had not even a conceptionof the ruin he had caused.And yet Darby had a misty consciousness of some success. He did not,indeed, know that his shell had exploded in a magazine; but he saw,from the confusion in the garrison, that his shot had told severelysomewhere."Maybe your honor would rather go to-morrow? or maybe you 'd like theMajor to come up here himself, and speak to you?""Once for all, I tell you, No! Is that plain? No! And I may add, my goodfellow, that if you knew me a little better, you 'd not tender me anyadvice I did not ask for.""And why would I? Would n't I be a baste if I did?""I think so," said Conyers, dryly, and turned away. He was out of temperwith everything and everybody,--the doctor, and his abject manner;Tom, and his roughness; Darby, and his roguish air of self-satisfiedcraftiness; all, for the moment, displeased and offended him. "I 'llleave the place to-morrow; I 'm not sure I shall not go to-night D'yehear?"Darby bowed respectfully."I suppose I can reach some spot, by boat, where a carriage can be had?""By coorse, your honor. At Hunt's Mills, or Shibna-brack, you 'll geta car easy enough. I won't say it will be an elegant convaniency, but agood horse will rowl you along into Thomastown, where you can change fora shay."Strange enough, this very facility of escape annoyed him. Had Darbyonly told him that there were all manner of difficulties to gettingaway,--that there were shallows in the river, or a landslip across theroad,--he would have addressed himself to overcome the obstacles like aman; but to hear that the course was open, that any one might take it,was intolerable."I suppose, your honor, I 'd better get the boat ready, at all events?""Yes, certainly,--that is, not till I give further orders. I 'm theonly stranger here, and I can't imagine there can be much difficulty inhaving a boat at any hour. Leave me, my good fellow; you only worry me.Go!"And Darby moved away, revolving within himself the curious problem, thatif, having plenty of money enlarged a man's means of enjoyment, it wasstrange how little effect it produced upon his manners. As for Conyers,he stood moodily gazing on the river, over whose placid surface a fewheavy raindrops were just falling; great clouds, too, rolled heavilyover the hillsides, and gathered into ominous-looking masses over thestream, while a low moaning sound of very far-off thunder foretold astorm.Here, at least, was a good tangible grievance, and he hugged it to hisheart. He was weather-bound! The tree-tops were already shaking wildly,and dark scuds flying fast over the mottled sky. It was clear that asevere storm was near. "No help for it now," muttered he, "if I mustremain here till to-morrow." And hobbling as well as he could intothe house, he seated himself at the window to watch the hurricane. Tooclosely pent up between the steep sides of the river for anything likedestructive power, the wind only shook the trees violently, or sweptalong the stream with tiny waves, which warred against the current; buteven these were soon beaten down by the rain,--that heavy, swooping,splashing rain, that seems to come from the overflowing of a lake in theclouds. Darker and darker grew the atmosphere as it fell, till the banksof the opposite side were gradually lost to view, while the river itselfbecame a yellow flood, surging up amongst the willows that lined thebanks. It was not one of those storms whose grand effects of lightning,aided by pealing thunder, create a sense of sublime terror, that has itsown ecstasy; but it was one of those dreary evenings when the dull skyshows no streak of light, and when the moist earth gives up no perfume,when foliage and hillside and rock and stream are leaden-colored andsad, and one wishes for winter, to close the shutter and draw thecurtain, and creep close to the chimney-corner as to a refuge.Oh, what comfortless things are these summer storms! They come upon uslike some dire disaster in a time of festivity. They swoop down upon ourdays of sunshine like a pestilence, and turn our joy into gloom, andall our gladness to despondency, bringing back to our minds memories ofcomfortless journeys, weariful ploddings, long nights of suffering.I am but telling what Conyers felt at this sudden change of weather. Youand I, my good reader, know better. We feel how gladly the parched earthdrinks up the refreshing draught, how the seared grass bends gratefullyto the skimming rain, and the fresh buds open with joy to catch thepearly drops. We know, too, how the atmosphere, long imprisoned, burstsforth into a joyous freedom, and comes back to us fresh from the sea andthe mountain rich in odor and redolent of health, making the very airbreathe an exquisite luxury. We know all this, and much more that he didnot care for.Now Conyers was only "bored," as if anything could be much worse; thatis to say, he was in that state of mind in which resources yield nodistraction, and nothing is invested with an interest sufficient to makeit even passingly amusing. He wanted to do something, though the precisesomething did not occur to him. Had he been well, and in full enjoymentof his strength, he 'd have sallied out into the storm and walked offhis ennui by a wetting. Even a cold would be a good exchange for thedreary blue-devilism of his depression; but this escape was deniedhim, and he was left to fret, and chafe, and fever himself, moving fromwindow to chimney-corner, and from chimney-corner to sofa, till at last,baited by self-tormentings, he opened his door and sallied forth towander through the rooms, taking his chance where his steps might leadhim.Between the gloomy influences of the storm and the shadows of adeclining day he could mark but indistinctly the details of the roomshe was exploring. They presented little that was remarkable; they weremodestly furnished, nothing costly nor expensive anywhere, but a degreeof homely comfort rare to find in an inn. They had, above all, thathabitable look which so seldom pertains to a house of entertainment,and, in the loosely scattered books, prints, and maps showed a sort offlattering trustfulness in the stranger who might sojourn there. Hiswanderings led him, at length, into a somewhat more pretentious room,with a piano and a harp, at one angle of which a little octangulartower opened, with windows in every face, and the spaces between themcompletely covered by miniatures in oil, or small cabinet pictures. Asmall table with a chess-board stood here, and an unfinished game yetremained on the board. As Conyers bent over to look, he perceived that abook, whose leaves were held open by a smelling-bottle, lay on the chairnext the table. He took this up, and saw that it was a little volumetreating of the game, and that the pieces on the board represented aproblem. With the eagerness of a man thirsting for some occupation, heseated himself at the table, and set to work at the question. "A Mate inSix Moves" it was headed, but the pieces had been already disturbed bysome one attempting the solution. He replaced them by the directions ofthe volume, and devoted himself earnestly to the task. He was not a goodplayer, and the problem posed him. He tried it again and again, but everunsuccessfully. He fancied that up to a certain point he had followedthe right track, and repeated the same opening moves each time.Meanwhile the evening was fast closing in, and it was only withdifficulty he could see the pieces on the board.[Illustration: 126]Bending low over the table, he was straining his eyes at the game, whena low, gentle voice from behind his chair said, "Would you not wishcandles, sir? It is too dark to see here."Conyers turned hastily, and as hastily recognized that the person whoaddressed him was a gentlewoman. He arose at once, and made a sort ofapology for his intruding."Had I known you were a chess-player, sir," said she, with the demuregravity of a composed manner, "I believe I should have sent you achallenge; for my brother, who is my usual adversary, is from home.""If I should prove a very unworthy enemy, madam, you will find me a verygrateful one, for I am sorely tired of my own company.""In that case, sir, I beg to offer you mine, and a cup of tea along withit."[Illustration: 126]Conyers accepted the invitation joyfully, and followed Miss Barringtonto a small but most comfortable little room, where a tea equipage ofexquisite old china was already prepared."I see you are in admiration of my teacups; they are the rare Cantonblue, for we tea-drinkers have as much epicurism in the form and colorof a cup as wine-bibbers profess to have in a hock or a claret glass.Pray take the sofa; you will find it more comfortable than a chair. I amaware you have had an accident."Very few and simple as were her words, she threw into her manner adegree of courtesy that seemed actual kindness; and coming, as this did,after his late solitude and gloom, no wonder was it that Conyers wascharmed with it. There was, besides, a quaint formality--a sort ofold-world politeness in her breeding--which relieved the interview ofawkwardness by taking it out of the common category of such events.When tea was over, they sat down to chess, at which Conyers had merelyproficiency enough to be worth beating. Perhaps the quality stood himin good stead; perhaps certain others, such as his good looks and hispleasing manners, were even better aids to him; but certain it is, MissBarrington liked her guest, and when, on arising to say good-night, hemade a bungling attempt to apologize for having prolonged his stay atthe cottage beyond the period which suited their plans, she stoppedhim by saying, with much courtesy, "It is true, sir, we are about torelinquish the inn, but pray do not deprive us of the great pleasurewe should feel in associating its last day or two with a most agreeableguest. I hope you will remain till my brother comes back and makes youracquaintance."Conyers very cordially accepted the proposal, and went off to his bedfar better pleased with himself and with all the world than he wellbelieved it possible he could be a couple of hours before.CHAPTER XI. A NOTE TO BE ANSWEREDWhile Conyers was yet in bed the following morning, a messenger arrivedat the house with a note for him, and waited for the answer. It was fromStapylton, and ran thus:--"Cobham Hall, Tuesday morning."Dear Con.,--The world here--and part of it is a very pretty world, withsilky tresses and trim ankles--has declared that you have had some sortof slight accident, and are laid up at a miserable wayside inn, tobe blue-devilled and doctored  discrtion. I strained my shoulderyesterday hunting,--my horse swerved against a tree,--or I shouldascertain all the particulars of your disaster in person; so there isnothing left for it but a note."I am here domesticated at a charming country-house, the host an oldAdmiral, the hostess a ci-devant belle of London,--in times notvery recent,--and more lately what is called in newspapers 'one of theornaments of the Irish Court.' We have abundance of guests,--county donsand native celebrities, clerical, lyrical, and quizzical, several prettywomen, a first-rate cellar, and a very tolerable cook. I give you thecatalogue of our attractions, for I am commissioned by Sir Charles andmy Lady to ask you to partake of them. The invitation is given in allcordiality, and I hope you will not decline it, for it is, amongst othermatters, a good opportunity of seeing an Irish 'interior,' a thing ofwhich I have always had my doubts and misgivings, some of which are nowsolved; others I should like to investigate with your assistance. Ina word, the whole is worth seeing, and it is, besides, one of thoseexperiences which can be had on very pleasant terms. There is perfectliberty; always something going on, and always a way to be out of it ifyou like. The people are, perhaps, not more friendly than in England,but they are far more familiar; and if not more disposed to be pleased,they tell you they are, which amounts to the same. There is a gooddeal of splendor, a wide hospitality, and, I need scarcely add, aconsiderable share of bad taste. There is, too, a costly attention tothe wishes of a guest, which will remind you of India, though I must ownthe Irish Brahmin has not the grand, high-bred air of the Bengalee. Butagain I say, come and see."I have been told to explain to you why they don't send their boat.There is something about draught of water, and something about a 'gash,'whatever that is: I opine it to be a rapid. And then I am directed tosay, that if you will have yourself paddled up to Brown's Barn, theCobham barge will be there to meet you."I write this with some difficulty, lying on my back on a sofa, while avery pretty girl is impatiently waiting to continue her reading to meof a new novel called 'The Antiquary.' a capital story, but strangelydisfigured by whole scenes in a Scottish dialect. You must read it whenyou come over."You have heard of Hunter, of course. I am sure you will be sorry at hisleaving us. For myself, I knew him very slightly, and shall not have toregret him like older friends; not to say that I have been so long inthe service that I never believe in a Colonel. Would you go with himif he gave you the offer? There is such a row and uproar all around me,that I must leave off. Have I forgotten to say that if you stand uponthe 'dignities,' the Admiral will go in person to invite you, though hehas a foot in the gout. I conclude you will not exact this, and I knowthey will take your acceptance of this mode of invitation as a greatfavor. Say the hour and the day, and believe me yours always,"Horace Stapylton."Sir Charles is come to say that if your accident does not interferewith riding, he hopes you will send for your horses. He has amplestabling, and is vainglorious about his beans. That short-leggedchestnut you brought from Norris would cut a good figure here, as thefences lie very close, and you must be always 'in hand.' If you saw howthe women ride! There is one here now--a 'half-bred 'un'--that poundedus all--a whole field of us--last Saturday. You shall see her. I won'tpromise you 'll follow her across her country."The first impression made on the mind of Conyers by this letter wassurprise that Stapylton, with whom he had so little acquaintance, shouldwrite to him in this tone of intimacy; Stapylton, whose cold, almoststern manner seemed to repel any approach, and now he assumed all thefree-and-easy air of a comrade of his own years and standing. Had hemistaken the man, or had he been misled by inferring from his bearing inthe regiment what he must be at heart?This, however, was but a passing thought; the passage which interestedhim most of all was about Hunter. Where and for what could he have left,then? It was a regiment he had served in since he entered the army.What could have led him to exchange? and why, when he did so, had he notwritten him one line--even one--to say as much? It was to serve underHunter, his father's old aide-de-camp in times back, that he had enteredthat regiment; to be with him, to have his friendship, his counsels, hisguidance. Colonel Hunter had treated him like a son in every respect,and Conyers felt in his heart that this same affection and interest itwas which formed his strongest tie to the service. The question, "Wouldyou go with him if he gave you the offer?" was like a reflection on him,while no such option had been extended to him. What more natural, afterall, than such an offer? so Stapylton thought,--so all the world wouldthink. How he thought over the constantly recurring questions of hisbrother-officers: "Why didn't you go with Hunter?" "How came it thatHunter did not name you on his staff?" "Was it fair--was it generousin one who owed all his advancement to his father--to treat him in thisfashion?" "Were the ties of old friendship so lax as all this?" "Wasdistance such an enemy to every obligation of affection?" "Would hisfather believe that such a slight had been passed upon himundeservedly? Would not the ready inference be, 'Hunter knew you tobe incapable,--unequal to the duties he required. Hunter must have hisreasons for passing you over'?" and such like. These reflections,very bitter in their way, were broken in upon by a request from MissBarrington for his company at breakfast. Strange enough, he had halfforgotten that there was such a person in the world, or that he hadspent the preceding evening very pleasantly in her society."I hope you have had a pleasant letter," said she, as he entered, withStapylton's note still in his hand."I can scarcely call it so, for it brings me news that our Colonel--avery dear and kind friend to me--is about to leave us.""Are these not the usual chances of a soldier's life? I used to be veryfamiliar once on a time with such topics.""I have learned the tidings so vaguely, too, that I can make nothing ofthem. My correspondent is a mere acquaintance,--a brother officer, whohas lately joined us, and cannot feel how deeply his news has affectedme; in fact, the chief burden of his letter is to convey an invitationto me, and he is full of country-house people and pleasures. He writesfrom a place called Cobham.""Sir Charles Cobham's. One of the best houses in the county.""Do you know them?" asked Conyers, who did not, till the words were out,remember how awkward they might prove.She flushed slightly for a moment, but, speedily recovering herself,said: "Yes, we knew them once. They had just come to the country, andpurchased that estate, when our misfortunes overtook us. They showedus much attention, and such kindness as strangers could show, and theyevinced a disposition to continue it; but, of course, our relativepositions made intercourse impossible. I am afraid," said she, hastily,"I am talking in riddles all this time. I ought to have told you that mybrother once owned a good estate here. We Barringtons thought a deal ofourselves in those days." She tried to say these words with a playfullevity, but her voice shook, and her lip trembled in spite of her.Conyers muttered something unintelligible about "his having heardbefore," and his sorrow to have awakened a painful theme; but shestopped him hastily, saying, "These are all such old stories now, oneshould be able to talk them over unconcernedly; indeed, it is easier todo so than to avoid the subject altogether, for there is no such egotistas your reduced gentleman." She made a pretext of giving him his tea,and helping him to something, to cover the awkward pause that followed,and then asked if he intended to accept the invitation to Cobham."Not if you will allow me to remain here. The doctor says three daysmore will see me able to go back to my quarters.""I hope you will stay for a week, at least, for I scarcely expect mybrother before Saturday. Meanwhile, if you have any fancy to visitCobham, and make your acquaintance with the family there, remember youhave all the privileges of an inn here, to come and go, and stay at yourpleasure.""I do not want to leave this. I wish I was never to leave it," mutteredhe below his breath."Perhaps I guess what it is that attaches you to this place," said she,gently. "Shall I say it? There is something quiet, something domestichere, that recalls 'Home.'""But I never knew a home," said Conyers, falteringly. "My mother diedwhen I was a mere infant, and I knew none of that watchful love thatfirst gives the sense of home. You may be right, however, in supposingthat I cling to this spot as what should seem to me like a home, for Iown to you I feel very happy here.""Stay then, and be happy," said she, holding out her hand, which heclasped warmly, and then pressed to his lips."Tell your friend to come over and dine with you any day that he cantear himself from gay company and a great house, and I will do my bestto entertain him suitably.""No. I don't care to do that; he is a mere acquaintance; there is nofriendship between us, and, as he is several years older than me, andfar wiser, and more man of the world, I am more chilled than cheeredby his company. But you shall read his letter, and I 'm certain you'll make a better guess at his nature than if I were to give you my ownversion of him at any length." So saying, he handed Stapyl-ton'snote across the table; and Miss Dinah, having deliberately put on herspectacles, began to read it."It's a fine manly hand,--very bold and very legible, and says somethingfor the writer's frankness. Eh? 'a miserable wayside inn!' This is lessthan just to the poor 'Fisherman's Home.' Positively, you must make himcome to dinner, if it be only for the sake of our character. This man isnot amiable, sir," said she, as she read on, "though I could swear he ispleasant company, and sometimes witty. But there is little of genial inhis pleasantry, and less of good nature in his wit.""Go on," cried Conyers; "I 'm quite with you.""Is he a person of family?" asked she, as she read on some few linesfurther."We know nothing about him; he joined us from a native corps, in India;but he has a good name and, apparently, ample means. His appearance andmanner are equal to any station.""For all that, I don't like him, nor do I desire that you shouldlike him. There is no wiser caution than that of the Psalmist against'sitting in the seat of the scornful.' This man is a scoffer.""And yet it is not his usual tone. He is cold, retiring, almost shy.This letter is not a bit like anything I ever saw in his character.""Another reason to distrust him. Set my mind at ease by saying 'No' tohis invitation, and let me try if I cannot recompense you by homelinessin lieu of splendor. The young lady," added she, as she folded theletter, "whose horsemanship is commemorated at the expense of herbreeding, must be our doctor's daughter. She is a very pretty girl, andrides admirably. Her good looks and her courage might have saved her thesarcasm. I have my doubts if the man that uttered it be thorough-bred.""Well, I 'll go and write my answer," said Conyers, rising. "I havebeen keeping his messenger waiting all this time. I will show it to youbefore I send it off."CHAPTER XII. THE ANSWER"Will this do?" said Conyers, shortly after, entering the room witha very brief note, but which, let it be owned, cost him fully as muchlabor as more practised hands occasionally bestow on a more lengthydespatch. "I suppose it's all that's civil and proper, and I don'tcare to make any needless professions. Pray read it, and give me youropinion." It was so brief that I may quote it:--"Dear Captain Stapylton,--Don't feel any apprehensions about me. I am inbetter quarters than I ever fell into in my life, and my accident is notworth speaking of. I wish you had told me more of our Colonel, ofwhose movements I am entirely ignorant. I am sincerely grateful to yourfriends for thinking of me, and hope, ere I leave the neighborhood, toexpress to Sir Charles and Lady Cobham how sensible I am of their kindintentions towards me."I am, most faithfully yours,"F. CONYERS.""It is very well, and tolerably legible," said Miss Barrington, dryly;"at least I can make out everything but the name at the end.""I own I do not shine in penmanship; the strange characters at the footwere meant to represent 'Conyers.'""Conyers! Conyers! How long is it since I heard that name last, and howfamiliar I was with it once! My nephew's dearest friend was a Conyers.""He must have been a relative of mine in some degree; at least, we arein the habit of saying that all of the name are of one family."Not heeding what he said, the old lady had fallen back in hermeditations to a very remote "long ago," and was thinking of a time whenevery letter from India bore the high-wrought interest of a romance, ofwhich her nephew was the hero,--times of intense anxiety, indeed, butfull of hope withal, and glowing with all the coloring with which loveand an exalted imagination can invest the incidents of an adventurouslife."It was a great heart he had, a splendidly generous nature, far toohigh-souled and too exacting for common friendships, and so it was thathe had few friends. I am talking of my nephew," said she, correctingherself suddenly. "What a boon for a young man to have met him, andformed an attachment to him. I wish you could have known him. Georgewould have been a noble example for you!" She paused for some minutes,and then suddenly, as it were remembering herself, said, "Did you tellme just now, or was I only dreaming, that you knew Ormsby Conyers?""Ormsby Conyers is my father's name," said he, quickly."Captain in the 25th Dragoons?" asked she, eagerly."He was so, some eighteen or twenty years ago.""Oh, then, my heart did not deceive me," cried she, taking his handwith both her own, "when I felt towards you like an old friend. Afterwe parted last night, I asked myself, again and again, how was it thatI already felt an interest in you? What subtle instinct was it thatwhispered this is the son of poor George's dearest friend,--this is theson of that dear Ormsby Conyers of whom every letter is full? Oh, thehappiness of seeing you under this roof! And what a surprise for mypoor brother, who clings only the closer, with every year, to all thatreminds him of his boy!""And you knew my father, then?" asked Conyers, proudly."Never met him; but I believe I knew him better than many who were hisdaily intimates: for years my nephew's letters were journals of theirjoint lives--they seemed never separate. But you shall read themyourself. They go back to the time when they both landed at Calcutta,young and ardent spirits, eager for adventure, and urged by a boldambition to win distinction. From that day they were inseparable. Theyhunted, travelled, lived together; and so attached had they become toeach other, that George writes in one letter: 'They have offered me anappointment on the staff, but as this would separate me from Ormsby,it is not to be thought of.' It was to me George always wrote, formy brother never liked letter-writing, and thus I was my nephew'sconfidante, and intrusted with all his secrets. Nor was there one inwhich your father's name did not figure. It was, how Ormsby got him outof this scrape, or took his duty for him, or made this explanation, orraised that sum of money, that filled all these. At last--I never knewwhy or how--George ceased to write to me, and addressed all his lettersto his father, marked 'Strictly private' too, so that I never sawwhat they contained. My brother, I believe, suffered deeply from theconcealment, and there must have been what to him seemed a sufficientreason for it, or he would never have excluded me from that share in hisconfidence I had always possessed. At all events, it led to a sort ofestrangement between us,--the only one of our lives. He would tell meat intervals that George was on leave; George was at the Hills; he wasexpecting his troop; he had been sent here or there; but nothing more,till one morning, as if unable to bear the burden longer, he said,'George has made up his mind to leave his regiment and take servicewith one of the native princes. It is an arrangement sanctioned by theGovernment, but it is one I grieve over and regret greatly.' I askedeagerly to hear further about this step, but he said he knew nothingbeyond the bare fact. I then said, 'What does his friend Conyers thinkof it?' and my brother dryly replied, 'I am not aware that he has beenconsulted.' Our own misfortunes were fast closing around us, so thatreally we had little time to think of anything but the difficulties thateach day brought forth. George's letters grew rarer and rarer; rumorsof him reached us; stories of his gorgeous mode of living, his princelystate and splendid retinue, of the high favor he enjoyed with the Rajah,and the influence he wielded over neighboring chiefs; and then we heard,still only by rumor, that he had married a native princess, who had sometime before been converted to Christianity. The first intimation of thefact from himself came, when, announcing that he had sent his daughter,a child of about five years old, to Europe to be educated--" She pausedhere, and seemed to have fallen into a revery over the past; whenConyers suddenly asked,--"And what of my father all this time? Was the old intercourse kept upbetween them?""I cannot tell you. I do not remember that his name occurred till thememorable case came on before the House of Commons--the inquiry, as itwas called, into Colonel Barrington's conduct in the case of Edwardes, aBritish-born subject of his Majesty, serving in the army of the Rajah ofLuckerabad. You have, perhaps, heard of it?""Was that the celebrated charge of torturing a British subject?""The same; the vilest conspiracy that ever was hatched, and thecruellest persecution that ever broke a noble heart. And yet there weremen of honor, men of purest fame and most unblemished character, whoharkened in to that infamous cry, and actually sent out emissaries toIndia to collect evidence against my poor nephew. For a while thewhole country rang with the case. The low papers, which assailed theGovernment, made it matter of attack on the nature of the British rulein India, and the ministry only sought to make George the victim toscreen themselves from public indignation. It was Admiral Byng's caseonce more. But I have no temper to speak of it, even after this lapse ofyears; my blood boils now at the bare memory of that foul and perjuredassociation. If you would follow the story, I will send you the littlepublished narrative to your room, but, I beseech you, do not againrevert to it. How I have betrayed myself to speak of it I know not. Formany a long year I have prayed to be able to forgive one man, who hasbeen the bitterest enemy of our name and race. I have asked for strengthto bear the burden of our calamity, but more earnestly a hundred-foldI have entreated that forgiveness might enter my heart, and that ifvengeance for this cruel wrong was at hand, I could be able to say, 'No,the time for such feeling is gone by.' Let me not, then, be temptedby any revival of this theme to recall all the sorrow and all theindignation it once caused me. This infamous book contains the wholestory as the world then believed it. You will read it with interest, forit concerned one whom your father dearly loved. But, again. I say, whenwe meet again let us not return to it. These letters, too, will amuseyou; they are the diaries of your father's early life in India as muchas George's, but of them we can talk freely."It was so evident that she was speaking with a forced calm, and that allher self-restraint might at any moment prove unequal to the effortshe was making, that Conyers, affecting to have a few words to say toStapylton's messenger, stole away, and hastened to his room to look overthe letters and the volume she had given him.He had scarcely addressed himself to his task when a knock came to thedoor, and at the same instant it was opened in a slow, half-hesitatingway, and Tom Dill stood before him. Though evidently dressed for theoccasion, and intending to present himself in a most favorable guise,Tom looked far more vulgar and unprepossessing than in the worncostume of his every-day life, his bright-buttoned blue coat and yellowwaistcoat being only aggravations of the low-bred air that unhappilybeset him. Worse even than this, however, was the fact that, beingsomewhat nervous about the interview before him, Tom had taken whathis father would have called a diffusible stimulant, in the shape of "adandy of punch," and bore the evidences of it in a heightened color anda very lustrous but wandering eye.[Illustration: 140]"Here I am," said he, entering with a sort of easy swagger, but far moreaffected than real, notwithstanding the "dandy.""Well, and what then?" asked Conyers, haughtily, for the vulgarpresumption of his manner was but a sorry advocate in his favor. "Idon't remember, that I sent for you.""No; but my father told me what you said to him, and I was to come upand thank you, and say, 'Done!' to it all."Conyers turned a look--not a very pleased or very flattering look--atthe loutish figure before him, and in his changing color might be seenthe conflict it cost him to keep down his rising temper. He was, indeed,sorely tried, and his hand shook as he tossed over the books on histable, and endeavored to seem occupied in other matters."Maybe you forget all about it," began Tom. "Perhaps you don't rememberthat you offered to fit me out for India, and send me over with a letterto your father--""No, no, I forget nothing of it; I remember it all." He had almostsaid "only too well," but he coughed down the cruel speech, and wenton hurriedly: "You have come, however, when I am engaged,--when I haveother things to attend to. These letters here--In fact, this is not amoment when I can attend to you. Do you understand me?""I believe I do," said Tom, growing very pale."To-morrow, then, or the day after, or next week, will be time enoughfor all this. I must think over the matter again.""I see," said Tom, moodily, as he changed from one foot to the other,and cracked the joints of his fingers, till they seemed dislocated. "Isee it all.""What do you mean by that?--what do you see?" asked Conyers, angrily."I see that Polly, my sister, was right; that she knew you better thanany of us," said Tom, boldly, for a sudden rush of courage had nowfilled his heart. "She said, 'Don't let him turn your head, Tom, withhis fine promises. He was in good humor and good spirits when he madethem, and perhaps meant to keep them too; but he little knows whatmisery disappointment brings, and he'll never fret himself over theheavy heart he's giving you, when he wakes in the morning with a changeof mind.' And then, she said another thing," added he, after a pause."And what was the other thing?""She said, 'If you go up there, Tom,' says she, 'dressed out like ashopboy in his Sunday suit, he'll be actually shocked at his havingtaken an interest in you. He 'll forget all about your hard lot andyour struggling fortune, and only see your vulgarity.' 'Yourvulgarity,'--that was the word." As he said this, his lip trembled, andthe chair he leaned on shook under his grasp."Go back, and tell her, then, that she was mistaken," said Conyers,whose own voice now quavered. "Tell her that when I give my word I keepit; that I will maintain everything I said to you or to your father;and that when she imputed to me an indifference as to the feelings ofothers, she might have remembered whether she was not unjust to mine.Tell her that also."[Illustration: 140]"I will," said Tom, gravely. "Is there anything more?" "No, nothingmore," said Conyers, who with difficulty suppressed a smile at the wordsand the manner of his questioner. "Good-bye, then. You 'll send for mewhen you want me," said Tom; and he was out of the room, and half-wayacross the lawn, ere Conyers could recover himself to reply.Conyers, however, flung open the window, and cried to him to come back."I was nigh forgetting a most important part of the matter, Tom," saidhe, as the other entered, somewhat pale and anxious-looking. "You toldme, t' other day, that there was some payment to be made,--some sum tobe lodged before you could present yourself for examination. What aboutthis? When must it be done?""A month before I go in," said Tom, to whom the very thought of theordeal seemed full of terror and heart-sinking."And how soon do you reckon that may be?""Polly says not before eight weeks at the earliest. She says we 'llhave to go over Bell on the Bones all again, and brush up the Ligaments,besides. If it was the Navy, they 'd not mind the nerves; but they tellme the Army fellows often take a man on the fifth pair, and I know ifthey do me, it's mighty little of India I 'll see.""Plucked, eh?""I don't know what you mean by 'plucked,' but I 'd be turned back, whichis, perhaps, the same. And no great disgrace, either," added he, withmore of courage in his voice; "Polly herself says there's days she couldn't remember all the branches of the fifth, and the third is almost asbad.""I suppose if your sister could go up in your place, Tom, you 'd bequite sure of your diploma?""It's many and many a day I wished that same," sighed he, heavily. "Ifyou heard her going over the 'Subclavian,' you 'd swear she had the bookin her hand."Conyers could not repress a smile at this strange piece of feminineaccomplishment, but he was careful not to let Tom perceive it. Not,indeed, that the poor fellow was in a very observant mood; Polly'sperfections, her memory, and her quickness were the themes that filledup his mind."What a rare piece of luck for you to have had such a sister, Tom!""Don't I say it to myself?--don't I repeat the very same words everymorning when I awake? Maybe I 'll never come to any good; maybe myfather is right, and that I 'll only be a disgrace as long as I live;but I hope one thing, at least, I 'll never be so bad that I 'll forgetPolly, and all she done for me. And I'll tell you more," said he, with achoking fulness in his throat; "if they turn me back at my examination,my heart will be heavier for her than for myself.""Come, cheer up, Tom; don't look on the gloomy side. You 'll pass, I 'mcertain, and with credit too. Here 's the thirty pounds you 'll have tolodge--""It is only twenty they require. And, besides, I could n't take it; it'smy father must pay." He stammered, and hesitated, and grew pale and thencrimson, while his lips trembled and his chest heaved and fell almostconvulsively."Nothing of the kind, Tom," said Conyers, who had to subdue his ownemotion by an assumed sternness. "The plan is all my own, and Iwill stand no interference with it. I mean that you should pass yourexamination without your father knowing one word about it. You shallcome back to him with your diploma, or whatever it is, in your hand,and say, 'There, sir, the men who have signed their names to that do notthink so meanly of me as you do.'""And he'd say, the more fools they!" said Tom, with a grim smile."At all events," resumed Conyers, "I 'll have my own way. Put thatnote in your pocket, and whenever you are gazetted Surgeon-Major to theGuards, or Inspector-General of all the Hospitals in Great Britain, youcan repay me, and with interest, besides, if you like it.""You 've given me a good long day to be in your debt," said Tom; andhe hurried out of the room before his overfull heart should betray hisemotion.It is marvellous how quickly a kind action done to another reconciles aman to himself. Doubtless conscience at such times condescends to playthe courtier, and whispers, "What a good fellow you are! and how unjustthe world is when it calls you cold and haughty and ungenial!" Not thatI would assert higher and better thoughts than these do not reward himwho, Samaritan-like, binds up the wounds of misery; but I fear me muchthat few of us resist self-flattery, or those little delicate adulationsone can offer to his own heart when nobody overhears him.At all events, Conyers was not averse to this pleasure, and grewactually to feel a strong interest for Tom Dill, all because that poorfellow had been the recipient of his bounty; for so is it the watersof our nature must be stirred by some act of charity or kindness, elsetheir healing virtues have small efficacy, and cure not.And then he wondered and questioned himself whether Polly might notpossibly be right, and that his "governor" would maryel where and how hehad picked up so strange a specimen as Tom. That poor fellow, too, likemany an humble flower, seen not disadvantageously in its native wilds,would look strangely out of place when transplanted and treated as anexotic. Still he could trust to the wide and generous nature of hisfather to overlook small defects of manner and breeding, and take thehumble fellow kindly.Must I own that a considerable share of his hopefulness was derived fromthinking that the odious blue coat and brass buttons could scarcelymake part of Tom's kit for India, and that in no other costume known tocivilized man could his protg look so unprepossessingly?CHAPTER XIII. A FEW LEAVES FROM A BLUE-BOOKThe journal which Miss Barrington had placed in Conyers's hands waslittle else than the record of the sporting adventures of two young andvery dashing fellows. There were lion and tiger hunts, so little variedin detail that one might serve for all, though doubtless to the narratoreach was marked with its own especial interest. There were travellingincidents and accidents, and straits for money, and mishaps and arrests,and stories of steeple-chases and balls all mixed up together, andrecounted so very much in the same spirit as to show how very littleshadow mere misadventure could throw across the sunshine of theirevery-day life. But every now and then Conyers came upon some entrywhich closely touched his heart. It was how nobly Ormsby behaved. What asplendid fellow he was! so frank, so generous, such a horseman! "I wishyou saw the astonishment of the Mahratta fellows as Ormsby liftedthe tent-pegs in full career; he never missed one. Ormsby won therifle-match; we all knew he would. Sir Peregrine invited Ormsby to gowith him to the Hills, but he refused, mainly because I was not asked."Ormsby has been offered this, that, or t'other; in fact, that one namerecurred in every second sentence, and always with the same marks ofaffection. How proud, too, did Barrington seem of his friend. "They havefound out that no country-house is perfect without Ormsby, and he ispositively persecuted with invitations. I hear the 'G.-G.' is provokedat Ormsby's refusal of a staff appointment. I'm in rare luck; the oldRajah of Tannanoohr has asked Ormsby to a grand elephant-hunt next week,and I 'm to go with him. I 'm to have a leave in October. Ormsby managedit somehow; he never fails, whatever he takes in hand. Such a frightas I got yesterday! There was a report in the camp Ormsby was goingto England with despatches; it's all a mistake, however, he says. Hebelieves he might have had the opportunity, had he cared for it."If there was not much in these passing notices of his father, there wasquite enough to impart to them an intense degree of interest. There isa wondrous charm, besides, in reading of the young days of those we haveonly known in maturer life, in hearing of them when they were fresh,ardent, and impetuous; in knowing, besides, how they were regarded bycontemporaries, how loved and valued. It was not merely that Ormsbyrecurred in almost every page of this journal, but the record boretestimony to his superiority and the undisputed sway he exercised overhis companions. This same power of dominating and directing had beenthe distinguishing feature of his after-life, and many an unruly andturbulent spirit had been reclaimed under Ormsby Conyers's hands.As he read on, he grew also to feel a strong interest for the writerhimself; the very heartiness of the affection he bestowed on his father,and the noble generosity with which he welcomed every success of that"dear fellow Ormsby," were more than enough to secure his interest forhim. There was a bold, almost reckless dash, too, about Barrington whichhas a great charm occasionally for very young men. He adventured uponlife pretty much as he would try to cross a river; he never looked fora shallow nor inquired for a ford, but plunged boldly in, and trustedto his brave heart and his strong arms for the rest. No one, indeed,reading even these rough notes, could hesitate to pronounce which of thetwo would "make the spoon," and which "spoil the horn." Young Conyerswas eager to find some mention of the incident to which Miss Barringtonhad vaguely alluded. He wanted to read George Barrington's own accountbefore he opened the little pamphlet she gave him, but the journalclosed years before this event; and although some of the letters camedown to a later date, none approached the period he wanted.It was not till after some time that he remarked how much moreunfrequently his father's name occurred in the latter portion of thecorrespondence. Entire pages would contain no reference to him, and inthe last letter of all there was this towards the end: "After all, I amalmost sorry that I am first for purchase, for I believe Ormsby is mostanxious for his troop. I say 'I believe,' for he has not told me so, andwhen I offered to give way to him, he seemed half offended with me.You know what a bungler I am where a matter of any delicacy is to betreated, and you may easily fancy either that I mismanage the affairgrossly, or that I am as grossly mistaken. One thing is certain, I 'dsee promotion far enough, rather than let it make a coldness beween us,which could never occur if he were as frank as he used to be. My dearaunt, I wish I had your wise head to counsel me, for I have a scheme inmy mind which I have scarcely courage for without some advice, and formany reasons I cannot ask O.'s opinion. Between this and the next mail I'll think it over carefully, and tell you what I intend."I told you that Ormsby was going to marry one of the Gpvernor-General'sdaughters. It is all off,--at least, I hear so,--and O. has asked forleave to go home. I suspect he is sorely cut up about this, but heis too proud a fellow to let the world see it. Report says that SirPeregrine heard that he played. So he does, because he does everything,and everything well. If he does go to England, he will certainly pay youa visit. Make much of him for my sake; you could not make too much forhis own."This was the last mention of his father, and he pondered long andthoughtfully over it. He saw, or fancied he saw, the first faintglimmerings of a coldness between them, and he hastily turned to theprinted report of the House of Commons inquiry, to see what part hisfather had taken. His name occurred but once; it was appended to anextract of a letter, addressed to him by the Governor-General. It wasa confidential report, and much of it omitted in publication. It wasthroughout, however, a warm and generous testimony to Barrington'scharacter. "I never knew a man," said he, "less capable of anything meanor unworthy; nor am I able to imagine any temptation strong enough towarp him from what he believed to be right. That on a question of policyhis judgment might be wrong, I am quite ready to admit, but I willmaintain that, on a point of honor, he would, and must, be infallible."Underneath this passage there was written, in Miss Barrington's hand,"Poor George never saw this; it was not published till after his death."So interested did young Conyers feel as to the friendship betweenthese two men, and what it could have been that made a breach betweenthem,--if breach there were,--that he sat a long time without openingthe little volume that related to the charge against Colonel Barrington.He had but to open it, however, to guess the spirit in which it waswritten. Its title was, "The Story of Samuel Ed-wardes, with an Accountof the Persecutions and Tortures inflicted on him by Colonel GeorgeBarrington, when serving in command of the Forces of the Meer NagheerAssahr, Rajah of Luckerabad, based on the documents produced before theCommittee of the House, and private authentic information." Opposite tothis lengthy title was an ill-executed wood-cut of a young fellowtied up to a tree, and being flogged by two native Indians, with theinscription at foot: "Mode of celebrating His Majesty's Birthday, 4th ofJune, 18--, at the Residence of Luckerabad."In the writhing figure of the youth, and the ferocious glee of hisexecutioners, the artist had displayed all his skill in expression, andvery unmistakably shown, besides, the spirit of the publication. I haveno intention to inflict this upon my reader. I will simply give him--andas briefly as I am able--its substance.The Rajah of Luckerabad, an independent sovereign, living on the bestof terms with the Government of the Company, had obtained permission toemploy an English officer in the chief command of his army, a force ofsome twenty-odd thousand, of all arms. It was essential that he shouldbe one not only well acquainted with the details of command, but fullyequal to the charge of organization of a force; a man of energy anddecision, well versed in Hindostanee, and not altogether ignorant ofPersian, in which, occasionally, correspondence was carried on. Amongstthe many candidates for an employment so certain to insure the fortuneof its possessor, Major Barrington, then a brevet Lieutenant-Colonel,was chosen.It is not improbable that, in mere technical details of his art, hemight have had many equal and some superior to him; it was well knownthat his personal requisites were above all rivalry. He was a man ofgreat size and strength, of a most commanding presence, an accomplishedlinguist in the various dialects of Central India and a great master ofall manly exercises. To these qualities he added an Oriental taste forsplendor and pomp. It had always been his habit to live in a style ofcostly extravagance, with the retinue of a petty prince, and when hetravelled it was with the following of a native chief.Though, naturally enough, such a station as a separate command gavemight be regarded as a great object of ambition by many, there was agood deal of surprise felt at the time that Barrington, reputedly a manof large fortune, should have accepted it; the more so since, by hiscontract, he bound himself for ten years to the Rajah, and thus foreverextinguished all prospect of advancement in his own service. There wereall manner of guesses afloat as to his reasons. Some said that he wasalready so embarrassed by his extravagance that it was his only exit outof difficulty; others pretended that he was captivated by the gorgeoussplendor of that Eastern life he loved so well; that pomp, display, andmagnificence were bribes he could not resist; and a few, who affectedto see more nearly, whispered that he was unhappy of late, had grownpeevish and uncompanionable, and sought any change, so that it took himout of his regiment. Whatever the cause, he bade his brother-officersfarewell without revealing it, and set out for his new destination. Hehad never anticipated a life of ease or inaction, but he was equallyfar from imagining anything like what now awaited him. Corruption,falsehood, robbery, on every hand! The army was little else than abrigand establishment, living on the peasants, and exacting, at thesword point, whatever they wanted. There was no obedience to discipline.The Rajah troubled himself about nothing but his pleasures, and, indeed,passed his days so drugged with opium as to be almost insensible toall around him. In the tribunals there was nothing but bribery, andthe object of every one seemed to be to amass fortunes as rapidly aspossible, and then hasten away from a country so insecure and dangerous.For some days after his arrival, Barrington hesitated whether he wouldaccept a charge so apparently hopeless; his bold heart, however, decidedthe doubt, and he resolved to remain. His first care was to look abouthim for one or two more trustworthy than the masses, if such thereshould be, to assist him, and the Rajah referred him to his secretaryfor that purpose. It was with sincere pleasure Barring-ton discoveredthat this man was English,--that is, his father had been an Englishman,and his mother was a Malabar slave in the Rajah's household: his namewas Edwardes, but called by the natives Ali Edwardes. He looked aboutsixty, but his real age was about forty-six when Barrington came to theResidence. He was a man of considerable ability, uniting all the craftand subtlety of the Oriental with the dogged perseverance of the Briton.He had enjoyed the full favor of the Rajah for nigh twenty years, andwas strongly averse to the appointment of an English officer to thecommand of the army, knowing full well the influence it would have overhis own fortunes. He represented to the Rajah that the Company wasonly intriguing to absorb his dominions with their own; that the newCommander-in-chief would be their servant and not his; that it wasby such machinery as this they secretly possessed themselves of allknowledge of the native sovereigns, learned their weakness and theirstrength, and through such agencies hatched those plots and schemes bywhich many a chief had been despoiled of his state.The Rajah, however, saw that if he had a grasping Government on oneside, he had an insolent and rebellious army on the other. There was notmuch to choose between them, but he took the side that he thought theleast bad, and left the rest to Fate.Having failed with the Rajah, Edwardes tried what he could do withBarrington; and certainly, if but a tithe of what he told him were true,the most natural thing in the world would have been that he should giveup his appointment, and quit forever a land so hopelessly sunk in viceand corruption. Cunning and crafty as he was, however, he madeone mistake, and that an irreparable one. When dilating on theinsubordination of the army, its lawless ways and libertine habits, hedeclared that nothing short of a superior force in the field could haveany chance of enforcing discipline. "As to a command," said he, "it issimply ludicrous. Let any man try it and they will cut him down in thevery midst of his staff."That unlucky speech decided the question; and Barring-ton simply said,--"I have heard plenty of this sort of thing in India; I never saw it,--I'll stay."Stay he did; and he did more: he reformed that rabble, and made of thema splendid force, able, disciplined, and obedient. With the influence ofhis success, added to that derived from the confidence reposed in himby the Rajah, he introduced many and beneficial changes into theadministration; he punished peculators by military law, and broughtknavish sutlers to the drum-head. In fact, by the exercise of a salutarydespotism, he rescued the state from an impending bankruptcy and ruin,placed its finances in a healthy condition, and rendered the countrya model of prosperity and contentment. The Rajah had, like most of hisrank and class, been in litigation, occasionally in armed contention,with some of his neighbors,--one especially, an uncle, whom he accusedof having robbed him, when his guardian, of a large share of hisheritage. This suit had gone on for years, varied at times by littleraids into each other's territories, to burn villages and carry awaycattle. Though with a force more than sufficient to have carried thequestion with a strong hand, Barrington preferred the more civilizedmode of leaving the matter in dispute to others, and suggested theCompany as arbitrator. The negotiations led to a lengthy correspondence,in which Edwardes and his son, a youth of seventeen or eighteen, wereactively occupied; and although Barrington was not without certainmisgivings as to their trustworthiness and honesty, he knew theircapacity, and had not, besides, any one at all capable of replacingthem. While these affairs were yet pending, Barrington married thedaughter of the Meer, a young girl whose mother had been a convertto Christianity, and who had herself been educated by a Catholicmissionary. She died in the second year of her marriage, giving birthto a daughter; but Barrington had now become so completely the centre ofall action in the state, that the Rajah interfered in nothing, leavingin his hands the undisputed control of the Government; nay, more, hemade him his son by adoption, leaving to him not alone all his immensepersonal property, but the inheritance to his throne. Though Barringtonwas advised by all the great legal authorities he consulted in Englandthat such a bequest could not be good in law, nor a British subjectbe permitted to succeed to the rights of an Eastern sovereignty, heobstinately declared that the point was yet untried; that, howevertheoretically the opinion might be correct, practically the questionhad not been determined, nor had any case yet occurred to rule as aprecedent on it. If he was not much of a lawyer, he was of a temperamentthat could not brook opposition. In fact, to make him take anyparticular road in life, you had only to erect a barricade on it. When,therefore, he was told the matter could not be, his answer was, "Itshall!" Calcutta lawyers, men deep in knowledge of Oriental law andcustom, learned Moonshees and Pundits, were despatched by him atenormous cost, to England, to confer with the great authorities at home.Agents were sent over to procure the influence of great Parliamentaryspeakers and the leaders in the press to the cause. For a matter which,in the beginning, he cared scarcely anything, if at all, he had nowgrown to feel the most intense and absorbing interest. Half persuadinghimself that the personal question was less to him than the greatprivilege and right of an Englishman, he declared that he would ratherdie a beggar in the defence of the cause than abandon it. So possessedwas he, indeed, of his rights, and so resolved to maintain them,supported by a firm belief that they would and must be ultimatelyconceded to him, that in the correspondence with the other chiefs everyreference which spoke of the future sovereignty of Luckerabad includedhis own name and title, and this with an ostentation quite Oriental.Whether Edwardes had been less warm and energetic in the cause thanBarrington expected, or whether his counsels were less palatable,certain it is he grew daily more and more distrustful of him; but anevent soon occurred to make this suspicion a certainty.The negotiations between the Meer and his uncle had been so successfullyconducted by Barrington, that the latter agreed to give up three"Pegunnahs," or villages he had unrightfully seized upon, and to pay aheavy mulct, besides, for the unjust occupation of them. This settlementhad been, as may be imagined, a work of much time and labor, andrequiring not only immense forbearance and patience, but intensewatchfulness and unceasing skill and craft. Edwardes, of course, wasconstantly engaged in the affair, with the details of which he had beenfor years familiar. Now, although Barrington was satisfied with thezeal he displayed, he was less so with his counsels, Edwardes alwaysinsisting that in every dealing with an Oriental you must inevitably bebeaten if you would not make use of all the stratagem and deceit heis sure to employ against you. There was not a day on which the wilysecretary did not suggest some cunning expedient, some clever trick; andBarrington's abrupt rejection of them only impressed him with a notionof his weakness and deficiency.One morning--it was after many defeats--Edwardes appeared with the draftof a document he had been ordered to draw out, and in which, of his ownaccord, he had made a large use of threats to the neighboring chief,should he continue to protract these proceedings. These threats veryunmistakably pointed to the dire consequences of opposing the greatGovernment of the Company; for, as the writer argued, the succession tothe Ameer being already vested in an Englishman, it is perfectly clearthe powerful nation he belongs to will take a very summary mode ofdealing with this question, if not settled before he comes to thethrone. He pressed, therefore, for an immediate settlement, as the bestpossible escape from difficulty.Barrington scouted the suggestion indignantly; he would not hear of it."What," said he, "is it while these very rights are in litigation thatI am to employ them as a menace? Who is to secure me being one day Rajahof Luckerabad? Not you, certainly, who have never ceased to speak coldlyof my claims. Throw that draft into the fire, and never propose a likeone to me again!"The rebuke was not forgotten. Another draft was, however, prepared, andin due time the long-pending negotiations were concluded, the Meer'suncle having himself come to Luckerabad to ratify the contract, which,being engrossed on a leaf of the Rajah's Koran, was duly signed andsealed by both.It was during the festivities incidental to this visit thatEdwardes, who had of late made a display of wealth and splendor quiteunaccountable, made a proposal to the Rajah for the hand of his onlyunmarried daughter, sister to Barrington's wife. The Rajah, longenervated by excess and opium, probably cared little about the matter;there were, indeed, but a few moments in each day when he could befairly pronounced awake. He referred the question to Barrington. Notsatisfied with an insulting rejection of the proposal, Barrington, whosepassionate moments were almost madness, tauntingly asked by what meansEdwardes had so suddenly acquired the wealth which had prompted thisdemand. He hinted that the sources of his fortune were more thansuspected, and at last, carried away by anger, for the discussion grewviolent, he drew from his desk a slip of paper, and held it up. "Whenyour father was drummed out of the 4th Bengal Fusiliers for theft, ofwhich this is the record, the family was scarcely so ambitious." Foran instant Edwardes seemed overcome almost to fainting; but he rallied,and, with a menace of his clenched hand, but without one word, hehurried away before Barrington could resent the insult. It was said thathe did not return to his house, but, taking the horse of an orderly thathe found at the door, rode away from the palace, and on the same nightcrossed the frontier into a neighboring state.It was on the following morning, as Barrington was passing a cavalryregiment in review, that young Edwardes, forcing his way through thestaff, insolently asked, "What had become of his father?" and at thesame instant levelling a pistol, he fired. The ball passed throughBarrington's shako, and so close to the head that it grazed it. It wasonly with a loud shout to abstain that Barrington arrested the gleamingsabres that now flourished over his head. "Your father has fled,youngster!" cried he. "When you show him that,"--and he struck himacross the face with his horsewhip,--"tell him how near you were to havebeen an assassin!" With this savage taunt, he gave orders that the youngfellow should be conducted to the nearest frontier, and turned adrift.Neither father nor son ever were seen there again.Little did George Barrington suspect what was to come of that morning'swork. Through what channel Edwardes worked at first was not known,but that he succeeded in raising up for himself friends in Englandis certain; by their means the very gravest charges were made againstBarrington. One allegation was that by a forged document, claiming to bethe assent of the English Government to his succession, he had obtainedthe submission of several native chiefs to his rule and a cession ofterritory to the Rajah of Luckerabad; and another charged him withhaving cruelly tortured a British subject named Samuel Edwardes,--aninvestigation entered into by a Committee of the House, and becoming,while it lasted, one of the most exciting subjects of public interest.Nor was the anxiety lessened by the death of the elder Edwardes, whichoccurred during the inquiry, and which Barrington's enemies declared tobe caused by a broken heart; and the martyred or murdered Edwardes wasno uncommon heading to a paragraph of the time.Conyers turned to the massive Blue-book that contained the proceedings"in Committee," but only to glance at the examination of witnesses,whose very names were unfamiliar to him. He could perceive, however,that the inquiry was a long one, and, from the tone of the member atwhose motion it was instituted, angry and vindictive.Edwardes appeared to have preferred charges of long continuedpersecution and oppression, and there was native testimony in abundanceto sustain the allegation; while the British Commissioner sent toLuckerabad came back so prejudiced against Barrington, from his proudand haughty bearing, that his report was unfavorable to him in allrespects. There was, it is true, letters from various high quarters,all speaking of Barrington's early career as both honorable anddistinguished; and, lastly, there was one signed Ormsby Conyers, awarm-hearted testimony "to the most straightforward gentleman and truestfriend I have ever known." These were words the young man read andre-read a dozen times.Conyers turned eagerly to read what decision had been come to by theCommittee, but the proceedings had come abruptly to an end by GeorgeBarrington's death. A few lines at the close of the pamphlet mentionedthat, being summoned to appear before the Governor-General in Councilat Calcutta, Barrington refused. An armed force was despatched to occupyLuckerabad, on the approach of which Barrington rode forth to meet them,attended by a brilliant staff,--with what precise object none knew; butthe sight of a considerable force, drawn up at a distance in what seemedorder of battle, implied at least an intention to resist. Coming ontowards the advanced pickets at a fast gallop, and not slackeningspeed when challenged, the men, who were Bengal infantry, fired, andBarrington fell, pierced by four bullets. He never uttered a wordafter, though he lingered on till evening. The force was commanded byLieutenant-General Conyers.There was little more to tell. The Rajah, implicated in the chargesbrought against Barrington, and totally unable to defend himself,despatched a confidential minister, Meer Mozarjah, to Europe to do whathe might by bribery. This unhappy blunder filled the measure of hisruin, and after a very brief inquiry the Rajah was declared to haveforfeited his throne and all his rights of succession. The Company tookpossession of Luckerabad, as a portion of British India, but from agenerous compassion towards the deposed chief, graciously accorded him apension of ten thousand rupees a month during his life.My reader will bear in mind that I have given him this recital, notas it came before Conyers, distorted by falsehood and disfigured bymisstatements, but have presented the facts as nearly as they might bederived from a candid examination of all the testimony adduced. Ere Ireturn to my own tale, I ought to add that Edwardes, discredited anddespised by some, upheld and maintained by others, left Calcutta withthe proceeds of a handsome subscription raised in his behalf. Whether hewent to reside in Europe, or retired to some other part of India, is notknown. He was heard of no more.As for the Rajah, his efforts still continued to obtain a revision ofthe sentence pronounced upon him, and his case was one of those whichnewspapers slur over and privy councils try to escape from, leaving toTime to solve what Justice has no taste for.But every now and then a Blue-book would appear, headed "East India (thedeposed Rajah of Luckerabad)," while a line in an evening paper wouldintimate that the Envoy of Meer Nagheer Assahr had arrived at a certainWest-end hotel to prosecute the suit of his Highness before the JudicialCommittee of the Lords. How pleasantly does a paragraph dispose of awhole life-load of sorrows and of wrongs that, perhaps, are breaking thehearts that carry them!While I once more apologize to my reader for the length to which thisnarrative has run, I owe it to myself to state that, had I presented itin the garbled and incorrect version which came before Conyers, and hadI interpolated all the misconceptions he incurred, the mistakes he firstfell into and then corrected, I should have been far more tedious andintolerable still; and now I am again under weigh, with easy canvas, butover a calm sea, and under a sky but slightly clouded.CHAPTER XIV. BARRINGTON'S FORDConyers had scarcely finished his reading when he was startled by thegalloping of horses under his window; so close, indeed, did they comethat they seemed to shake the little cottage with their tramp. He lookedout, but they had already swept past, and were hidden from his viewby the copse that shut out the river. At the same instant he heard theconfused sound of many voices, and what sounded to him like the plash ofhorses in the stream.Urged by a strong curiosity, he hurried downstairs and made straightfor the river by a path that led through the trees; but before he couldemerge from the cover he heard cries of "Not there! not there! Lowerdown!" "No, no! up higher! up higher! Head up the stream, or you 'll becaught in the gash!" "Don't hurry; you've time enough!"When he gained the bank, it was to see three horsemen, who seemed tobe cheering, or, as it might be, warning a young girl who, mounted on apowerful black horse, was deep in the stream, and evidently endeavoringto cross it. Her hat hung on the back of her neck by its ribbon, and herhair had also fallen down; but one glance was enough to show that shewas a consummate horsewoman, and whose courage was equal to her skill;for while steadily keeping her horse's head to the swift current, shewas careful not to control him overmuch, or impede the free action ofhis powers. Heeding, as it seemed, very little the counsels or warningsshowered on her by the bystanders, not one of whom, to Conyers's intenseamazement, had ventured to accompany her, she urged her horse steadilyforward."Don't hurry,--take it easy!" called out one of the horsemen, as helooked at his watch. "You have fifty-three minutes left, and it's allturf.""She 'll do it,--I know she will!" "She 'll lose,--she must lose!" "It'sten miles to Foynes Gap!" "It's more!" "It's less!" "There!--see!--she'sin, by Jove! she's in!" These varying comments were now arrested by theintense interest of the moment, the horse having impatiently plungedinto a deep pool, and struck out to swim with all the violent exertionof an affrighted animal. "Keep his head up!" "Let him free, quite free!""Get your foot clear of the stirrup!" cried out the bystanders, whilein lower tones they muttered, "She would cross here!" "It's all her ownfault!" Just at this instant she turned in her saddle, and called outsomething which, drowned in the rush of the river, did not reach them."Don't you see," cried Conyers, passionately, for his temper could nolonger endure the impassive attitude of this on-looking, "one of thereins is broken, her bridle is smashed?"And, without another word, he sprang into the river, partly wading,partly swimming, and soon reached the place where the horse, restrainedby one rein alone, swam in a small circle, fretted by restraint andmaddened by inability to resist."Leave him to me,--let go your rein," said Conyers, as he graspedthe bridle close to the bit; and the animal, accepting the guidance,suffered himself to be led quietly till he reached the shallow. Oncethere, he bounded wildly forward, and, splashing through the current,leaped up the bank, where he was immediately caught by the others.By the time Conyers had gained the land, the girl had quitted her saddleand entered the cottage, never so much as once turning a look on him whohad rescued her. If he could not help feeling mortified at this show ofindifference, he was not less puzzled by the manner of the others,who, perfectly careless of his dripping condition, discussed amongstthemselves how the bridle broke, and what might have happened if theleather had proved tougher."It's always the way with her," muttered one, sulkily."I told her to ride the match in a ring-snaffle, but she's a mule inobstinacy! She 'd have won easily--ay, with five minutes to spare--ifshe'd have crossed at Nunsford. I passed there last week without wettinga girth.""She 'll not thank you young gentleman, whoever you are," said theoldest of the party, turning to Conyers, "for your gallantry. She 'llonly remember you as having helped her to lose a wager!""That's true!" cried another. "I never got as much as thank you forcatching her horse one day at Lyrath, though it threw me out of thewhole run afterwards.""And this was a wager, then?" said Conyers."Yes. An English officer that is stopping at Sir Charles's saidyesterday that nobody could ride from Lowe's Folly to Foynes as the crowflies; and four of us took him up--twenty-five pounds apiece--that PollyDill would do it,--and against time, too,--an hour and forty.""On a horse of mine," chimed in another,--"Bayther-shini""I must say it does not tell very well for your chivalry in theseparts," said Conyers, angrily. "Could no one be found to do the matchwithout risking a young girl's life on it?"A very hearty burst of merriment met this speech, and the elder of theparty rejoined,--"You must be very new to this country, or you'd not have said that, sir.There's not a man in the hunt could get as much out of a horse as thatgirl.""Not to say," added another, with a sly laugh, "that the Englishman gavefive to one against her when he heard she was going to ride."Disgusted by what he could not but regard as a most disgraceful wager,Conyers turned away, and walked into the house."Go and change your clothes as fast as you can," said Miss Barrington,as she met him in the porch. "I am quite provoked you should have wettedyour feet in such a cause."It was no time to ask for explanations; and Conyers hurried away to hisroom, marvelling much at what he had heard, but even more astonishedby the attitude of cool and easy indifference as to what might haveimperilled a human life. He had often heard of the reckless habits andabsurd extravagances of Irish life, but he fancied that they appertainedto a time long past, and that society had gradually assumed the tone andthe temper of the English. Then he began to wonder to what class in lifethese persons belonged. The girl, so well as he could see, was certainlyhandsome, and appeared ladylike; and yet, why had she not even by a wordacknowledged the service he rendered her? And lastly, what could oldMiss Barrington mean by that scornful speech? These were all greatpuzzles to him, and like many great puzzles only the more embarrassingthe more they were thought over.The sound of voices drew him now to the window, and he saw one of theriding-party in converse with Darby at the door. They talked in a lowtone together, and laughed; and then the horseman, chucking a half-crowntowards Darby, said aloud,--"And tell her that we 'll send the boat down for her as soon as we getback."Darby touched his hat gratefully, and was about to retire within thehouse when he caught sight of Conyers at the window. He waited till therider had turned the angle of the road, and then said,--"That's Mr. St. George. They used to call him the Slasher, he killed somany in duels long ago; but he 's like a lamb now.""And the young lady?""The young lady is it!" said Darby, with the air of one not exactlyconcurring in the designation. "She's old Dill's daughter, the doctorthat attends you.""What was it all about?""It was a bet they made with an English captain this morning that she'd ride from Lowe's Folly to the Gap in an hour and a half. The Captaintook a hundred on it, because he thought she 'd have to go round bythe bridge; and they pretinded the same, for they gave all kinds ofdirections about clearing the carts out of the road, for it's market-dayat Thomastown; and away went the Captain as hard as he could, to be atthe bridge first, to 'time her,' as she passed. But he has won themoney!" sighed he, for the thought of so much Irish coin going into aSaxon pocket completely overcame him; "and what's more," added he, "thegentleman says it was all your fault!""All my fault!" cried Conyers, indignantly. "All my fault! Do theyimagine that I either knew or cared for their trumpery wager! I saw agirl struggling in a danger from which not one of them had the manlinessto rescue her!""Oh, take my word for it," burst in Darby, "it's not courage they want!""Then it is something far better than even courage, and I'd like to tellthem so."And he turned away as much disgusted with Darby as with the rest of hiscountrymen. Now, all the anger that filled his breast was not in realityprovoked by the want of gallantry that he condemned; a portion, atleast, was owing to the marvellous indifference the young lady hadmanifested to her preserver. Was peril such an every-day incident ofIrish life that no one cared for it, or was gratitude a quality notcultivated in this strange land? Such were the puzzles that tormentedhim as he descended to the drawing-room.As he opened the door, he heard Miss Barrington's voice, in a tone whichhe rightly guessed to be reproof, and caught the words, "Just as unwiseas it is unbecoming," when he entered."Mr. Conyers, Miss Dill," said the old lady, stiffly; "the younggentleman who saved you, the heroine you rescued!" The two allocutionswere delivered with a gesture towards each. To cover a moment of extremeawkwardness, Conyers blundered out something about being too happy, anda slight service, and a hope of no ill consequences to herself."Have no fears on that score, sir," broke in Miss Dinah. "Manly youngladies are the hardiest things in nature. They are as insensible todanger as they are to--" She stopped, and grew crimson, partly fromanger and partly from the unspoken word that had almost escaped her."Nay, madam," said Polly, quietly, "I am really very much 'ashamed.'"And, simple as the words were, Miss Barrington felt the poignancy oftheir application to herself, and her hand trembled over the embroideryshe was working.She tried to appear calm, but in vain; her color came and went, and thestitches, in spite of her, grew irregular; so that, after a moment'sstruggle, she pushed the frame away, and left the room. While this verybrief and painful incident was passing, Conyers was wondering to himselfhow the dashing horsewoman, with flushed cheek, flashing eye, anddishevelled hair, could possibly be the quiet, demure girl, with adowncast look, and almost Quaker-like simplicity of demeanor. It isbut fair to add, though he himself did not discover it, that thecontributions of Miss Dinah's wardrobe, to which poor Polly was reducedfor dress, were not exactly of a nature to heighten her personalattractions; nor did a sort of short jacket, and a very much beflouncedpetticoat, set off the girl's figure to advantage. Polly never raisedher eyes from the work she was sewing as Miss Barrington withdrew, but,in a low, gentle voice, said, "It was very good of you, sir, to cometo my rescue, but you mustn't think ill of my countrymen for not havingdone so; they had given their word of honor not to lead a fence, noropen a gate, nor, in fact, aid me in any way.""So that, if they could win their wager, your peril was of littlematter," broke he in.She gave a little low, quiet laugh, perhaps as much at the energy as atthe words of his speech. "After all," said she, "a wetting is no greatmisfortune; the worst punishment of my offence was one that I nevercontemplated.""What do you mean?" asked he."Doing penance for it in this costume," said she, drawing out the stifffolds of an old brocaded silk, and displaying a splendor of flowersthat might have graced a peacock's tail; "I never so much as dreamed ofthis!"There was something so comic in the way she conveyed her distress thathe laughed outright. She joined him; and they were at once at their easetogether."I think Miss Barrington called you Mr. Conyers," said she; "and ifso, I have the happiness of feeling that my gratitude is bestowed wherealready there has been a large instalment of the sentiment. It is youwho have been so generous and so kind to my poor brother.""Has he told you, then, what we have been planning together?""He has told me all that you had planned out for him," said she, witha very gracious smile, which very slightly colored her cheek, and gavegreat softness to her expression. "My only fear was that the poor boyshould have lost his head completely, and perhaps exaggerated to himselfyour intentions towards him; for, after all, I can scarcely think--""What is it that you can scarcely think?" asked he, after a long pause."Not to say," resumed she, unheeding his question, "that I cannotimagine how this came about. What could have led him to tell you--aperfect stranger to him--his hopes and fears, his struggles and hissorrows? How could you--by what magic did you inspire him with thattrustful confidence which made him open his whole heart before you? PoorTom, who never before had any confessor than myself!""Shall I tell you how it came about? It was talking of you!""Of me! talking of me!" and her cheek now flushed more deeply."Yes, we had rambled on over fifty themes, not one of which seemed toattach him strongly, till, in some passing allusion to his own cares anddifficulties, he mentioned one who has never ceased to guide and comforthim; who shared not alone his sorrows, but his hard hours of labor, andturned away from her own pleasant paths to tread the dreary road of toilbeside him.""I think he might have kept all this to himself," said she, with a toneof almost severity."How could he? How was it possible to tell me his story, and not touchupon what imparted the few tints of better fortune that lighted it? I'mcertain, besides, that there is a sort of pride in revealing how much ofsympathy and affection we have derived from those better than ourselves,and I could see that he was actually vain of what you had done for him.""I repeat, he might have kept this to himself. But let us leave thismatter; and now tell me,--for I own I can hardly trust my poor brother'striumphant tale,--tell me seriously what the plan is?"Conyers hesitated for a few seconds, embarrassed how to avoid mention ofhimself, or to allude but passingly to his own share in the project. Atlast, as though deciding to dash boldly into the question, he said, "Itold him, if he 'd go out to India, I 'd give him such a letter to myfather that his fortune would be secure. My governor is something of aswell out there,"--and he reddened, partly in shame, partly in pride, ashe tried to disguise his feeling by an affectation of ease,--"and thatwith him for a friend, Tom would be certain of success. You smile atmy confidence, but you don't know India, and what scores of fine thingsare--so to say--to be had for asking; and although doctoring is all verywell, there are fifty other ways to make a fortune faster. Tom could bea Receiver of Revenue; he might be a Political Resident. You don't knowwhat they get. There's a fellow at Baroda has four thousand rupees amonth, and I don't know how much more for dk-money.""I can't help smiling," said she, "at the notion of poor Tom in apalanquin. But, seriously, sir, is all this possible? or might it not befeared that your father, when he came to see my brother--who, with manya worthy quality, has not much to prepossess in his favor,--when, Isay, he came to see your protg is it not likely that hemight--might--hold him more cheaply than you do?""Not when he presents a letter from me; not when it's I that have takenhim up. You 'll believe me, perhaps, when I tell you what happened whenI was but ten years old. We were up at Rangoon, in the Hills, when adreadful hurricane swept over the country, destroying everything beforeit; rice, paddy, the indigo-crop, all were carried away, and the poorpeople left totally destitute. A subscription-list was handed aboutamongst the British residents, to afford some aid in the calamity, andit was my tutor, a native Moonshee, who went about to collect the sums.One morning he came back somewhat disconsolate at his want of success.A payment of eight thousand rupees had to be made for grain on that day,and he had not, as he hoped and expected, the money ready. He talkedfreely to me of his disappointment, so that, at last, my feelings beingworked upon, I took up my pen and wrote down my name on the list, withthe sum of eight thousand rupees to it Shocked at what he regarded asan act of levity, he carried the paper to my father, who at once said,'Fred wrote it; his name shall not be dishonored;' and the money waspaid. I ask you, now, am I reckoning too much on one who could do that,and for a mere child too?""That was nobly done," said she, with enthusiasm; and though Conyerswent on, with warmth, to tell more of his father's generous nature,she seemed less to listen than to follow out some thread of her ownreflections. Was it some speculation as to the temperament the son ofsuch a father might possess? or was it some pleasurable revery regardingone who might do any extravagance and yet be forgiven? My reader mayguess this, perhaps,--I cannot. Whatever her speculation, it lent avery charming expression to her features,--that air of gentle, tranquilhappiness we like to believe the lot of guileless, simple natures.Conyers, like many young men of his order, was very fond of talking ofhimself, of his ways, his habits, and his temper, and she listened tohim very prettily,--so prettily, indeed, that when Darby, slyly peepingin at the half-opened door, announced that the boat had come, he feltwell inclined to pitch the messenger into the stream."I must go and say good-bye to Miss Barrington," said Polly, rising. "Ihope that this rustling finery will impart some dignity to my demeanor."And drawing wide the massive folds, she made a very deep courtesy,throwing back her head haughtily as she resumed her height in admirableimitation of a bygone school of manners.[Illustration: 166]"Very well,--very well, indeed! Quite as like what it is meant for as isMiss Polly Dill for the station she counterfeits!" said Miss Dinah, as,throwing wide the door, she stood before them."I am overwhelmed by your flattery, madam," said Polly, who, thoughvery red, lost none of her self-possession; "but I feel that, likethe traveller who tried on Charlemagne's armor, I am far more equal tocombat in my every-day clothes."[Illustration: 166]"Do not enter the lists with me in either," said Miss Dinah, with a lookof the haughtiest insolence. "Mr. Conyers, will you let me show you myflower-garden?""Delighted! But I will first see Miss Dill to her boat." "As you please,sir," said the old lady; and she withdrew with a proud toss of her headthat was very unmistakable in its import."What a severe correction that was!" said Polly, half gayly, as she wentalong, leaning on his arm. "And you know that, whatever myoffending, there was no mimicry in it. I was simply thinking of somegreat-grandmother who had, perhaps, captivated the heroes of Dettingen;and, talking of heroes, how courageous of you to come to my rescue!"Was it that her arm only trembled slightly, or did it really pressgently on his own as she said this? Certainly Conyers inclined to thelatter hypothesis, for he drew her more closely to his side, and said,"Of course I stood by you. She was all in the wrong, and I mean to tellher so.""Not if you would serve me," said she, eagerly. "I have paid thepenalty, and I strongly object to be sentenced again. Oh, here's theboat!""Why it's a mere skiff. Are you safe to trust yourself in such a thing?"asked he, for the canoe-shaped "cot" was new to him."Of course!" said she, lightly stepping in. "There is even room foranother." Then, hastily changing her theme, she asked, "May I tell poorTom what you have said to me, or is it just possible that you will comeup one of these days and see us?""If I might be permitted--""Too much honor for us!" said she, with such a capital imitation of hisvoice and manner that he burst into a laugh in spite of himself."Mayhap Miss Bamngton was not so far wrong: after all, you are aterrible mimic.""Is it a promise, then? Am I to say to my brother you will come?" saidshe, seriously."Faithfully!" said he, waving his hand, for the boatmen had already gotthe skiff under weigh, and were sending her along like an arrow from abow.Polly turned and kissed her hand to him, and Conyers muttered somethingover his own stupidity for not being beside her, and then turned sulkilyback towards the cottage. A few hours ago and he had thought hecould have passed his life here; there was a charm in the unbrokentranquillity that seemed to satisfy the longings of his heart, andnow, all of a sudden, the place appeared desolate. Have you never, dearreader, felt, in gazing on some fair landscape, with mountain and streamand forest before you, that the scene was perfect, wanting nothing inform or tone or color, till suddenly a flash of strong sunlight frombehind a cloud lit up some spot with a glorious lustre, to fade away asquickly into the cold tint it had worn before? Have you not felt then,I say, that the picture had lost its marvellous attraction, and that thevery soul of its beauty had departed? In vain you try to recall thepast impression; your memory will mourn over the lost, and refuse tobe comforted. And so it is often in life: the momentary charm thatcame unexpectedly can become all in all to our imaginations, and itsdeparture leave a blank, like a death, behind it.Nor was he altogether satisfied with Miss Barrington. The "oldwoman"--alas! for his gallantry, it was so that he called her tohimself--was needlessly severe. Why should a mere piece of harmlesslevity be so visited? At all events, he felt certain that he himselfwould have shown a more generous spirit. Indeed, when Polly had quizzedhim, he took it all good-naturedly, and by thus turning his thoughts tohis natural goodness and the merits of his character, he at lengthgrew somewhat more well-disposed to the world at large. He knew hewas naturally forgiving, and he felt he was very generous. Scores offellows, bred up as he was, would have been perfectly unendurable;they would have presumed on their position, and done this, that, and t'other. Not one of them would have dreamed of taking up a poor ungainlybumpkin, a country doctor's cub, and making a man of him; not one ofthem would have had the heart to conceive or the energy to carry outsuch a project. And yet this he would do. Polly herself, sceptical asshe was, should be brought to admit that he had kept his word. Selfishfellows would limit their plans to their own engagements, and weakfellows could be laughed out of their intentions; but he flatteredhimself that he was neither of these, and it was really fortunate thatthe world should see how little spoiled a fine nature could be, thoughsurrounded with all the temptations that are supposed to be dangerous.In this happy frame--for he was now happy--he reentered the cottage."What a coxcomb!" will say my reader. Be it so. But it was a coxcomb whowanted to be something better.Miss Barrington met him in the porch, not a trace of her latedispleasure on her face, but with a pleasant smile she said, "I havejust got a few lines from my brother. He writes in excellent spirits,for he has gained a lawsuit; not a very important case, but it puts usin a position to carry out a little project we are full of. He will behere by Saturday, and hopes to bring with him an old and valued friend,the Attorney-General, to spend a few days with us. I am, therefore,able to promise you an ample recompense for all the loneliness of yourpresent life. I have cautiously abstained from telling my brother whoyou are; I keep the delightful surprise for the moment of your meeting.Your name, though associated with some sad memories, will bring him backto the happiest period of his life."Conyers made some not very intelligible reply about his reluctanceto impose himself on them at such a time, but she stopped him with agood-humored smile, and said,--"Your father's son should know that where a Barrington lived he hada home,--not to say you have already paid some of the tribute of thishomeliness, and seen me very cross and ill-tempered. Well, let us notspeak of that now. I have your word to remain here." And she left him toattend to her household cares, while he strolled into the garden, halfamused, half embarrassed by all the strange and new interests that hadgrown up so suddenly around him.CHAPTER XV. AN EXPLORING EXPEDITIONWhether from simple caprice, or that Lady Cobham desired to mark herdisapprobation of Polly Dill's share in the late wager, is not open tome to say, but the festivities at Cob-ham were not, on that day, gracedor enlivened by her presence. If the comments on her absence were brief,they were pungent, and some wise reflections, too, were uttered as tothe dangers that must inevitably attend all attempts to lift people intoa sphere above their own. Poor human nature! that unlucky culprit whois flogged for everything and for everybody, bore the brunt of theseseverities, and it was declared that Polly had done what any othergirl "in her rank of life" might have done; and this being settled, thecompany went to luncheon, their appetites none the worse for the smallauto-da-f they had just celebrated."You'd have lost your money, Captain," whispered Ambrose Bushe toStapylton, as they stood talking together in a window recess, "if thatgirl had only taken the river three hundred yards higher up. Even as itwas, she 'd have breasted her horse at the bank if the bridle had notgiven way. I suppose you have seen the place?""I regret to say I have not. They tell me it's one of the strongestrapids in the river.""Let me describe it to you," replied he; and at once set about a picturein which certainly no elements of peril were forgotten, and all thedangers of rocks and rapids were given with due emphasis. Stapyltonseemed to listen with fitting attention, throwing out the suitable"Indeed! is it possible!" and such-like interjections, his mind,however, by no means absorbed by the narrative, but dwelling solely on achance name that had dropped from the narrator."You called the place 'Barrington's Ford,'" said he, at last. "Who isBarrington?""As good a gentleman by blood and descent as any in this room, but nowreduced to keep a little wayside inn,--the 'Fisherman's Home,' it iscalled. All come of a spendthrift son, who went out to India, and ranthrough every acre of the property before he died.""What a strange vicissitude! And is the old man much broken by it?""Some would say he was; my opinion is, that he bears up wonderfully.Of course, to me, he never makes any mention of the past; but while myfather lived, he would frequently talk to him over bygones, and likednothing better than to speak of his son, Mad George as they called him,and tell all his wildest exploits and most harebrained achievements.But you have served yourself in India. Have you never heard of GeorgeBarrington?"Stapylton shook his head, and dryly added that India was very large,and that even in one Presidency a man might never hear what went on inanother."Well, this fellow made noise enough to be heard even over here. Hemarried a native woman, and he either shook off his English allegiance,or was suspected of doing so. At all events, he got himself into troublethat finished him. It's a long complicated story, that I have neverheard correctly. The upshot was, however, old Barrington was sold outstick and stone, and if it was n't for the ale-house he might starve.""And his former friends and associates, do they rally round him andcheer him?""Not a great deal. Perhaps, however, that's as much his fault as theirs.He is very proud, and very quick to resent anything like considerationfor his changed condition. Sir Charles would have him up here,--he hastried it scores of times, but all in vain; and now he is left to two orthree of his neighbors, the doctor and an old half-pay major, who liveson the river, and I believe really he never sees any one else. OldM'Cormick knew George Barrington well; not that they were friends,--twomen less alike never lived; but that's enough to make poor Peter fond oftalking to him, and telling all about some lawsuits George left him fora legacy.""This Major that you speak of, does he visit here? I don't remember tohave seen him.""M'Cormick!" said the other, laughing. "No, he 's a miserly old fellowthat has n't a coat fit to go out in, and he's no loss to any one. It'sas much as old Peter Barrington can do to bear his shabby ways, and hiscranky temper, but he puts up with everything because he knew his sonGeorge. That's quite enough for old Peter; and if you were to go overto the cottage, and say, 'I met your son up in Bombay or Madras; we werequartered together at Ram-something-or-other,' he 'd tell you the placewas your own, to stop at as long as you liked, and your home for life.""Indeed!" said Stapylton, affecting to feel interested, while hefollowed out the course of his own thoughts."Not that the Major could do even that much!" continued Bushe, who nowbelieved that he had found an eager listener. "There was only one thingin this world he'd like to talk about,--Walcheren. Go how or when youliked, or where or for what,--no matter, it was Walcheren you 'd get,and nothing else.""Somewhat tiresome this, I take it!""Tiresome is no name for it! And I don't know a stronger proof of oldPeter's love for his son's memory, than that, for the sake of hearingabout him, he can sit and listen to the 'expedition.'"There was a half-unconscious mimicry in the way he gave the lastword that showed how the Major's accents had eaten their way into hissensibilities."Your portrait of this Major is not tempting," said Stapylton, smiling."Why would it? He's eighteen or twenty years in the neighborhood, and Inever heard that he said a kind word or did a generous act by any one.But I get cross if I talk of him. Where are you going this morning? Willyou come up to the Long Callows and look at the yearlings? The Admiralis very proud of his young stock, and he thinks he has some of the bestbone and blood in Ireland there at this moment.""Thanks, no; I have some notion of a long walk this morning. I takeshame to myself for having seen so little of the country here since Icame that I mean to repair my fault and go off on a sort of voyage ofdiscovery.""Follow the river from Brown's Barn down to Inistioge, and if youever saw anything prettier I'm a Scotchman." And with this appallingalternative, Mr. Bushe walked away, and left the other to his ownguidance.Perhaps Stapylton is not the companion my reader would care to strollwith, even along the grassy path beside that laughing river, withspray-like larches bending overhead, and tender water-lilies streaming,like pennants, in the fast-running current. It may be that he or shewould prefer some one more impressionable to the woodland beauty of thespot, and more disposed to enjoy the tranquil loveliness around him; forit is true the swarthy soldier strode on, little heeding the picturesqueeffects which made every succeeding reach of the river a subject for apainter. He was bent on finding out where M'Cormick lived, and on makingthe acquaintance of that bland individual."That's the Major's, and there's himself," said a countryman, as hepointed to a very shabbily dressed old man hoeing his cabbages ina dilapidated bit of garden-ground, but who was so absorbed in hisoccupation as not to notice the approach of a stranger."Am I taking too great a liberty," said Stapylton, as he raised hishat, "if I ask leave to follow the river path through this lovely spot?""Eh--what?--how did you come? You didn't pass round by the young wheat,eh?" asked M'Cormick, in his most querulous voice."I came along by the margin of the river.""That's just it!" broke in the other. "There's no keeping them outthat way. But I 'll have a dog as sure as my name is Dan. I'll have abull-terrier that'll tackle the first of you that's trespassing there.""I fancy I'm addressing Major M'Cormick," said Stapylton, never noticingthis rude speech; "and if so, I will ask him to accord me the privilegeof a brother-soldier, and let me make myself known to him,--CaptainStapylton, of the Prince's Hussars.""By the wars!" muttered old Dan; the exclamation being a favorite onewith him to express astonishment at any startling event. Then recoveringhimself, he added, "I think I heard there were three or four of yestopping up there at Cobham; but I never go out myself anywhere. I livevery retired down here.""I am not surprised at that. When an old soldier can nestle down in alovely nook like this, he has very little to regret of what the world isbusy about outside it.""And they are all ruining themselves, besides," said M'Cormick, withone of his malicious grins. "There's not a man in this county is n'tmortgaged over head and ears. I can count them all on my fingers foryou, and tell what they have to live on.""You amaze me," said Stapylton, with a show of interest"And the women are as bad as the men: nothing fine enough for them towear; no jewels rich enough to put on! Did you ever hear them mentionme?" asked he, suddenly, as though the thought flashed upon him thathe had himself been exposed to comment of a very different kind."They told me of an old retired officer, who owned a most picturesquecottage, and said, if I remember aright, that the view from one of thewindows was accounted one of the most perfect bits of river landscape inthe kingdom.""Just the same as where you 're standing,--no difference in life,"said M'Cormick, who was not to be seduced by the flattery into anydemonstration of hospitality."I cannot imagine anything finer," said Stapylton, as he threw himselfat the foot of a tree, and seemed really to revel in enjoyment of thescene. "One might, perhaps, if disposed to be critical, ask for a littleopening in that copse yonder. I suspect we should get a peep at the boldcliff whose summit peers above the tree-tops.""You'd see the quarry, to be sure," croaked out the Major, "if that'swhat you mean.""May I offer you a cigar?" said Stapylton, whose self-possession waspushed somewhat hard by the other. "An old campaigner is sure to be asmoker.""I am not. I never had a pipe in my mouth since Walcheren.""Since Walcheren! You don't say that you are an old Walcheren man?""I am, indeed. I was in the second battalion of the 103d,--the Duke'sFusiliers, if ever you heard of them.""Heard of them! The whole world has heard of them; but I did n't knowthere was a man of that splendid corps surviving. Why, they lost--let mesee--they lost every officer but--" Here a vigorous effort to keep hiscigar alight interposed, and kept him occupied for a few seconds. "Howmany did you bring out of action,--four was it, or five? I'm certain youhad n't six!""We were the same as the Buffs, man for man," said M'Cormick."The poor Buffs!--very gallant fellows too!" sighed Stapylton. "Ihave always maintained, and I always will maintain, that the Walcherenexpedition, though not a success, was the proudest achievement of theBritish arms.""The shakes always began after sunrise, and in less than ten minutes you'd see your nails growing blue.""How dreadful!""And if you felt your nose, you would n't know it was your nose; you 'dthink it was a bit of a cold carrot.""Why was that?""Because there was no circulation; the blood would stop going round; andyou 'd be that way for four hours,--till the sweating took you,--justthe same as dead.""There, don't go on,--I can't stand it,--my nerves are all ajaralready.""And then the cramps came on," continued M'Cormick, in an ecstasy overa listener whose feelings he could harrow; "first in the calves of thelegs, and then all along the spine, so that you 'd be bent like a fish.""For Heaven's sake, spare me! I've seen some rough work, but thatdescription of yours is perfectly horrifying! And when one thinks it wasthe glorious old 105th--""No, the 103d; the 105th was at Barbadoes," broke in the Major, testily."So they were, and got their share of the yellow fever at that very timetoo," said Stapylton, hazarding a not very rash conjecture."Maybe they did, and maybe they didn't," was the dry rejoinder.It required all Stapylton's nice tact to get the Major once more fullswing at the expedition, but he at last accomplished the feat, and withsuch success that M'Cormick suggested an adjournment within doors,and faintly hinted at a possible something to drink. The wily guest,however, declined this. "He liked," he said, "that nice breezy spotunder those fine old trees, and with that glorious reach of the riverbefore them. Could a man but join to these enjoyments," he continued,"just a neighbor or two,--an old friend or so that he really liked,--onenot alone agreeable from his tastes, but to whom the link of earlycompanionship also attached us, with this addition I could call this aparadise.""Well, I have the village doctor," croaked out M'Cor-mick, "and there'sBarrington--old Peter--up at the 'Fisherman's Home.' I have them byway of society. I might have better, and I might have worse.""They told me at Cobham that there was no getting you to 'go out;' that,like a regular old soldier, you liked your own chimney-corner, and couldnot be tempted away from it.""They didn't try very hard, anyhow," said he, harshly. "I'll be nineteenyears here if I live till November, and I think I got two invitations,and one of them to a 'dancing tea,' whatever that is; so that you mayobserve they did n't push the temptation as far as St. Anthony's!"Stapylton joined in the laugh with which M'Cormick welcomed his owndrollery."Your doctor," resumed he, "is, I presume, the father of the pretty girlwho rides so cleverly?""So they tell me. I never saw her mounted but once, and she smashed amelon-frame for me, and not so much as 'I ask your pardon!' afterwards.""And Barrington," resumed Stapylton, "is the ruined gentleman I haveheard of, who has turned innkeeper. An extravagant son, I believe,finished him?""His own taste for law cost him just as much," muttered M'Cormick. "Hehad a trunk full of old title-deeds and bonds and settlements, and hewas always poring over them, discovering, by the way, flaws in this andomissions in that, and then he 'd draw up a case for counsel, and getconsultations on it, and before you could turn round, there he was,trying to break a will or get out of a covenant, with a special jury andthe strongest Bar in Ireland. That's what ruined him.""I gather from what you tell me that he is a bold, determined, andperhaps a vindictive man. Am I right?""You are not; he's an easy-tempered fellow, and careless, like everyone of his name and race. If you said he hadn't a wise head on hisshoulders, you 'd be nearer the mark. Look what he 's going to do now!"cried he, warming with his theme: "he 's going to give up the inn--""Give it up! And why?""Ay, that's the question would puzzle him to answer; but it's thehaughty old sister persuades him that he ought to take this blackgirl--George Barrington's daughter--home to live with him, and that ashebeen is n't the place to bring her to, and she a negress. That's moreof the family wisdom!""There may be affection in it.""Affection! For what,--for a black! Ay, and a black that they never seteyes on! If it was old Withering had the affection for her, I wouldn'tbe surprised.""What do you mean? Who is he?""The Attorney-General, who has been fighting the East India Company forher these sixteen years, and making more money out of the case thanshe 'll ever get back again. Did you ever hear of Barrington and LotRammadahn Mohr against the India Company? That's the case. Twelvemillions of rupees and the interest on them! And I believe in my heartand soul old Peter would be well out of it for a thousand pounds.""That is, you suspect he must be beaten in the end?""I mean that I am sure of it! We have a saying in Ireland, 'It's notfair for one man to fall on twenty,' and it's just the same thing to goto law with a great rich Company. You 're sure to have the worst of it.""Did it never occur to them to make some sort of compromise?""Not a bit of it. Old Peter always thinks he has the game in his hand,and nothing would make him throw up the cards. No; I believe if youoffered to pay the stakes, he 'd say, 'Play the game out, and let thewinner take the money!'""His lawyer may, possibly, have something to say to this spirit.""Of course he has; they are always bolstering each other up. It is,'Barrington, my boy, you 'll turn the corner yet. You 'll drive up thatold avenue to the house you were born in, Barrington, of BarringtonHall;' or, 'Withering, I never heard you greater than on that pointbefore the twelve Judges;' or, 'Your last speech at Bar was finer thanCurran.' They'd pass the evening that way, and call me a cantankerousold hound when my back was turned, just because I did n't hark in to thecry. Maybe I have the laugh at them, after all." And he broke out intoone of his most discordant cackles to corroborate his boast."The sound sense and experience of an old Walcheren man might have itsweight with them. I know it would with me.""Ay," muttered the Major, half aloud, for he was thinking tohimself whether this piece of flattery was a bait for a littlewhiskey-and-water."I 'd rather have the unbought judgment of a shrewd man of theworld than a score of opinions based upon the quips and cranks of anattorney's instructions.""Ay!" responded the other, as he mumbled to himself, "he's mightythirsty.""And what's more," said Stapylton, starting to his legs, "I 'd followthe one as implicitly as I'd reject the other. I 'd say, 'M'Cormick isan old friend; we have known each other since boyhood.'""No, we haven't I never saw Peter Barrington till I came to live here.""Well, after a close friendship of years with his son--""Nor that, either," broke in the implacable Major. "He was alwayscutting his jokes on me, and I never could abide him, so that the closefriendship you speak of is a mistake.""At all events," said Stapylton, sharply, "it could be no interest ofyours to see an old--an old acquaintance lavishing his money on lawyersand in the pursuit of the most improbable of all results. You have nodesign upon him. You don't want to marry his sister!""No, by Gemini! "--a favorite expletive of the Major's in urgentmoments."Nor the Meer's daughter, either, I suppose?""The black! I think not. Not if she won the lawsuit, and was as richas--she never will be.""I agree with you there, Major, though I know nothing of the case or itsmerits; but it is enough to hear that a beggared squire is on one side,and Leadenhall Street on the other, to predict the upshot, and, for myown part, I wonder they go on with it.""I'll tell you how it is," said M'Cormick, closing one eye so as toimpart a look of intense cunning to his face. "It's the same with law asat a fox-hunt: when you 're tired out beating a cover, and ready to gooff home, one dog--very often the worst in the whole pack--will yelpout. You know well enough he's a bad hound, and never found in his life.What does that signify? When you 're wishing a thing, whatever flattersyour hopes is all right,--is n't that true?--and away you dash after theyelper as if he was a good hound.""You have put the matter most convincingly before me.""How thirsty he is now!" thought the Major; and grinned maliciously athis reflection."And the upshot of all," said Stapylton, like one summing up acase,--"the upshot of all is, that this old man is not satisfied withhis ruin if it be not complete; he must see the last timbers of thewreck carried away ere he leaves the scene of his disaster. Strange, sadinfatuation!""Ay," muttered the Major, who really had but few sympathies with merelymoral abstractions."Not what I should have done in a like case; nor you either, Major,eh?""Very likely not""But so it is. There are men who cannot be practical, do what they will.This is above them."A sort of grunt gave assent to this proposition; and Stapylton, whobegan to feel it was a drawn game, arose to take his leave."I owe you a very delightful morning, Major," said he. "I wish I couldthink it was not to be the last time I was to have this pleasure. Do youever come up to Kilkenny? Does it ever occur to you to refresh your oldmess recollections?"Had M'Cormick been asked whether he did not occasionally drop in atHolland House, and brush up his faculties by intercourse with the brightspirits who resorted there, he could scarcely have been more astounded.That he, old Dan M'Cormick, should figure at a mess-table,--he, whosewardrobe, a mere skeleton battalion thirty years ago, had never sincebeen recruited,--he should mingle with the gay and splendid youngfellows of a "crack" regiment!"I'd just as soon think of--of--" he hesitated how to measure anunlikelihood-- "of marrying a young wife, and taking her off to Paris!""And I don't see any absurdity in the project There is certainly a greatdeal of brilliancy about it!""And something bitter too!" croaked out M'Cormick, with a fearful grin."Well, if you'll not come to see me, the chances are I'll come over andmake you another visit before I leave the neighborhood." He waited asecond or two, not more, for some recognition of this offer; but nonecame, and he con-tinned: "I'll get you to stroll down with me, and showme this 'Fisherman's Home,' and its strange proprietor.""Oh, I 'll do that!" said the Major, who had no objection to a planwhich by no possibility could involve himself in any cost."As it is an inn, perhaps they 'd let us have a bit of dinner. Whatwould you say to being my guest there tomorrow? Would that suit you?""It would suit me well enough!" was the strongly marked reply."Well, we 'll do it this wise. You 'll send one of your people overto order dinner for two at--shall we say five o'clock?--yes,five--to-morrow. That will give us a longer evening, and I 'll call herefor you about four. Is that agreed?""Yes, that might do," was M'Cormick's half-reluctant assent, for, inreality, there were details in the matter that he scarcely fancied.First of all, he had never hitherto crossed that threshold except as aninvited guest, and he had his misgivings about the prudence of appearingin any other character, and secondly, there was a responsibility inordering the dinner, which he liked just as little, and, as he mutteredto himself, "Maybe I 'll have to order the bill too!"Some unlucky experiences of casualties of this sort had, perhaps,shadowed his early life; for so it was, that long after Stapylton hadtaken his leave and gone off, the Major stood there ruminating over thisunpleasant contingency, and ingeniously imagining all the pleas hecould put in, should his apprehension prove correct, against his ownindebtedness."Tell Miss Dinah," said he to his messenger,--"tell her 't is an officerby the name of Captain Staples, or something like that, that 's up atCobham, that wants a dinner for two to-morrow at five o'clock; and mindthat you don't say who the other is, for it's nothing to her. And ifshe asks you what sort of a dinner, say the best in the house, for theCaptain--mind you say the Captain--is to pay for it, and the other manonly dines with him. There, now, you have your orders, and take carethat you follow them!"There was a shrewd twinkle in the messenger's eye as he listened, which,if not exactly complimentary, guaranteed how thoroughly he comprehendedthe instructions that were given to him; and the Major saw him set forthon his mission, well assured that he could trust his envoy.In that nothing-for-nothing world Major M'Cormick had so long lived in,and to whose practice and ways he had adapted all his thoughts, therewas something puzzling in the fact of a dashing Captain of Hussars of"the Prince's Own," seeking him out, to form his acquaintance and invitehim to dinner. Now, though the selfishness of an unimaginative man isthe most complete of all, it yet exposes him to fewer delusions than thesame quality when found allied with a hopeful or fanciful temperament.M'Cormick had no "distractions" from such sources. He thought very illof the world at large; he expected extremely little from its generosity,and he resolved to be "quits" with it. To his often put question, "Whatbrought him here?--what did he come for?" he could find no satisfactoryreply. He scouted the notion of "love of scenery, solitude, and soforth," and as fully he ridiculed to himself the idea of a strangercaring to hear the gossip and small-talk of a mere country neighborhood."I have it!" cried he at last, as a bright thought darted through hisbrain,--"I have it at last! He wants to pump me about the 'expedition.'It's for that he's come. He affected surprise, to be sure, when I saidI was a Walcheren man, and pretended to be amazed, besides; but that wasall make-believe. He knew well enough who and what I was before hecame. And he was so cunning, leading the conversation away in anotherdirection, getting me to talk of old Peter and his son George. Wasn'tit deep?--was n't it sly? Well, maybe we are not so innocent as we look,ourselves; maybe we have a trick in our sleeves too! 'With a good dinnerand a bottle of port wine,' says he, 'I 'll have the whole story, andbe able to write it with the signature "One who was there."' But you 'remistaken this time, Captain; the sorrow bit of Walcheren you 'll hearout of my mouth to-morrow, be as pleasant and congenial as you like.I 'll give you the Barringtons, father and son,--ay, and old Dinah, too,if you fancy her,--but not a syllable about the expedition. It's theScheldt you want, but you 'll have to 'take it out' in the Ganges." Andhis uncouth joke so tickled him that he laughed till his eyes ran over;and in the thought that he was going to obtain a dinner under falsepretences, he felt something as nearly like happiness as he had tastedfor many a long day before.CHAPTER XVI. COMING HOMEMiss Barrtngton waited with impatience for Conyers's appearance atthe breakfast-table,--she had received such a pleasant note from herbrother, and she was so eager to read it. That notion of imparting someconception of a dear friend by reading his own words to a stranger isa very natural one. It serves so readily to corroborate all we havealready said, to fill up that picture of which wo have but given themere outline, not to speak of the inexplicable charm there is in beingable to say, "Here is the man without reserve or disguise; here he is inall the freshness and warmth of genuine feeling; no tricks of style, noturning of phrases to mar the honest expression of his nature. You seehim as we see him.""My brother is coming home, Mr. Conyers; he will be here to-day. Hereis his note," said Miss Dinah, as she shook hands with her guest "I mustread it for you:--"'At last, my dear Dinah--at last I am free, and, with all my love oflaw and lawyers, right glad to turn my steps homeward. Not but Ihave had a most brilliant week of it; dined with my old schoolfellowLongmore, now Chief Baron, and was the honored guest of the "HomeCircuit," not to speak of one glorious evening with a club called the"Unbriefed," the pleasantest dogs that ever made good speeches fornothing!--an amount of dissipation upon which I can well retire and livefor the next twelve months. How strange it seems to me to be once morein the "world," and listening to scores of things in which I have nopersonal interest; how small it makes my own daily life appear, but howsecure and how homelike, Dinah! You have often heard me grumbling overthe decline of social agreeability, and the dearth of those pleasantspeeches that could set the table in a roar. You shall never hear thesame complaint from me again. These fellows are just as good as theirfathers. If I missed anything, it was that glitter of scholarship, thatclassical turn which in the olden day elevated table-talk, and made itracy with the smart aphorisms and happy conceits of those who, even overtheir wine, were poets and orators. But perhaps I am not quite faireven in this. At all events, I am not going to disparage those who havebrought back to my old age some of the pleasant memories of my youth,and satisfied me that even yet I have a heart for those social joys Ionce loved so dearly!"'And we have won our suit, Dinah,--at least, a juror was withdrawn byconsent,--and Brazier agrees to an arbitration as to the Moyalty lands,the whole of Clanebrach and Barrymaquilty property being released fromthe sequestration.'"This is all personal matter, and technical besides," said MissBarrington; "so I skip it.""'Withering was finer than ever I heard him in the speech to evidence.We have been taunted with our defensive attitude so suddenly convertedinto an attack, and he compared our position to Wellington's at TorresVedras. The Chief Justice said Curran, at his best, never excelled it,and they have called me nothing but Lord Wellington ever since. And now,Dinah, to answer the question your impatience has been putting these tenminutes: "What of the money part of all this triumph?" I fear much,my dear sister, we are to take little by our motion. The costs of thecampaign cut up all but the glory! Hogan's bill extends to thirty-eightfolio pages, and there's a codicil to it of eleven more, headed"Confidential between Client and Attorney," and though I have not ina rapid survey seen anything above five pounds, the gross total is twothousand seven hundred and forty-three pounds three and fourpence. Imust and will say, however, it was a great suit, and admirably prepared.There was not an instruction Withering did not find substantiated,and Hogan is equally delighted with him, With all my taste for fieldsports and manly games, Dinah, I am firmly convinced that a good trialat bar is a far finer spectacle than the grandest tournament thatever was tilted. There was a skirmish yesterday that I 'd ratherhave witnessed than I 'd have seen Brian de Bois himself atAshby-de-la-Zouch. And, considering that my own share for this passageat arms will come to a trifle above two thousand pounds, the confessionmay be taken as an honest one."'And who is your young guest whom I shall be so delighted to see? Thisgives no clew to him, Dinah, for you know well how I would welcome anyone who has impressed you so favorably. Entreat of him to prolong hisstay for a week at least, and if I can persuade Withering to come downwith me, we 'll try and make his sojourn more agreeable. Look out forme--at least, about five o'clock--and have the green-room ready for W.,and let Darby be at Holt's stile to take the trunks, for Withering likesthat walk through the woods, and says that he leaves his wig and gown onthe holly-bushes there till he goes back.'"The next paragraph she skimmed over to herself. It was one about anadvance that Hogan had let him have of two hundred pounds. "Quiteample," W. says, "for our excursion to fetch over Josephine." Somedetails as to the route followed, and some wise hints about travellingon the Continent, and a hearty concurrence on the old lawyer's part withthe whole scheme."These are little home details," said she, hurriedly, "but you haveheard enough to guess what my brother is like. Here is the conclusion:--"'I hope your young friend is a fisherman, which will give me morechance of his company than walking up the partridges, for which I amgetting too old. Let him however understand that we mean him to enjoyhimself in his own way, to have the most perfect liberty, and that theonly despotism we insist upon is, not to be late for dinner."'Your loving brother,"'Peter Barrington."'There is no fatted calf to feast our return, Dinah, but Witheringhas an old weakness for a roast sucking-pig. Don't you think we couldsatisfy it?'"Conyers readily caught the contagion of the joy Miss Barrington feltat the thought of her brother's return. Short as the distance was thatseparated him from home, his absences were so rare, it seemed asthough he had gone miles and miles away, for few people ever lived moredependent on each other, with interests more concentrated, and all ofwhose hopes and fears took exactly the same direction, than this brotherand sister, and this, too, with some strong differences on the score oftemperament, of which the reader already has an inkling.What a pleasant bustle that is of a household that prepares for thereturn of a well-loved master! What feeling pervades twenty littleoffices of every-day routine! And how dignified by affection are thesmallest cares and the very humblest attentions! "He likes this!" "Heis so fond of that!" are heard at every moment It is then that one markshow the observant eye of love has followed the most ordinary tricks ofhabit, and treasured them as things to be remembered. It is not the keyof the street door in your pocket, nor the lease of the premises in yourdrawer, that make a home. Let us be grateful when we remember that, inthis attribute, the humblest shealing on the hillside is not inferior tothe palace of the king!Conyers, I have said, partook heartily of Miss Barring-ton's delight,and gave a willing help to the preparations that went forward. All weresoon busy within doors and without. Some were raking the gravel beforethe door; while others were disposing the flower-pots in little pyramidsthrough the grass plats; and then there were trees to be nailed up, andwindows cleaned, and furniture changed in various ways. What superhumanefforts did not Conyers make to get an old jet d'eau to play whichhad not spouted for nigh twenty years; and how reluctantly he resignedhimself to failure and assisted Betty to shake a carpet!And when all was completed, and the soft and balmy air sent the odor ofthe rose and the jessamine through the open windows, within which everyappearance of ease and comfort prevailed, Miss Barrington sat downat the piano and began to refresh her memory of some Irish airs, oldfavorites of Withering's, which he was sure to ask for. There was thatin their plaintive wildness which strongly interested Conyers; while,at the same time, he was astonished at the skill of one at whose touch,once on a time, tears had trembled in the eyes of those who listened,and whose fingers had not yet forgot their cunning."Who is that standing without there?" said Miss Barrington, suddenly, asshe saw a very poor-looking countryman who had drawn close to thewindow to listen. "Who are you? and what do you want here?" asked she,approaching him."I 'm Terry, ma'am,--Terry Delany, the Major's man," said he, taking offhis hat."Never heard of you; and what 's your business?""'T is how I was sent, your honor's reverence," began he, faltering atevery word, and evidently terrified by her imperious style of address."'Tis how I came here with the master's compliments,--not indeed his ownbut the other man's,--to say, that if it was plazing to you, or, indeed,anyhow at all, they 'd be here at five o'clock to dinner; and thoughit was yesterday I got it, I stopped with my sister's husband at FoynesGap, and misremembered it all till this morning, and I hope your honor'sreverence won't tell it on me, but have the best in the house all thesame, for he's rich enough and can well afford it.""What can the creature mean?" cried Miss Barrington. "Who sent youhere?""The Major himself; but not for him, but for the other that's up atCobham.""And who is this other? What is he called?""'Twas something like Hooks, or Nails; but I can't remember," said he,scratching his head in sign of utter and complete bewilderment."Did any one ever hear the like! Is the fellow an idiot?" exclaimed she,angrily."No, my lady; but many a one might be that lived with ould M'Cormick!"burst out the man, in a rush of unguardedness."Try and collect yourself, my good fellow," said Miss Barrington,smiling, in spite of herself, at his confession, "and say, if you can,what brought you here?""It's just, then, what I said before," said he, gaining a little morecourage. "It's dinner for two ye're to have; and it's to be ready atfive o'clock; but ye 're not to look to ould Dan for the money, for heas good as said he would never pay sixpence of it, but 't is all to comeout of the other chap's pocket, and well affordin' it. There it isnow, and I defy the Pope o' Rome to say that I did n't give the messageright!""Mr. Conyers," began Miss Barrington, in a voice shaking with agitation,"it is nigh twenty years since a series of misfortunes brought us so lowin the world that--" She stopped, partly overcome by indignation, partlyby shame; and then, suddenly turning towards the man, she continued,in a firm and resolute tone, "Go back to your master and say, 'MissBarrington hopes he has sent a fool on his errand, otherwise his messageis so insolent it will be far safer he should never present himself hereagain!' Do you hear me? Do you understand me?""If you mane you'd make them throw him in the river, the divil a straw I'd care, and I would n't wet my feet to pick him out of it!""Take the message as I have given it you, and do not dare to mix upanything of your own with it.""Faix, I won't. It's trouble enough I have without that! I 'll tell himthere's no dinner for him here to-day, and that, if he 's wise, he won'tcome over to look for it.""There, go--be off," cried Conyers, impatiently, for he saw that MissBarrington's temper was being too sorely tried.She conquered, however, the indignation that at one moment hadthreatened to master her, and in a voice of tolerable calm said,--"May I ask you to see if Darby or any other of the workmen are in thegarden? It is high time to take down these insignia of our traffic, andtell our friends how we would be regarded in future.""Will you let me do it? I ask as a favor that I may be permitted to doit," cried Conyers, eagerly; and without waiting for her answer, hurriedaway to fetch a ladder. He was soon back again and at work."Take care how you remove that board, Mr. Conyers," said she. "If therebe the tiniest sprig of jessamine broken, my brother will miss it. Hehas been watching anxiously for the time when the white bells would shutout every letter of his name, and I like him not to notice the changeimmediately. There, you are doing it very handily indeed. There isanother holdfast at this corner. Ah, be careful; that is a branch ofthe passion-tree, and though it looks dead, you will see it covered withflowers in spring. Nothing could be better. Now for the last emblem ofour craft,--can you reach it?""Oh, easily," said Conyers, as he raised his eyes to where the littletin fish hung glittering above him. The ladder, however, was too short,and, standing on one of the highest rungs, still he could not reach thelittle iron stanchion. "I must have it, though," cried he; "I mean toclaim that as my prize. It will be the only fish I ever took with myown hands." He now cautiously crept up another step of the ladder,supporting himself by the frail creepers which covered the walls. "Helpme now with a crooked stick, and I shall catch it."[Illustration: 190]"I'll fetch you one," said she, disappearing within the porch.Still wistfully looking at the object of his pursuit, Conyers neverturned his eyes downwards as the sound of steps apprised him some onewas near, and, concluding it to be Miss Barrington, he said, "I'm halfafraid that I have torn some of this jessamine-tree from the wall; butsee here's the prize!" A slight air of wind had wafted it towardshim, and he suatched the fish from its slender chain and held it up intriumph."A poacher caught in the fact, Barrington!" said a deep voice frombelow; and Conyers, looking down, saw two men, both advanced in life,very gravely watching his proceedings.Not a little ashamed of a situation to which he never expected anaudience, he hastily descended the ladder; but before he reached theground Miss Barrington was in her brother's arms, and welcoming him homewith all the warmth of true affection. This over, she next shook handscordially with his companion, whom she called Mr. Withering."And now, Peter," said she, "to present one I have been longing to makeknown to you. You, who never forget a well-known face, will recognizehim.""My eyes are not what they used to be," said Barrington, holding out hishand to Conyers, "but they are good enough to see the young gentleman Ileft here when I went away.""Yes, Peter," said she, hastily; "but does the sight of him bring backto you no memory of poor George?""George was dark as a Spaniard, and this gentleman--But pray, sir,forgive this rudeness of ours, and let us make ourselves betteracquainted within doors. You mean to stay some time here, I hope.""I only wish I could; but I have already overstayed my leave, and waitedhere only to shake your hand before I left."[Illustration: 190]"Peter, Peter," said Miss Dinah, impatiently, "must I then tell whom youare speaking to?"Barrington seemed pazzled. He looked from the stranger to his sister,and back again.She drew near and whispered in his ear: "The son of poor George'sdearest friend on earth,--the son of Ormsby Conyers.""Of whom?" said Barrington, in a startled and half-angry voice."Of Ormsby Conyers."Barrington trembled from head to foot; his face, for an instant crimson,became suddenly of an ashy paleness, and his voice shook as he said,--"I was not--I am not--prepared for this honor. I mean, I could not haveexpected that Mr. Conyers would have desired--Say this--do this for me,Withering, for I am not equal to it," said the old man, as, with hishands pressed over his face, he hurried within the house, followed byhis sister."I cannot make a guess at the explanation my friend has left me tomake," cried Withering, courteously; "but it is plain to see that yourname has revived some sorrow connected with the great calamity of hislife. You have heard of his son, Colonel Barrington?""Yes, and it was because my father had been his dearest friend that MissBarrington insisted on my remaining here. She told me, over and overagain, of the joy her brother would feel on meeting me--""Where are you going,--what's the matter?" asked Withering, as a manhurriedly passed out of the house and made for the river."The master is taken bad, sir, and I 'm going to Inistioge for thedoctor.""Let me go with you," said Conyers; and, only returning by a nod thegood-bye of Withering, he moved past and stepped into the boat."What an afternoon to such a morning!" muttered he to himself, as thetears started from his eyes and stole heavily along his cheeks.CHAPTER XVII. A SHOCKIf Conyers had been in the frame of mind to notice it, the contrastbetween the neat propriety of the "Fisherman's Home," and the disorderand slovenliness of the little inn at Inistioge could not have failedto impress itself upon him. The "Spotted Duck" was certainly, in all itsdetails, the very reverse of that quiet and picturesque cottage he hadjust quitted. But what did he care at that moment for the roof thatsheltered him, or the table that was spread before him? For days back hehad been indulging in thoughts of that welcome which Miss Barrington hadpromised him. He fancied how, on the mere mention of his father's name,the old man's affection would have poured forth in a flood of kindestwords; he had even prepared himself for a scene of such emotion as afather might have felt on seeing one who brought back to mind his ownson's earlier years; and instead of all this, he found himself shunned,avoided, repulsed. If there was a thing on earth in which his pride wasgreatest, it was his name; and yet it was on the utterance of that word,"Conyers," old Barrington turned away and left him.Over and over again had he found the spell of his father's name andtitle opening to him society, securing him attentions, and obtainingfor him that recognition and acceptance which go so far to make lifepleasurable; and now that word, which would have had its magic at apalace, fell powerless and cold at the porch of a humble cottage.To say that it was part of his creed to believe his father could dono wrong is weak. It was his whole belief,--his entire and completeconviction. To his mind his father embodied all that was noble,high-hearted, and chivalrous. It was not alone the testimony of thosewho served under him could be appealed to. All India, the Governmentat home, his own sovereign knew it. From his earliest infancy he hadlistened to this theme, and to doubt it seemed like to dispute the factof his existence. How was it, then, that this old man refused to acceptwhat the whole world had stamped with its value? Was it that he impugnedthe services which had made his father's name famous throughout theentire East?He endeavored to recall the exact words Barrington had used towardshim, but he could not succeed. There was something, he thought, aboutintruding, unwarrantably intruding; or it might be a mistaken impressionof the welcome that awaited him. Which was it? or was it either of them?At all events, he saw himself rejected and repulsed, and the indignitywas too great to be borne.While he thus chafed and fretted, hours went by; and Mr. M'Cabe, thelandlord, had made more than one excursion into the room, under pretenceof looking after the fire, or seeing that the windows were dulyclosed, but, in reality, very impatient to learn his guest's intentionsregarding dinner."Was it your honor said that you'd rather have the chickens roast thanbiled?" said he at last, in a very submissive tone."I said nothing of the kind.""Ah, it was No. 5 then, and I mistook; I crave your honor's pardon."Hoping that the chord he had thus touched might vibrate, he stooped downto arrange the turf, and give time for the response, but none came. Mr.M'Cabe gave a faint sigh, but returned to the charge. "When there's thelaste taste of south in the wind, there 's no making this chimney draw."Not a word of notice acknowledged this remark."But it will do finely yet; it's just the outside of the turf is alittle wet, and no wonder; seven weeks of rain--glory be to Him thatsent it--has nearly desthroyed us."Still Conyers vouchsafed no reply."And when it begins to rain here, it never laves off. It isn't like inyour honor's country. Your honor is English?"A grunt,--it might be assent, it sounded like malediction."'T is azy seen. When your honor came out of the boat, I said, 'Shusy,'says I, 'he's English; and there's a coat they could n't make in Irelandfor a king's ransom.'""What conveyances leave this for Kilkenny?" asked Conyers, sternly."Just none at all, not to mislead you," said M'Cabe, in a voice quitedevoid of its late whining intonation."Is there not a chaise or a car to be had?""Sorrow one. Dr. Dill has a car, to be sure, but not for hire.""Oh, Dr. Dill lives here. I forgot that. Go and tell him I wish to seehim."The landlord withdrew in dogged silence, but returned in about tenminutes, to say that the doctor had been sent for to the "Fisherman'sHome," and Mr. Barrington was so ill it was not likely he would be backthat night."So ill, did you say?" cried Conyers. "What was the attack,--what didthey call it?""'T is some kind of a 'plexy, they said. He's a full man, and advancedin years, besides.""Go and tell young Mr. Dill to come over here.""He's just gone off with the cuppin' instruments. I saw him steppin'into the boat.""Let me have a messenger; I want a man to take a note up to MissBarrington, and fetch my writing-desk here."In his eager anxiety to learn how Mr. Barrington was, Conyers hastilyscratched off a few lines; but on reading them over, he tore them up:they implied a degree of interest on his part which, considering thelate treatment extended to him, was scarcely dignified. He tried again;the error was as marked on the other side. It was a cold and formalinquiry. "And yet," said he, as he tore this in fragments, "one thingis quite clear,--this illness is owing to me! But for my presencethere, that old man had now been hale and hearty; the impressions,rightfully or wrongfully, which the sight of me and the announcementof my name produced are the cause of this malady. I cannot deny it."With this revulsion of feeling he wrote a short but kindly wordednote to Miss Barrington, in which, with the very faintest allusion tohimself, he begged for a few lines to say how her brother was. He wouldhave added something about the sorrow he experienced in requiting allher kindness by this calamitous return, but he felt that if the caseshould be a serious one, all reference to himself would be misplaced andimpertinent.The messenger despatched, he sat down beside his fire, the only lightnow in the room, which the shade of coming night had darkened. He wassad and dispirited, and ill at ease with his own heart. Mr. M'Cabe,indeed, appeared with a suggestion about candles, and a shadowy hintthat if his guest speculated of dining at all, it was full time tointimate it; but Conyers dismissed him with a peremptory command not todare to enter the room again until he was summoned to it. So odious tohim was the place, the landlord, and all about him, that he would haveset out on foot had his ankle been only strong enough to bear him. "Whatif he were to write to Stapylton to come and fetch him away? He neverliked the man; he liked him less since the remark Miss Barrrington hadmade upon him from mere reading of his letter, but what was he to do?"While he was yet doubting what course to take, he heard the voicesof some new arrivals outside, and, strange enough, one seemed to beStapylton's. A minute or two after, the travellers had entered the roomadjoining his own, and from which a very frail partition of lath andplaster alone separated him."Well, Barney," said a harsh, grating voice, addressing the landlord,"what have you got in the larder? We mean to dine with you.""To dine here, Major!" exclaimed M'Cabe. "Well, well, wondhers willnever cease." And then hurriedly seeking to cover a speech not veryflattering to the Major's habits of hospitality, "Sure, I 've a loin ofpork, and there 's two chickens and a trout fresh out of the water, andthere's a cheese; it isn't mine, to be sure, but Father Cody's, buthe 'll not miss a slice out of it; and barrin' you dined at the'Fisherman's Home,' you 'd not get betther.""That 's where we were to have dined by right," said the Major,crankily,--"myself and my friend here,--but we're disappointed, and sowe stepped in here, to do the best we can.""Well, by all accounts, there won't be many dinners up there for sometime.""Why so?""Ould Barrington was took with a fit this afternoon, and they say hewon't get over it.""How was it?--what brought it on?""Here's the way I had it. Ould Peter was just come home from Kilkenny,and had brought the Attorney-General with him to stay a few days at thecottage, and what was the first thing he seen but a man that come allthe way from India with a writ out against him for some of mad GeorgeBarrington's debts; and he was so overcome by the shock, that he faintedaway, and never came rightly to himself since.""This is simply impossible," said a voice Conyers well knew to beStapylton's."Be that as it may, I had it from the man that came for the doctor,and what's more, he was just outside the window, and could hear ouldBarrington cursin' and swearin' about the man that ruined his son, andbrought his poor boy to the grave; but I 'll go and look after yourhonor's dinner, for I know more about that.""I have a strange half-curiosity to know the correct version of thisstory," said Stapylton, as the host left the room. "The doctor is afriend of yours, I think. Would he step over here, and let us hear thematter accurately?""He's up at the cottage now, but I 'll get him to come in here when hereturns."If Conyers was shocked to hear how even this loose version of what hadoccurred served to heighten the anxiety his own fears created, he wasalso angry with himself at having learned the matter as he did. It wasnot in his nature to play the eavesdropper, and he had, in reality,heard what fell between his neighbors, almost ere he was aware of it. Toapprise them, therefore, of the vicinity of a stranger, he coughed andsneezed, poked the fire noisily, and moved the chairs about; but thoughthe disturbance served to prevent him from hearing, it did not tend toimpress any greater caution upon them, for they talked away as before,and more than once above the din of his own tumult, he heard the name ofBarrington, and even his own, uttered.Unable any longer to suffer the irritation of a position so painful, hetook his hat, and left the house. It was now night, and so dark thathe had to stand some minutes on the door-sill ere he could accustom hissight to the obscurity. By degrees, however, he was enabled to guide hissteps, and, passing through the little square, he gained the bridge;and here he resolved to walk backwards and forwards till such time ashe hoped his neighbors might have concluded their convivialities, andturned homeward.A thin cold rain was falling, and the night was cheerless, and withouta star; but his heart was heavy, and the dreariness without best suitedthat within him. For more than an hour he continued his lonely walk,tormented by all the miseries his active ingenuity could muster. Tohave brought sorrow and mourning beneath the roof where you have beensheltered with kindness is sad enough, but far sadder is it to connectthe calamity you have caused with one dearer to you than yourself, andwhose innocence, while assured of, you cannot vindicate. "My fathernever wronged this man, for the simple reason that he has never beenunjust to any one. It is a gross injustice to accuse him! If ColonelBarrington forfeited my father's friendship, who could doubt where thefault lay? But I will not leave the matter questionable. I will writeto my father and ask him to send me such a reply as may set the issueat rest forever; and then I will come down here, and, with my father'sletter in my hand, say, 'The mention of my name was enough, once on atime, to make you turn away from me on the very threshold of your owndoor--'" When he had got thus far in his intended appeal, his ear wassuddenly struck by the word "Conyers," uttered by one of two men whohad passed him the moment before, and now stood still in one of theprojections of the bridge to talk. He as hastily recognized Dr. Dillas the speaker. He went on thus: "Of course it was mere raving, butone must bear in mind that memory very often is the prompter of thesewanderings; and it was strange how persistently he held to the onetheme, and continued to call out, 'It was not fair, sir! It was notmanly! You know it yourself, Conyers; you cannot deny it!'""But you attach no importance to such wanderings, doctor?" asked onewhose deep-toned voice betrayed him to be Stapylton."I do; that is, to the extent I have mentioned. They are incoherencies,but they are not without some foundation. This Conyers may have hadhis share in that famous accusation against Colonel Barrington,--thatwell-known charge I told you of; and if so, it is easy to connect thename with these ravings.""And the old man will die of this attack," said Stapylton, halfmusingly."I hope not. He has great vigor of constitution; and old as he is, Ithink he will rub through it.""Young Conyers left for Kilkenny, then, immediately?" asked he."No; he came down here, to the village. He is now at the inn.""At the inn, here? I never knew that. I am sorry I was not aware of it,doctor; but since it is so, I will ask of you not to speak of havingseen me here. He would naturally take it ill, as his brother officer,that I did not make him out, while, as you see, I was totally ignorantof his vicinity.""I will say nothing on the subject, Captain," said the doctor. "And nowone word of advice from you on a personal matter. This young gentlemanhas offered to be of service to my son--"Conyers, hitherto spellbound while the interest attached to his father,now turned hastily from the spot and walked away, his mind not alonecharged with a heavy care, but full of an eager anxiety as to whereforeStapylton should have felt so deeply interested in Barrington's illness,and the causes that led to it,--Stapylton, the most selfish of men, andthe very last in the world to busy himself in the sorrows or misfortunesof a stranger. Again, too, why had he desired the doctor to preserve hispresence there as a secret? Conyers was exactly in the frame of mind toexaggerate a suspicion, or make a mere doubt a grave question. While bethus mused, Stapylton and the doctor passed him on their way towards thevillage, deep in converse, and, to all seeming, in closest confidence."Shall I follow him to the inn, and declare that I overheard a fewwords on the bridge which give me a claim to explanation? Shall I say,'Captain Stapylton, you spoke of my father, just now, sufficiently aloudto be overheard by me as I passed, and in your tone there was that whichentitles me to question you? Then if he should say, 'Go on; what is ityou ask for?' shall I not be sorely puzzled to continue? Perhaps, too,he might remind me that the mode in which I obtained my informationprecludes even a reference to it. He is one of those fellows not tothrow away such an advantage, and I must prepare myself for a quarrel.Oh, if I only had Hunter by me! What would I not give for the braveColonel's counsel at such a moment as this?"Of this sort were his thoughts as he strolled up and down for hours,wearing away the long "night watches," till a faint grayish tingeabove the horizon showed that morning was not very distant. The wholelandscape was wrapped in that cold mysterious tint in which tower andhill-top and spire are scarcely distinguishable from each other,while out of the low-lying meadows already arose the bluish vaporthat proclaims the coming day. The village itself, overshadowed by themountain behind it, lay a black, unbroken mass.Not a light twinkled from a window, save close to the river's bank,where a faint gleam stole forth and flickered on the water.Who has not felt the strange interest that attaches to a solitary lightseen thus in the tranquil depth of a silent night? How readily dowe associate it with some incident of sorrow! The watcher beside thesick-bed rises to the mind, or the patient sufferer himself trying tocheat the dull hours by a book, or perhaps some poor son of toil arisingto his daily round of labor, and seated at that solitary meal which nokind word enlivens, no companionship beguiles. And as I write, in whatcorner of earth are not such scenes passing,--such dark shadows movingover the battlefield of life?In such a feeling did Conyers watch this light as, leaving thehigh-road, he took a path that led along the river towards it. As hedrew nigher, he saw that the light came from the open window of a roomwhich gave upon a little garden,--a mere strip of ground fenced offfrom the path by a low paling. With a curiosity he could not master, hestopped and looked in. At a large table, covered with books and papers,and on which a skull also stood, a young man was seated, his headleaning on his hand, apparently in deep thought, while a girl was slowlypacing the little chamber as she talked to him."It does not require," said she, in a firm voice, "any great effort ofmemory to bear in mind that a nerve, an artery, and a vein always go incompany.""Not for you, perhaps,--not for you, Polly.""Not for any one, I 'm sure. Your fine dragoon friend with the sprainedankle might be brought to that amount of instruction by one telling ofit.""Oh, he 's no fool, I promise you, Polly. Don't despise him because hehas plenty of money and can lead a life of idleness.""I neither despise nor esteem him, nor do I mean that he should divertour minds from what we are at. Now for the popliteal space. Can youdescribe it? Do you know where it is, or anything about it?""I do," said he, doggedly, as he pushed his long hair back from hiseyes, and tried to think,--"I do, but I must have time. You must n'thurry me."She made no reply, but continued her walk in silence."I know all about it, Polly, but I can't describe it. I can't describeanything; but ask me a question about it.""Where is it,--where does it lie?""Isn't it at the lower third of the humerus, where the flexors divide?""You are too bad,--too stupid!" cried she, angrily. "I cannot believethat anything short of a purpose, a determination to be ignorant, couldmake a person so unteach-able. If we have gone over this once, we havedone so fifty times. It haunts me in my sleep, from very iteration.""I wish it would haunt me a little when I 'm awake," said he, sulkily."And when may that be, I'd like to know? Do you fancy, sir, that yourpresent state of intelligence is a very vigilant one?""I know one thing. I hope there won't be the like of you on the Courtof Examiners, for I would n't bear the half of what you've said to mefrom another."[Illustration: 202]"Rejection will be harder to bear, Tom. To be sent back as ignorant andincapable will be far heavier as a punishment than any words of mine.What are you laughing at, sir? Is it a matter of mirth to you?""Look at the skull, Polly,--look at the skull." And he pointed to wherehe had stuck his short, black pipe, between the grinning teeth of theskeleton.She snatched it angrily away, and threw it out of the window, saying,"You may be ignorant, and not be able to help it. I will take care youshall not be irreverent, sir.""There's my short clay gone, anyhow," said Tom, submissively, "and Ithink I 'll go to bed." And he yawned drearily as he spoke."Not till you have done this, if we sit here till breakfast-time," saidshe, resolutely. "There's the plate, and there's the reference. Read ittill you know it!""What a slave-driver you 'd make, Polly!" said he, with a half-bittersmile."What a slave I am!" said she, turning away her head."That's true," cried he, in a voice thick with emotion; "and when I 'mthousands of miles away, I 'll be longing to hear the bitterest wordsyou ever said to me, rather than never see you any more."[Illustration: 202]"My poor brother," said she, laying her hand softly on his rough head,"I never doubted your heart, and I ought to be better tempered with you,and I will. Come, now, Tom,"--and she seated herself at the table nexthim,--"see, now, if I cannot make this easy to you." And then the twoheads were bent together over the table, and the soft brown hair of thegirl half mingled with the rough wool of the graceless numskull besideher."I will stand by him, if it were only for her sake," said Conyers tohimself. And he stole slowly away, and gained the inn.So intent upon his purpose was he that he at once set about itsfulfilment. He began a long letter to his father, and, touching slightlyon the accident by which he made Dr. Dill's acquaintance, professed tobe deeply his debtor for kindness and attention. With this prelude heintroduced Tom. Hitherto his pen had glided along flippantly enough.In that easy mixture of fact and fancy by which he opened his case, nograve difficulty presented itself; but Tom was now to be presented, andthe task was about as puzzling as it would have been to have conductedhim bodily into society."I was ungenerous enough to be prejudiced against this poor fellow whenI first met him," wrote he. "Neither his figure nor his manners are inhis favor, and in his very diffidence there is an apparent rudeness andforwardness which are not really in his nature. These, however, are notmistakes you, my dear father, will fall into. With your own quicknessyou will see what sterling qualities exist beneath this rugged outside,and you will befriend him at first for my sake. Later on, I trust hewill open his own account in your heart. Bear in mind, too, that it wasall my scheme,--the whole plan mine. It was I persuaded him to try hisluck in India; it was through me he made the venture; and if the poorfellow fail, all the fault will fall back upon me." From this he wentinto little details of Tom's circumstances, and the narrow means bywhich he was surrounded, adding how humble he was, and how ready to besatisfied with the most moderate livelihood. "In that great wide worldof the East, what scores of things there must be for such a fellow todo; and even should he not turn out to be a Sydenham or a Harvey, hemight administer justice, or collect revenue, or assist in some otherway the process of that system which we call the British rule in India.In a word, get him something he may live by, and be able, in due time,to help those he has left behind here, in a land whose 'Paddy-fields'are to the full as pauperized as those of Bengal."He had intended, having disposed of Tom Dill's case, to have addressedsome lines to his father about the Barring-tons, sufficiently vague tobe easily answered if the subject were one distasteful or unpleasing tohim; but just as he reached the place to open this, he was startled bythe arrival of a jaunting-car at the inn-door, whose driver stopped totake a drink. It was a chance conveyance, returning to Kilkenny, andConyers at once engaged it; and, leaving an order to send on the replywhen it arrived from the cottage, he wrote a hasty note to Tom Dill anddeparted. This note was simply to say that he had already fulfilled hispromise of interesting his father in his behalf, and that whenever Tomhad passed his examination, and was in readiness for his voyage, heshould come or write to him, and he would find him fully disposed toserve and befriend him. "Meanwhile," wrote he, "let me hear of you. I amreally anxious to learn how you acquit yourself at the ordeal, for whichyou have the cordial good wishes of your friend, F. Conyers."Oh, if the great men of our acquaintance--and we all of us, no matterhow hermit-like we may live, have our "great men"--could only know andfeel what ineffable pleasure will sometimes be derived from the chanceexpressions they employ towards us,--words which, little significant inthemselves, perhaps have some touch of good fellowship or good feeling,now reviving a "bygone," now far-seeing a future, tenderly thrillingthrough us by some little allusion to a trick of our temperament, notedand observed by one in whose interest we never till then knew we hada share,--if, I say, they were but aware of this, how delightful theymight make themselves!--what charming friends!--and, it is but fair toown, what dangerous patrons!I leave my reader to apply the reflection to the case before him,and then follow me to the pleasant quarters of a well-maintainedcountry-house, full of guests and abounding in gayety.CHAPTER XVIII. COBHAMMy reader is already aware that I am telling of some forty years ago,and therefore I have no apologies to make for habits and ways which ourmore polished age has pronounced barbarous. Now, at Cobham, the mensat after dinner over their wine when the ladies had withdrawn, and,I grieve to say, fulfilled this usage with a zest and enjoyment thatunequivocally declared it to be the best hour of the whole twenty-four.Friends could now get together, conversation could range overpersonalities, egotisms have their day, and bygones be disinterredwithout need of an explanation. Few, indeed, who did not unbend atsuch a moment, and relax in that genial atmosphere begotten of closedcurtains, and comfort, and good claret. I am not so certain that weare wise in our utter abandonment of what must have often conciliateda difference or reconciled a grudge. How many a lurking discontent, toosubtle for intervention, must have been dissipated in the general burstof a common laugh, or the racy enjoyment of a good story! Decidedly thedecanter has often played peacemaker, though popular prejudice inclinesto give it a different mission.On the occasion to which I would now invite my reader, the party wereseated--by means of that genial discovery, a horseshoe-table--aroundthe fire at Cobham. It was a true country-house society of neighbors whoknew each other well, sprinkled with guests,--strangers to every one.There were all ages and all temperaments, from the hardy old squire,whose mellow cheer was known at the fox-cover, to the young heirfresh from Oxford and loud about Leicestershire; gentlemen-farmers andsportsmen, and parsons and soldiers, blended together with just enoughdisparity of pursuit to season talk and freshen experiences.The conversation, which for a while was partly on sporting matters,varied with little episodes of personal achievement, and those littleboastings which end in a bet, was suddenly interrupted by a hasty callfor Dr. Dill, who was wanted at the "Fisherman's Home.""Can't you stay to finish this bottle, Dill?" said the Admiral, who hadnot heard for whom he had been sent."I fear not, sir. It is a long row down to the cottage.""So it 's poor Barrington again! I 'm sincerely sorry for it! And now I'll not ask you to delay. By the way, take my boat. Elwes," said he tothe servant, "tell the men to get the boat ready at once for Dr. Dill,and come and say when it is so."The doctor's gratitude was profuse, though probably a dim vista of the"tip" that might be expected from him detracted from the fulness of theenjoyment."Find out if I could be of any use, Dill," whispered the Admiral, as thedoctor arose. "Your own tact will show if there be anything I could do.You understand me; I have the deepest regard for old Barrington, and hissister too."Dill promised to give his most delicate attention to the point, anddeparted.While this little incident was occurring, Stapylton, who sat at an angleof the fireplace, was amusing two or three listeners by an accountof his intended dinner at the "Home," and the haughty refusal of MissBarrington to receive him."You must tell Sir Charles the story!" cried out Mr. Bushe. "He'll soonrecognize the old Major from your imitation of him.""Hang the old villain! he shot a dog-fox the other morning, and he knowswell how scarce they are getting in the country," said another."I 'll never forgive myself for letting him have a lease of that place,"said a third; "he's a disgrace to the neighborhood.""You're not talking of Barrington, surely," called out Sir Charles."Of course not. I was speaking of M'Cormick. Harrington is another stampof man, and here's his good health!""He'll need all your best wishes, Jack," said the host, "for Dr. Dillhas just been called away to see him.""To see old Peter! Why, I never knew him to have a day's illness!""He's dangerously ill now," said the Admiral, gravely. "Dill tells methat he came home from the Assizes hale and hearty, in high spiritsat some verdict in his favor, and brought back the Attorney-General tospend a day or two with him; but that, on arriving, he found a youngfellow whose father or grandfather--for I have n't it correctly--hadbeen concerned in some way against George Barrington, and that highwords passed between old Peter and this youth, who was turned out on thespot, while poor Barrington, overcome by emotion, was struck down witha sort of paralysis. As I have said, I don't know the story accurately,for even Dill himself only picked it up from the servants at thecottage, neither Miss Barrington nor Withering having told him one wordon the subject.""That is the very same story I heard at the village where we dined,"broke in Stapylton, "and M'Cormick added that he remembered the name.Conyers--the young man is called Conyers--did occur in a certain famousaccusation against Colonel Barrington.""Well, but," interposed Bushe, "isn't all that an old story now? Is n'tthe whole thing a matter of twenty years ago?""Not so much as that," said Sir Charles. "I remember reading it all whenI was in command of the 'Madagascar,'--I forget the exact year, but Iwas at Corfu.""At all events," said Bushe, "it's long enough past to be forgotten orforgiven; and old Peter was the very last man I could ever have supposedlikely to carry on an ancient grudge against any one.""Not where his son was concerned. Wherever George's name entered,forgiveness of the man that wronged him was impossible," said another."You are scarcely just to my old friend," interposed the Admiral. "Firstof all, we have not the facts before us. Many of us here have neverseen, some have never heard of the great Barrington Inquiry, and of suchas have, if their memories be not better than mine, they can't discussthe matter with much profit.""I followed the case when it occurred," chimed in the former speaker,"but I own, with Sir Charles, that it has gone clean out of my headsince that time.""You talk of injustice, Cobham, injustice to old Peter Barrington," saidan old man from the end of the table; "but I would ask, are we quitejust to poor George? I knew him well. My son served in the same regimentwith him before he went out to India, and no finer nor nobler-heartedfellow than George Barrington ever lived. Talk of him ruining his fatherby his extravagance! Why, he'd have cut off his right hand ratherthan caused him one pang, one moment of displeasure. Barrington ruinedhimself; that insane passion for law has cost him far more than halfwhat he was worth in the world. Ask Withering; he 'll tell you somethingabout it. Why, Withering's own fees in that case before 'the Lords'amount to upwards of two thousand guineas.""I won't dispute the question with you, Fowndes," said the Admiral."Scandal says you have a taste for a trial at bar yourself."The hit told, and called for a hearty laugh, in which Fowndes himselfjoined freely."I 'm a burned child, however, and keep away from the fire," said he,good-humoredly; "but old Peter seems rather to like being singed. Therehe is again with his Privy Council case for next term, and with, Isuppose, as much chance of success as I should have in a suit to recovera Greek estate of some of my Phoenician ancestors."It was not a company to sympathize deeply with such a litigious spirit.The hearty and vigorous tone of squiredom, young and old, could notunderstand it as a passion or a pursuit, and they mainly agreed thatnothing but some strange perversion could have made the generous natureof old Barrington so fond of law. Gradually the younger members ofthe party slipped away to the drawing-room, till, in the changes thatensued, Stapylton found himself next to Mr. Fowndes."I'm glad to see, Captain," said the old squire, "that modern fashion ofdeserting the claret-jug has not invaded your mess. I own I like a manwho lingers over his wine.""We have no pretext for leaving it, remember that," said Stapylton,smiling."Very true. The placeus uxor is sadly out of place in a soldier'slife. Your married officer is but a sorry comrade; besides, how is afellow to be a hero to the enemy who is daily bullied by his wife?""I think you said that you had served?" interposed Stapylton."No. My son was in the army; he is so still, but holds a Governorshipin the West Indies. He it was who knew this Barrington we were speakingof.""Just so," said Stapylton, drawing his chair closer, so as to conversemore confidentially."You may imagine what very uneventful lives we country gentlemen live,"said the old squire, "when we can continue to talk over one memorablecase for something like twenty years, just because one of the parties toit was our neighbor.""You appear to have taken a lively interest in it," said Stapylton, whorightly conjectured it was a favorite theme with the old squire."Yes. Barrington and my son were friends; they came down to my housetogether to shoot; and with all his eccentricities--and they weremany--I liked Mad George, as they called him.""He was a good fellow, then?""A thoroughly good fellow, but the shyest that ever lived; to alloutward seeming rough and careless, but sensitive as a woman all thewhile. He would have walked up to a cannon's mouth with a calm step,but an affecting story would bring tears to his eyes; and then, tocover this weakness, which he was well ashamed of, he 'd rush into fiftyfollies and extravagances. As he said himself to me one day, alludingto some feat of rash absurdity, 'I have been taking another inch off thedog's tail,'--he referred to the story of Alcibiades, who docked his dogto take off public attention from his heavier transgressions.""There was no truth in these accusations against him?""Who knows? George was a passionate fellow, and he 'd have made shortwork of the man that angered him. I myself never so entirely acquittedhim as many who loved him less. At all events, he was hardly treated; hewas regularly hunted down. I imagine he must have made many enemies,for witnesses sprung up against him on all sides, and he was too prouda fellow to ask for one single testimony in his favor! If ever a man metdeath broken-hearted, he did!"A pause of several minutes occurred, after which the old squireresumed,--"My son told me that after Barrington's death there was a strongrevulsion in his favor, and a great feeling that he had been hardlydealt by. Some of the Supreme Council, it is said, too, were disposedto behave generously towards his child, but old Peter, in an evil hour,would hear of nothing short of restitution of all the territory, and aregular rehabilitation of George's memory, besides; in fact, he made themost extravagant demands, and disgusted the two or three who werekindly and well disposed towards his cause. Had they, indeed,--as hesaid,--driven his son to desperation, he could scarcely ask them todeclare it to the world; and yet nothing short of this would satisfyhim! 'Come forth,' wrote he,--I read the letter myself,--'come forth andconfess that your evidence was forged and your witnesses suborned; thatyou wanted to annex the territory, and the only road to your object wasto impute treason to the most loyal heart that ever served the King!'Imagine what chance of favorable consideration remained to the man whopenned such words as these.""And he prosecutes the case still?""Ay, and will do to the day of his death. Withering--who was an oldschoolfellow of mine--has got me to try what I could do to persuade himto come to some terms; and, indeed, to do old Peter justice, it isnot the money part of the matter he is so obstinate about; it is thequestion of what he calls George's fair fame and honor; and one cannotexactly say to him, 'Who on earth cares a brass button whether GeorgeBarrington was a rebel or a true man? Whether he deserved to die anindependent Rajah of some place with a hard name, or the loyal subjectof his Majesty George the Third?' I own I, one day, did go so close tothe wind, on that subject, that the old man started up and said, 'I hopeI misapprehend you, Harry Fowndes. I hope sincerely that I do so, for ifnot, I 'll have a shot at you, as sure as my name is Peter Barrington.'Of course I 'tried back' at once, and assured him it was a puremisconception of my meaning, and that until the East India folk fairlyacknowledged that they had wronged his son, he could not, with honor,approach the question of a compromise in the money matter.""That day, it may be presumed, is very far off," said Stapylton, halflanguidly."Well, Withering opines not. He says that they are weary of the wholecase. They have had, perhaps, some misgivings as to the entire justiceof what they did. Perhaps they have learned something during the courseof the proceedings which may have influenced their judgment; and notimpossible is it that they pity the old man fighting out his life; andperhaps, too, Barrington himself may have softened a little, since hehas begun to feel that his granddaughter--for George left a child--hadinterests which his own indignation could not rightfully sacrifice; sothat amongst all these perhapses, who knows but some happy issue maycome at last?""That Barrington race is not a very pliant one," said Stapylton,half dreamily; and then, in some haste, added, "at least, such is thecharacter they give them here.""Some truth there may be in that. Men of a strong temperament and witha large share of self-dependence generally get credit from the world forobstinacy, just because the road they see out of difficulties isnot the popular one. But even with all this, I 'd not call old Peterself-willed; at least, Withering tells me that from time to time, as hehas conveyed to him the opinions and experiences of old Indian officers,some of whom had either met with or heard of George, he has listenedwith much and even respectful attention. And as all their counsels havegone against his own convictions, it is something to give them a patienthearing.""He has thus permitted strangers to come and speak with him on thesetopics?" asked Stapylton, eagerly."No, no,--not he. These men had called on Withering,--met him, perhaps,in society,--heard of his interest in George Barrington's case, andcame good-naturedly to volunteer a word of counsel in favor of an oldcomrade. Nothing more natural, I think.""Nothing. I quite agree with you; so much so, indeed, that having servedsome years in India, and in close proximity, too, to one of thenative courts, I was going to ask you to present me to your friendMr. Withering, as one not altogether incapable of affording him someinformation.""With a heart and a half. I 'll do it.""I say, Harry," cried out the host, "if you and Captain Stapylton willneither fill your glasses nor pass the wine, I think we had better jointhe ladies."And now there was a general move to the drawing-room, where severalevening guests had already assembled, making a somewhat numerouscompany. Polly Dill was there, too,--not the wearied-looking, carewornfigure we last saw her, when her talk was of "dead anatomies," butthe lively, sparkling, bright-eyed Polly, who sang the Melodies to theaccompaniment of him who could make every note thrill with the sentimenthis own genius had linked to it. I half wish I had not a story totell,--that is, that I had not a certain road to take,--that I mightwander at will through by-path and lane, and linger on the memories thusby a chance awakened! Ah, it was no small triumph to lift out of obscurecompanionship and vulgar associations the music of our land, and wed itto words immortal, to show us that the pebble at our feet was a gem tobe worn on the neck of beauty, and to prove to us, besides, that ourlanguage could be as lyrical as Anacreon's own!"I am enchanted with your singing," whispered Stapylton, in Polly's ear;"but I 'd forego all the enjoyment not to see you so pleased with yourcompanion. I begin to detest the little Poet.""I 'll tell him so," said she, half gravely; "and he 'll know well thatit is the coarse hate of the Saxon.""I'm no Saxon!" said he, flushing and darkening at the same time. Andthen, recovering his calm, he added, "There are no Saxons left amongstus, nor any Celts for us to honor with our contempt; but come away fromthe piano, and don't let him fancy he has bound you by a spell.""But he has," said she, eagerly,--"he has, and I don't care to breakit."But the little Poet, running his fingers lightly over the keys, warbledout, in a half-plaintive whisper,--"Oh, tell me, dear Polly, why is it thine eyesThrough their brightness have something of sorrow?I cannot suppose that the glow of such skiesShould ever mean gloom for the morrow;"Or must I believe that your heart is afar,And you only make semblance to hear me,While your thoughts are away to that splendid hussar,And 't is only your image is near me?""An unpublished melody, I fancy," said Stapylton, with a malicioustwinkle of his eye."Not even corrected as yet," said the Poet, with a glance at Polly.What a triumph it was for a mere village beauty to be thus tilted forby such gallant knights; but Polly was practical as well as vain, and acertain unmistakable something in Lady Cobham's eye told her that two ofthe most valued guests of the house were not to be thus withdrawn fromcirculation; and with this wise impression on her mind, she slippedhastily away, on the pretext of something to say to her father. Andalthough it was a mere pretence on her part, there was that in her lookas they talked together that betokened their conversation to be serious."I tell you again," said he, in a sharp but low whisper, "she will notsuffer it. You used not to make mistakes of this kind formerly, and Icannot conceive why you should do so now.""But, dear papa," said she, with a strange half-smile, "don't youremember your own story of the gentleman who got tipsy because heforesaw he would never be invited again?"But the doctor was in no jesting mood, and would not accept of theillustration. He spoke now even more angrily than before."You have only to see how much they make of him to know well that he isout of our reach," said he, bitterly."A long shot, Sir Lucius; there is such honor in a long shot," said she,with infinite drollery; and then with a sudden gravity, added, "I havenever forgotten the man you cured, just because your hand shook and yougave him a double dose of laudanum."This was too much for his patience, and he turned away in disgust at herfrivolity. In doing so, however, he came in front of Lady Cobham, whohad come up to request Miss Dill to play a certain Spanish dance for twoyoung ladies of the company."Of course, your Ladyship,--too much honor for her,--she will becharmed; my little girl is overjoyed when she can contribute even thushumbly to the pleasure of your delightful house."Never did a misdemeanist take his "six weeks" with a more completeconsciousness of penalty than did Polly sit down to that piano. Shewell understood it as a sentence, and, let me own, submitted well andgracefully to her fate. Nor was it, after all, such a slight trial, forthe fandango was her own speciality; she had herself brought the danceand the music to Cobham. They who were about to dance it were her ownpupils, and not very proficient ones, either. And with all this she didher part well and loyally. Never had she played with more spirit; nevermarked the time with a firmer precision; never threw more tendernessinto the graceful parts, nor more of triumphant daring into the proudones. Amid the shower of "Bravos!" that closed the performance,--fornone thought of the dancers,--the little Poet drew nigh and whispered,"How naughty!""Why so?" asked she, innocently."What a blaze of light to throw over a sorry picture!" said he, danglinghis eyeglass, and playing that part of middle-aged Cupid he was so fondof assuming."Do you know, sir," said Lady Cobham, coming hastily towards him, "thatI will not permit you to turn the heads of my young ladies? Dr. Dillis already so afraid of your fascinations that he has ordered hiscarriage,--is it not so?" she went on appealing to the doctor, withincreased rapidity. "But you will certainly keep your promise to us. Weshall expect you on Thursday at dinner."Overwhelmed with confusion, Dill answered--he knew not what--aboutpleasure, punctuality, and so forth; and then turned away to ring forthat carriage he had not ordered before."And so you tell me Barrington is better?" said the Admiral, taking himby the arm and leading him away. "The danger is over, then?""I believe so; his mind is calm, and he is only suffering now fromdebility. What with the Assizes, and a week's dissipation at Kilkenny,and this shock,--for it was a shock,--the whole thing was far more of amental than a bodily ailment.""You gave him my message? You said how anxious I felt to know if I couldbe of any use to him?""Yes; and he charged Mr. Withering to come and thank you, for he ispassing by Cobham to-morrow on his way to Kilkenny.""Indeed! Georgiana, don't forget that. Withering will call hereto-morrow; try and keep him to dine, at least, if we cannot secure himfor longer. He's one of those fellows I am always delighted to meetWhere are you going, Dill? Not taking your daughter away at this hour,are you?"The doctor sighed, and muttered something about dissipations that wereonly too fascinating, too engrossing. He did not exactly like tosay that his passports had been sent him, and the authorities dulyinstructed to give him "every aid and assistance possible." For amoment, indeed, Polly looked as though she would make some explanationof the matter; but it was only for a moment, and the slight flush onher cheek gave way quickly, and she looked somewhat paler than her wont.Meanwhile, the little Poet had fetched her shawl, and led her away,humming, "Buona notte,--buona sera!" as he went, in that half-caressing,half-quizzing way he could assume so jauntily. Stapylton walked behindwith the doctor, and whispered as he went, "If not inconvenient, might Iask the favor of a few minutes with you to-morrow?"Dill assured him he was devotedly his servant; and having fixed theinterview for two o'clock, away they drove. The night was calm andstarlight, and they had long passed beyond the grounds of Cobham, andwere full two miles on their road before a word was uttered by either."What was it her Ladyship said about Thursday next, at dinner?" askedthe doctor, half pettishly."Nothing to me, papa.""If I remember, it was that we had accepted the invitation already, andbegging me not to forget it.""Perhaps so," said she, dryly."You are usually more mindful about these matters," said he, tartly,"and not so likely to forget promised festivities.""They certainly were not promised to me," said she, "nor, if they hadbeen, should I accept of them.""What do you mean?" said he, angrily."Simply, papa, that it is a house I will not re-enter, that's all.""Why, your head is turned, your brains are destroyed by flattery,girl. You seem totally to forget that we go to these places merelyby courtesy,--we are received only on sufferance; we are not theirequals.""The more reason to treat us with deference, and not render our positionmore painful than it need be.""Folly and nonsense! Deference, indeed! How much deference is due fromeight thousand a year to a dispensary doctor, or his daughter? I 'llhave none of these absurd notions. If they made any mistake towards you,it was by over-attention,--too much notice.""That is very possible, papa; and it was not always very flattering forthat reason.""Why, what is your head full of? Do you fancy you are one of LordCarricklough's daughters, eh?""No, papa; for they are shockingly freckled, and very plain.""Do you know your real station?" cried he, more angrily, "and that if,by the courtesy of society, my position secures acceptance anywhere, itentails nothing--positively nothing--to those belonging to me?""Such being the case, is it not wise of us not to want anything,--not tolook for it,--not to pine after it? You shall see, papa, whether I fretover my exclusion from Cobham."The doctor was not in a mood to approve of such philosophy, and he droveon, only showing--by an extra cut of his whip--the tone and temper thatbeset him."You are to have a visit from Captain Stapylton tomorrow, papa?" saidshe, in the manner of a half question."Who told you so?" said he, with a touch of eagerness in his voice;for suddenly it occurred to him if Polly knew of this appointment, sheherself might be interested in its object."He asked me what was the most likely time to find you at home, and alsoif he might venture to hope he should be presented to mamma."That was, as the doctor thought, a very significant speech; it mightmean a great deal,--a very great deal, indeed; and so he turned it overand over in his mind for some time before he spoke again. At last hesaid,--"I haven't a notion what he's coming about, Polly,--have you?""No, sir; except, perhaps, it be to consult you. He told me he hadsprained his arm, or his shoulder, the other day, when his horseswerved.""Oh no, it can't be that, Polly; it can't be that.""Why not the pleasure of a morning call, then? He is an idle man, andfinds time heavy on his hands."A short "humph" showed that this explanation was not more successfulthan the former, and the doctor, rather irritated with this game offence, for so he deemed it, said bluntly,--"Has he been showing you any marked attentions of late? Have you noticedanything peculiar in his manner towards you?""Nothing whatever, sir," said she, with a frank boldness. "He haschatted and flirted with me, just as every one else presumes he has aright to do with a girl in a station below their own; but he has neverbeen more impertinent in this way than any other young man of fashion.""But there have been"--he was sorely puzzled for the word he wanted, andit was only as a resource, not out of choice, he said--"attentions?""Of course, papa, what many would call in the cognate phrase, markedattentions; but girls who go into the world as I do no more mistake whatthese mean than would you yourself, papa, if passingly asked what wasgood for a sore-throat fancy that the inquirer intended to fee you.""I see, Polly, I see," muttered he, as the illustration came home tohim. Still, after ruminating for some time, a change seemed to come overhis thoughts, for he said,--"But you might be wrong this time, Polly: it is by no means impossiblethat you might be wrong.""My dear papa," said she, gravely, "when a man of his rank is disposedto think seriously of a girl in mine, he does not begin by flattery;he rather takes the line of correction and warning, telling her fiftylittle platitudes about trifles in manner, and so forth, by her docileacceptance of which he conceives a high notion of himself, and a halfliking for her. But I have no need to go into these things; enough ifI assure you Captain Stapylton's visit has no concern for me; he eithercomes out of pure idleness, or he wants to make use of you."The last words opened a new channel to Dill's thoughts, and he drove onin silent meditation over them.CHAPTER XIX. THE HOUR OF LUNCHEONIf there be a special agreeability about all the meal-times of apleasant country-house, there is not one of them which, in the charmof an easy, unconstrained gayety, can rival the hour of luncheon. Atbreakfast, one is too fresh; at dinner, too formal; but luncheon, likean opening manhood, is full of its own bright projects. The plans of theday have already reached a certain maturity, and fixtures have been madefor riding-parties, or phaeton drives, or flirtations in the garden. Thevery strangers who looked coldly at each other over their morning papershave shaken into a semi-intimacy, and little traits of character andtemperament, which would have been studiously shrouded in the moresolemn festivals of the day, are now displayed with a frank and fearlessconfidence. The half-toilette and the tweed coat, mutton broth and"Balmorals," seem infinitely more congenial to acquaintanceship thanthe full-blown splendor of evening dress and the grander discipline ofdinner.Irish social life permits of a practice of which I do not, whilerecording, constitute myself the advocate or the apologist,--a sortof good-tempered banter called quizzing,--a habit I scarcely believepracticable in other lands; that is, I know of no country where it couldbe carried on as harmlessly and as gracefully, where as much wit couldbe expended innocuously, as little good feeling jeopardized in thedisplay. The happiest hour of the day for such passages as these wasthat of luncheon, and it was in the very clash and clatter of the combatthat a servant announced the Attorney-General!What a damper did the name prove! Short of a bishop himself, noannouncement could have spread more terror over the younger membersof the company, embodying as it seemed to do all that could beinquisitorial, intolerant, and overbearing. Great, however, wasthe astonishment to see, instead of the stern incarnation of Crownprosecutions and arbitrary commitments, a tall, thin, slightly stoopedman, dressed in a gray shooting-jacket, and with a hat plentifullygarnished with fishing-flies. He came lightly into the room, and kissedthe hand of his hostess with a mixture of cordiality and old-fashionedgallantry that became him well."My old luck, Cobham!" said he, as he seated himself at table. "I havefished the stream all the way from the Red House to this, and never somuch as a rise to reward me."They knew you,--they knew you, Withering," chirped out the Poet, "andthey took good care not to put in an appearance, with the certainty of a'detainer.'""Ah! you here! That decanter of sherry screened you completely from myview," said Withering, whose sarcasm on his size touched the very sorestof the other's susceptibilities. "And talking of recognizances,how comes it you are here, and a large party at Lord Dunraney's allassembled to meet you?"The Poet, as not infrequent with him, had forgotten everything of thisprior engagement, and was now overwhelmed with his forgetfulness. Theladies, however, pressed eagerly around him with consolation so likecaresses, that he was speedily himself again."How natural a mistake, after all!" said the lawyer. "The old songsays,--'Tell me where beauty and wit and wineAre met, and I 'll say where I 'm asked to dine.'Ah! Tommy, yours is the profession, after all; always sure of yourretainer, and never but one brief to sustain--'T. M. versus the Heartof Woman.'""One is occasionally nonsuited, however," said the other, halfpettishly. "By the way, how was it you got that verdict for oldBarrington t'other day? Was it true that Plowden got hold of your bagby mistake?""Not only that, but he made a point for us none of us had discovered.""How historical the blunder:--'The case is classical, as I and you know;He came from Venus, but made love to Juno.'""If Peter Barrington gained his cause by it I 'm heartily rejoiced, andI wish him health and years to enjoy it." The Admiral said this with acordial good will as he drank off his glass."He's all right again," said Withering. "I left him working away witha hoe and a rake this morning, looking as hale and hearty as he did adozen years ago.""A man must have really high deserts in whose good fortune so many arewell-wishers," said Stapylton; and by the courteous tone of the remarkWithering's attention was attracted, and he speedily begged the Admiralto present him to his guest. They continued to converse together asthey arose from table, and with such common pleasure that when Witheringexpressed a hope the acquaintance might not end there, Stapylton repliedby a request that he would allow him to be his fellow-traveller toKilkenny, whither he was about to go on a regimental affair. Thearrangement was quickly made, to the satisfaction of each; and as theydrove away, while many bewailed the departure of such pleasant membersof the party, the little Poet simperingly said,--"Shall I own that my heart is relieved of a care?--Though you 'll think the confession is petty--I cannot but feel, as I look on the pair,It is 'Peebles' gone off with 'Dalgetty.'"As for the fellow-travellers, they jogged along very pleasantly on theirway, as two consummate men of the world are sure to do when they meet.For what Freemasonry equals that of two shrewd students of life? Howflippantly do they discuss each theme! how easily read each character,and unravel each motive that presents itself! What the lawyer gained bythe technical subtlety of his profession, the soldier made up for byhis wider experience of mankind. There were, besides, a variety ofexperiences to exchange. Toga could tell of much that interested the"man of war," and he, in turn, made himself extremely agreeable by hisEastern information, not to say, that he was able to give a correctversion of many Hindostanee phrases and words which the old lawyereagerly desired to acquire."All you have been telling me has a strong interest for me, CaptainStapylton," said he, as they drove into Kilkenny. "I have a case whichhas engaged my attention for years, and is likely to occupy what remainsto me of life,--a suit of which India is the scene, and Orientals figureas some of the chief actors,--so that I can scarcely say how fortunate Ifeel this chance meeting with you.""I shall deem myself greatly honored if the acquaintance does not endhere.""It shall not, if it depend upon me," said Withering, cordially. "Yousaid something of a visit you were about to make to Dublin. Will you dome a great--a very great--favor, and make my house your home while youstay? This is my address: '18 Merrion Square.' It is a bachelor's hall;and you can come and go without ceremony.""The plan is too tempting to hesitate about. I accept your invitationwith all the frankness you have given it. Meanwhile you will be my guesthere." "'That is impossible. I must start for Cork this evening." Andnow they parted,--not like men who had been strangers a few hours back,but like old acquaintances, only needing the occasion to feel as oldfriends.CHAPTER XX. AN INTERIOR AT THE DOCTOR'SWhen Captain Stapylton made his appointment to wait on Dr. Dill, he wasnot aware that the Attorney-General was expected at Cobham. No sooner,however, had he learned that fact than he changed his purpose, andintimated his intention of running up for a day to Kilkenny, to hearwhat was going on in the regiment. No regret for any disappointment hemight be giving to the village doctor, no self-reproach for the breachof an engagement--all of his own making--crossed his mind. It is,indeed, a theme for a moralist to explore, the ease with which a certainsuperiority in station can divest its possessor of all care for thesensibilities of those below him; and yet in the little household ofthe doctor that promised visit was the source of no small discomfort andtrouble. The doctor's study--the sanctum in which the interview shouldbe held--had to be dusted and smartened up. Old boots, andovercoats, and smashed driving-whips, and odd stirrup-leathers, andstable-lanterns, and garden implements had all to be banished. Thegreat table in front of the doctor's chair had also to be professionallylittered with notes and cards and periodicals, not forgetting aningenious admixture of strange instruments of torture, quaint screws,and inscrutable-looking scissors, destined, doubtless, to make many afaint heart the fainter in their dread presence. All these detailshad to be carried out in various ways through the rest of theestablishment,--in the drawing-room, wherein the great man was to beushered; in the dining-room, where he was to lunch. Upon Polly did thegreater part of these cares devolve; not alone attending to the duedisposal of chairs and sofas and tables, but to the preparation ofcertain culinary delicacies, which were to make the Captain forget thedainty luxuries of Cobham. And, in truth, there is a marvellous espritdu corps in the way a woman will fag and slave herself to make thehumble household she belongs to look its best, even to the very guestshe has least at heart; for Polly did not like Stapylton. Flatteredat first by his notice, she was offended afterwards at the sort ofconscious condescension of his manner,--a something which seemed tosay, I can be charming, positively fascinating, but don't imagine fora moment that there is anything especial in it. I captivate--just as Ifish, hunt, sketch, or shoot--to amuse myself. And with all this, howwas it he was really not a coxcomb? Was it the grave dignity of hisaddress, or the quiet state-liness of his person, or was it a certainuniformity, a keeping, that pervaded all he said or did? I am not quitesure whether all three did not contribute to this end, and make him whatthe world confessed,--a most well-bred gentleman.Polly was, in her way, a shrewd observer, and she felt that Stapylton'smanner towards her was that species of urbane condescension with which agreat master of a game deigns to play with a very humble proficient. Hemoved about the board with an assumption that said, I can checkmate youwhen I will! Now this is hard enough to bear when the pieces at stakeare stained ivory, but it is less endurable: still when they are ouremotions and our wishes. And yet with all this before her, Polly orderedand arranged and superintended and directed with an energy that nevertired, and an activity that never relaxed.As for Mrs. Dill, no similar incident in the life of Clarissa hadprepared her for the bustle and preparation she saw on every side, andshe was fairly perplexed between the thought of a seizure for rent anda fire,--casualties which, grave as they were, she felt she could meetwith Mr. Richardson beside her. The doctor himself was unusually fidgetyand anxious. Perhaps he ascribed considerable importance to this visit;perhaps he thought Polly had not been candid with him, and that, inreality, she knew more of its object than she had avowed; and so hewalked hurriedly from room to room, and out into the garden, and acrossthe road to the river's side, and once as far as the bridge, consultinghis watch, and calculating that as it now only wanted eight minutes oftwo o'clock, the arrival could scarcely be long delayed.It was on his return he entered the drawing-room and found Polly, nowplainly but becomingly dressed, seated at her work, with a seemingquietude and repose about her, strangely at variance with her latedisplay of activity. "I 've had a look down the Graigue Road," said he,"but can see nothing. You are certain he said two o'clock?""Quite certain, sir.""To be sure he might come by the river; there's water enough now for theCobham barge."She made no answer, though she half suspected some reply was expected."And of course," continued the doctor, "they'd have offered him the useof it. They seem to make a great deal of him up there.""A great deal, indeed, sir," said she; but in a voice that was a mereecho of his own."And I suspect they know why. I 'm sure they know why. People in theircondition make no mistakes about each other; and if he receives muchattention, it is because it's his due."No answer followed this speech, and he walked feverishly up and down theroom, holding his watch in his closed hand. "I have a notion you musthave mistaken him. It was not two he said.""I 'm positive it was two, sir. But it can scarcely be much past thathour now.""It is seventeen minutes past two," said he, solemnly. And then, as ifsome fresh thought had just occurred to him, asked, "Where 's Tom? Inever saw him this morning.""He 's gone out to take a walk, sir. The poor fellow is dead beat bywork, and had such a headache that I told him to go as far as the RedHouse or Snow's Mill.""And I 'll wager he did not want to be told twice. Anything for idlenesswith him!""Well, papa, he is really doing his very best now. He is not naturallyquick, and he has a bad memory, so that labor is no common toil; but hisheart is in it, and I never saw him really anxious for success before.""To go out to India, I suppose," said Dill, sneeringly, "that notableproject of the other good-for-nothing; for, except in the matter offortune, there's not much to choose between them. There 's the half-hourstriking now!""The project has done this for him, at least," said she, firmly,--"ithas given him hope!""How I like to hear about hope!" said he, with a peculiarly sarcasticbitterness. "I never knew a fellow worth sixpence that had that cantof 'hope' in his mouth! How much hope had I when I began the world! Howmuch have I now?""Don't you hope Captain Stapylton may not have forgotten hisappointment, papa?" said she, with a quick drollery, which sparkled inher eye, but brought no smile to her lips."Well, here he is at last," said Dill, as he heard the sharp click madeby the wicket of the little garden; and he started up, and rushed to thewindow. "May I never!" cried he, in horror, "if it isn't M'Cormick! Saywe're out,--that I'm at Graigue,--that I won't be home till evening!"But while he was multiplying these excuses, the old Major had caughtsight of him, and was waving his hand in salutation from below."It's too late,--it's too late!" sighed Dill, bitterly; "he sees menow,--there's no help for it!"What benevolent and benedictory expressions were muttered below hisbreath, it is not for this history to record; but so vexed and irritatedwas he, that the Major had already entered the room ere he could composehis features into even a faint show of welcome."I was down at the Dispensary," croaked out M'Cormick, "and they toldme you were not expected there to-day, and so I said, maybe he's ill,or maybe,"--and here he looked shrewdly around him,--"maybe there 'ssomething going on up at the house.""What should there be going on, as you call it?" responded Dill,angrily, for he was now at home, in presence of the family, and couldnot compound for that tone of servile acquiescence he employed onforeign service."And, faix, I believe I was right; Miss Polly isn't so smart thismorning for nothing, no more than the saving cover is off the sofa, andthe piece of gauze taken down from before the looking-glass, and the'Times' newspaper away from the rug!""Are there any other domestic changes you 'd like to remark upon, MajorM'Cormick?" said Dill, pale with rage."Indeed, yes," rejoined the other; "there 's yourself, in the elegantblack coat that I never saw since Lord Kilraney's funeral, and lookingpretty much as lively and pleasant as you did at the ceremony.""A gentleman has made an appointment with papa," broke in Polly, "andmay be here at any moment.""I know who it is," said M'Cormick, with a finger on the side of hisnose to imply intense cunning. "I know all about it.""What do you know?--what do you mean by all about it?" said Dill, withan eagerness he could not repress."Just as much as yourselves,--there now! Just as much as yourselves!"said he, sententiously."But apparently, Major, you know far more," said Polly."Maybe I do, maybe I don't; but I 'll tell you one thing, Dill, foryour edification, and mind me if I 'm not right: you 're all mistakenabout him, every one of ye!""Whom are you talking of?" asked the doctor, sternly."Just the very man you mean yourself, and no other! Oh, you need n'tfuss and fume, I don't want to pry into your family secrets. Not thatthey 'll be such secrets tomorrow or next day,--the whole town will betalking of them,--but as an old friend that could, maybe, give a word ofadvice--""Advice about what? Will you just tell me about what?" cried Dill, nowbursting with anger."I 've done now. Not another word passes my lips about it from thisminute. Follow your own road, and see where it will lead ye?""Cannot you understand, Major M'Cormick, that we are totally unable toguess what you allude to? Neither papa nor I have the very faintest clewto your meaning, and if you really desire to serve us, you will speakout plainly.""Not another syllable, if I sat here for two years!"The possibility of such an infliction seemed so terrible to poor Pollythat she actually shuddered as she heard it."Is n't that your mother I see sitting up there, with all the fineribbons in her cap?" whispered M'Cormick, as he pointed to a small roomwhich opened off an angle of the larger one. "That 's 'the boodoo,' isn't it?" said he, with a grin. This, I must inform my reader, was theM'Cormick for "boudoir." "Well, I'll go and pay my respects to her."So little interest did Mrs. Dill take in the stir and movement aroundher that the Major utterly failed in his endeavors to torture her by allhis covert allusions and ingeniously drawn inferences. No matter whathints he dropped or doubts he suggested, she knew "Clarissa" wouldcome well out of her trials; and beyond a little unmeaning simper, and amuttered "To be sure," "No doubt of it," and, "Why not?" M'Cormick couldobtain nothing from her.Meanwhile, in the outer room the doctor continued to stride up anddown with impatience, while Polly sat quietly working on, not the lessanxious, perhaps, though her peaceful air betokened a mind at rest."That must be a boat, papa," said she, without lifting her head, "thathas just come up to the landing-place. I heard the plash of the oars,and now all is still again.""You 're right; so it is!" cried he, as he stopped before the window."But how is this! That 's a lady I see yonder, and a gentleman alongwith her. That's not Stapylton, surely!""He is scarcely so tall," said she, rising to look out, "but not veryunlike him. But the lady, papa,--the lady is Miss Barrington."Bad as M'Cormick's visit was, it was nothing to the possibility of suchan advent as this, and Dill's expressions of anger were now neithermeasured nor muttered."This is to be a day of disasters. I see it well, and no help for it,"exclaimed he, passionately. "If there was one human being I 'd hate tocome here this morning, it's that old woman! She's never civil. She'snot commonly decent in her manner towards me in her own house, and whatshe 'll be in mine, is clean beyond me to guess. That's herself! Thereshe goes! Look at her remarking,--I see, she's remarking on the weedsover the beds, and the smashed paling. She's laughing too! Oh, to besure, it's fine laughing at people that's poor; and she might knowsomething of that same herself. I know who the man is now. That 'sthe Colonel, who came to the 'Fisherman's Home' on the night of theaccident.""It would seem we are to hold a levee to-day," said Polly, giving a veryfleeting glance at herself in the glass. And now a knock came to thedoor, and the man who acted gardener and car-driver and valet to thedoctor announced that Miss Barrington and Colonel Hunter were below."Show them up," said Dill, with the peremptory voice of one orderinga very usual event, and intentionally loud enough to be heard belowstairs.If Polly's last parting with Miss Barrington gave little promise ofpleasure to their next meeting, the first look she caught of the oldlady on entering the room dispelled all uneasiness on that score. MissDinah entered with a pleasing smile, and presented her friend, ColonelHunter, as one come to thank the doctor for much kindness to his youngsubaltern. "Whom, by the way," added he, "we thought to find here. It isonly since we landed that we learned he had left the inn for Kilkenny."While the Colonel continued to talk to the doctor, Miss Dinah had seatedherself On the sofa, with Polly at her side."My visit this morning is to you," said she. "I have come to ask yourforgiveness. Don't interrupt me, child; your forgiveness was the veryword I used. I was very rude to you t' other morning, and being all inthe wrong,--like most people in such circumstances,--I was very angrywith the person who placed me so.""But, my dear madam," said Polly, "you had such good reason to supposeyou were in the right that this amende on your part is far toogenerous.""It is not at all generous,--it is simply just. I was sorely vexed withyou about that stupid wager, which you were very wrong to have had anyshare in; vexed with your father, vexed with your brother,--not that Ibelieved his counsel would have been absolute wisdom,--and I was evenvexed with my young friend Conyers, because he had not the bad tasteto be as angry with you as I was. When I was a young lady," said she,bridling up, and looking at once haughty and defiant, "no man would havedared to approach me with such a proposal as complicity in a wager. ButI am told that my ideas are antiquated, and the world has grown muchwiser since that day.""Nay, madam," said Polly, "but there is another difference that yourpoliteness has prevented you from appreciating. I mean the difference instation between Miss Barrington and Polly Dill."It was a well-directed shot, and told powerfully, for Miss Barrington'seyes became clouded, and she turned her head away, while she pressedPolly's hand within her own with a cordial warmth. "Ah!" said she,feelingly, "I hope there are many points of resemblance between us. Ihave always tried to be a good sister. I know well what you have been toyour brother."A very jolly burst of laughter from the inner room, where Hunter hadalready penetrated, broke in upon them, and the merry tones of his voicewere heard saying, "Take my word for it, madam, nobody could spare timenowadays to make love in nine volumes. Life 's too short for it. Ask myold brother-officer here if he could endure such a thirty years' war; orrather let me turn here for an opinion. What does your daughter say onthe subject?""Ay, ay," croaked out M'Cormick. "Marry in haste--""Or repent that you did n't. That 's the true reading of the adage.""The Major would rather apply leisure to the marriage, and make therepentance come--""As soon as possible afterwards," said Miss Dinah, tartly."Faix, I 'll do better still; I won't provoke the repentance at all.""Oh, Major, is it thus you treat me?" said Polly, affecting to wipe hereyes. "Are my hopes to be dashed thus cruelly?"But the doctor, who knew how savagely M'Cormick could resent even themost harmless jesting, quickly interposed, with a question whether Pollyhad thought of ordering luncheon.It is but fair to Dr. Dill to record the bland but careless way heordered some entertainment for his visitors. He did it like the lord ofa well-appointed household, who, when he said "serve," they served.It was in the easy confidence of one whose knowledge told him that thetrain was laid, and only waited for the match to explode it."May I have the honor, dear lady?" said he, offering his arm to MissBarrington.Now, Miss Dinah had just observed that she had various small mattersto transact in the village, and was about to issue forth for theirperformance; but such is the force of a speciality, that she could nottear herself away without a peep into the dining-room, and a glance, atleast, at arrangements that appeared so magically conjured up. Nor wasDill insensible to the astonishment expressed in her face as her eyesranged over the table."If your daughter be your housekeeper, Dr. Dill," said she, in awhisper, "I must give her my very heartiest approbation. These arematters I can speak of with authority, and I pronounce her worthy ofhigh commendation.""What admirable salmon cutlets!" cried the Colonel. "Why, doctor, thesetell of a French cook.""There she is beside you, the French cook!" said the Major, with amalicious twinkle."Yes," said Polly, smiling, though with a slight flush on her face, "ifMajor M'Cormick will be indiscreet enough to tell tales, let us hopethey will never be more damaging in their import.""And do you say--do you mean to tell me that this curry is yourhandiwork? Why, this is high art.""Oh, she 's artful enough, if it 's that ye 're wanting," muttered theMajor.Miss Barrington, having apparently satisfied the curiosity she feltabout the details of the doctor's housekeeping, now took her leave, not,however, without Dr. Dill offering his arm on one side, while Polly,with polite observance, walked on the other."Look at that now," whispered the Major. "They 're as much afraid ofthat old woman as if she were the Queen of Sheba! And all because shewas once a fine lady living at Barrington Hall.""Here's their health for it," said the Colonel, filling his glass,--"andin a bumper too! By the way," added he, looking around, "does not Mrs.Dill lunch with us?""Oh, she seldom comes to her meals! She's a little touched here." And helaid his finger on the centre of his forehead. "And, indeed, no wonderif she is." The benevolent Major was about to give some details ofsecret family history, when the doctor and his daughter returned to theroom.The Colonel ate and talked untiringly. He was delighted with everything,and charmed with himself for his good luck in chancing upon suchagreeable people. He liked the scenery, the village, the beetroot salad,the bridge, the pickled oysters, the evergreen oaks before the door.He was not astonished Conyers should linger on such a spot; and then itsuddenly occurred to him to ask when he had left the village, and how.The doctor could give no information on the point, and while he wassurmising one thing and guessing another, M'Cormick whispered in theColonel's ear, "Maybe it's a delicate point. How do you know what wenton with--" And a significant nod towards Polly finished the remark."I wish I heard what Major M'Cormick has just said," said Polly."And it is exactly what I cannot repeat to you.""I suspected as much. So that my only request will be that you neverremember it.""Isn't she sharp!--sharp as a needle!" chimed in the Major.Checking, and not without some effort, a smart reprimand on the lastspeaker, the Colonel looked hastily at his watch, and arose from table."Past three o'clock, and to be in Kilkenny by six.""Do you want a car? There's one of Rice's men now in the village; shallI get him for you?""Would you really do me the kindness?" While the Major bustled offon his errand, the Colonel withdrew the doctor inside the recess of awindow. "I had a word I wished to say to you in private, Dr. Dill; butit must really be in private,--you understand me?""Strictly confidential, Colonel Hunter," said Dill, bowing."It is this: a young officer of mine, Lieutenant Conyers, has writtento me a letter mentioning a plan he had conceived for the futureadvancement of your son, a young gentleman for whom, it would appear,he had formed a sudden but strong attachment. His project was, as Iunderstand it, to accredit him to his father with such a letter as mustsecure the General's powerful influence in his behalf. Just the sort ofthing a warm-hearted young fellow would think of doing for a friend hedetermined to serve, but exactly the kind of proceeding that might havea very unfortunate ending. I can very well imagine, from my own shortexperience here, that your son's claims to notice and distinction may bethe very highest; I can believe readily what very little extraneous aidhe would require to secure his success; but you and I are old men of theworld, and are bound to look at things cautiously, and to ask, 'Is thisscheme a very safe one?' 'Will General Conyers enter as heartily intoit as his son?' 'Will the young surgeon be as sure to captivate the oldsoldier as the young one?' In a word, would it be quite wise to set aman's whole venture in life on such a cast, and is it the sort of riskthat, with your experience of the world, you would sanction?"It was evident, from the pause the Colonel left after these words, thathe expected Dill to say something; but, with the sage reserve of hisorder, the doctor stood still, and never uttered a syllable. Let us bejust to his acuteness, he never did take to the project from the first;he thought ill of it, in every way, but yet he did not relinquish theidea of making the surrender of it "conditional;" and so he slowlyshook his head with an air of doubt, and smoothly rolled his handsone over the other, as though to imply a moment of hesitation andindecision."Yes, yes," muttered he, talking only to himself,--"disappointment, tobe sure!--very great disappointment too! And his heart so set upon it,that's the hardship.""Naturally enough," broke in Hunter, hastily. "Who would n't bedisappointed under such circumstances? Better even that, however,than utter failure later on." The doctor sighed, but over what precisecalamity was not so clear; and Hunter continued,--"Now, as I have made this communication to you in strictest confidence,and not in any concert with Conyers, I only ask you to accept the viewas a mere matter of opinion. I think you would be wrong to suffer yourson to engage in such a venture. That's all I mean by my interference,and I have done."Dill was, perhaps, scarcely prepared for the sudden summing up of theColonel, and looked strangely puzzled and embarrassed."Might I talk the matter over with my daughter Polly? She has a goodhead for one so little versed in the world.""By all means. It is exactly what I would have proposed. Or, betterstill, shall I repeat what I have just told you?""Do so," said the doctor, "for I just remember Miss Barrington will callhere in a few moments for that medicine I have ordered for her brother,and which is not yet made up.""Give me five minutes of your time and attention, Miss Dill," saidHunter, "on a point for which your father has referred me to yourcounsel.""To mine?""Yes," said he, smiling at her astonishment. "We want your quickfaculties to come to the aid of our slow ones. And here's the case." Andin a few sentences he put the matter before her, as he had done to herfather. While he thus talked, they had strolled out into the garden, andwalked slowly side by side down one of the alleys."Poor Tom!--poor fellow!" was all that Polly said, as she listened; butonce or twice her handkerchief was raised to her eyes, and her chestheaved heavily."I am heartily sorry for him--that is, if his heart be bent on it--if hereally should have built upon the scheme already.""Of course he has, sir. You don't suppose that in such lives as oursthese are common incidents? If we chance upon a treasure, or fancy thatwe have, once in a whole existence, it is great fortune.""It was a brief, a very brief acquaintance,--a few hours, I believe.The--What was that? Did you hear any one cough there?""No, sir; we are quite alone. There is no one in the garden butourselves.""So that, as I was saying, the project could scarcely have taken a verydeep root, and--and--in fact, better the first annoyance than a mistakethat should give its color to a whole lifetime. I'm certain I heard astep in that walk yonder.""No, sir; we are all alone.""I half wish I had never come on this same errand. I have done anungracious thing, evidently very ill, and with the usual fate of thosewho say disagreeable things, I am involved in the disgrace I came toavert.""But I accept your view.""There! I knew there was some one there!" said Hunter, springing acrossa bed and coming suddenly to the side of M'Cormick, who was affecting tobe making a nosegay."The car is ready at the door, Colonel," said he, in some confusion."Maybe you 'd oblige me with a seat as far as Lyrath?""Yes, yes; of course. And how late it is!" cried he, looking at hiswatch. "Time does fly fast in these regions, no doubt of it.""You see, Miss Polly, you have made the Colonel forget himself," saidM'Cormick, maliciously."Don't be severe on an error so often your own, Major M'Cormick," saidshe, fiercely, and turned away into the house.The Colonel, however, was speedily at her side, and in an earnest voicesaid: "I could hate myself for the impression I am leaving behind mehere. I came with those excellent intentions which so often make aman odious, and I am going away with those regrets which follow allfailures; but I mean to come back again one of these days, and erase, ifI can, the ill impression.""One who has come out of his way to befriend those who had no claim uponhis kindness can have no fear for the estimation he will be held in;for my part, I thank you heartily, even though I do not exactly see thedirect road out of this difficulty.""Let me write to you. One letter--only one," said Hunter.But M'Cormick had heard the request, and she flushed up with anger atthe malicious glee his face exhibited."You 'll have to say my good-byes for me to your father, for I am sorelypressed for time; and, even as it is, shall be late for my appointmentin Kilkenny." And before Polly could do more than exchange his cordialshake hands, he was gone.CHAPTER XXI. DARK TIDINGSIf I am not wholly without self-reproach when I bring my reader intouncongenial company, and make him pass time with Major M'Cormick he hadfar rather bestow upon a pleasanter companion, I am sustained by thefact--unpalatable fact though it be--that the highway of life is notalways smooth, nor its banks flowery, and that, as an old Derry womanonce remarked to me, "It takes a' kind o' folk to mak' a world."Now, although Colonel Hunter did drive twelve weary miles of road withthe Major for a fellow-traveller,--thanks to that unsocial conveniencycalled an Irish jaunting-car,--they rode back to back, and conversedbut little. One might actually believe that unpopular men grow to feela sort of liking for their unpopularity, and become at length delightedwith the snubbings they meet with, as though an evidence of the amountof that discomfort they can scatter over the world at large; just, infact, as a wasp or a scorpion might have a sort of triumphant joy in theconsciousness of its power for mischief, and exult in the terror causedby its vicinity."Splendid road--one of the best I ever travelled on," said the Colonel,after about ten miles, during which he smoked on without a word."Why wouldn't it be, when they can assess the county for it? They're onthe Grand Jury, and high up, all about here," croaked out the Major."It is a fine country, and abounds in handsome places." "And wellmortgaged, too, the most of them." "You 'd not see better farming thanthat in Norfolk, cleaner wheat or neater drills; in fact, one mightimagine himself in England.""So he might, for the matter of taxes. I don't see much difference.""Why don't you smoke? Things look pleasanter through the blue haze of agood Havannah," said Hunter, smiling."I don't want them to look pleasanter than they are," was the dryrejoinder.Whether Hunter did or did not, he scarcely liked his counsellor, and,re-lighting a cigar, he turned his back once more on him."I'm one of those old-fashioned fellows," continued the Major, leaningover towards his companion, "who would rather see things as they are,not as they might be; and when I remarked you awhile ago so pleased withthe elegant luncheon and Miss Polly's talents for housekeeping, I waslaughing to myself over it all.""How do you mean? What did you laugh at?" said Hunter, half fiercely."Just at the way you were taken in, that's all.""Taken in?--taken in? A very strange expression for an hospitablereception and a most agreeable visit.""Well, it's the very word for it, after all; for as to the hospitablereception, it was n't meant for us, but for that tall Captain,--thedark-complexioned fellow,--Staples, I think they call him.""Captain Stapylton?""Yes, that's the man. He ordered Healey's car to take him over here; andI knew when the Dills sent over to Mrs. Brierley for a loan of the twocut decanters and the silver cruet-stand, something was up; and so Istrolled down, by way of--to reconnoitre the premises, and see what oldDill was after.""Well, and then?""Just that I saw it all,--the elegant luncheon, and the two bottles ofwine, and the ginger cordials, all laid out for the man that nevercame; for it would seem he changed his mind about it, and went back tohead-quarters.""You puzzle me more and more at every word. What change of mind do youallude to? What purpose do you infer he had in coming over here to-day?"The only answer M'Cormick vouchsafed to this was by closing one eye andputting his finger significantly to the tip of his nose, while he said,"Catch a weasel asleep!""I more than suspect," said Hunter, sternly, "that this half-pay lifeworks badly for a man's habits, and throws him upon very petty andcontemptible modes of getting through his time. What possible businesscould it be of yours to inquire why Stapylton came, or did not come hereto-day, no more than for the reason of my visit?""Maybe I could guess that, too, if I was hard pushed," said M'Cormick,whose tone showed no unusual irritation from the late rebuke. "I was inthe garden all the time, and heard everything.""Listened to what I was saying to Miss Dill!" cried Hunter, whose voiceof indignation could not now be mistaken."Every word of it," replied the unabashed Major. "I heard all you saidabout a short acquaintance--a few hours you called it--but that yourheart was bent upon it, all the same. And then you went on about India;what an elegant place it was, and the fine pay and the great allowances.And ready enough she was to believe it all, for I suppose she wassworn at Highgate, and would n't take the Captain if she could get theColonel."By this time, and not an instant earlier, it flashed upon Hunter's mindthat M'Cormick imagined he had overheard a proposal of marriage; andso amused was he by the blunder, that he totally drowned his anger in ahearty burst of laughter."I hope that, as an old brother-officer, you 'll be discreet, at allevents," said he, at last. "You have not come by the secret quitelegitimately, and I trust you will preserve it.""My hearing is good, and my eyesight too, and I mean to use them both aslong as they 're spared to me.""It was your tongue that I referred to," said Hunter, more gravely."Ay, I know it was," said the Major, crankily. "My tongue will take careof itself also.""In order to make its task the easier, then," said Hunter, speaking ina slow and serious voice, "let me tell you that your eaves-droppinghas, for once at least, misled you. I made no proposal, such as yoususpected, to Miss Dill. Nor did she give me the slightest encouragementto do so. The conversation you so unwarrantably and imperfectlyoverheard had a totally different object, and I am not at all sorry youshould not have guessed it. So much for the past. Now one word for thefuture. Omit my name, and all that concerns me, from the narrative withwhich you amuse your friends, or, take my word for it, you 'll haveto record more than you have any fancy for. This is strictly betweenourselves; but if you have a desire to impart it, bear in mind that Ishall be at my quarters in Kilkenny till Tuesday next.""You may spend your life there, for anything I care," said the Major."Stop, Billy; pull up. I'll get down here." And shuffling off the car,he muttered a "Good-day" without turning his head, and bent his stepstowards a narrow lane that led from the high-road.[Illustration: 242]"Is this the place they call Lyrath?" asked the Colonel of the driver."No, your honor. We're a good four miles from it yet."The answer showed Hunter that his fellow-traveller had departed inanger; and such was the generosity of his nature, he found it hard notto overtake him and make his peace with him."After all," thought he, "he 's a crusty old fellow, and has huggedhis ill-temper so long, it may be more congenial to him now than apleasanter humor." And he turned his mind to other interests that moreclosely touched him. Nor was he without cares,--heavier ones, too, thanhis happy nature had ever yet been called to deal with. There arefew more painful situations in life than to find our advancement--thelong-wished and strived-for promotion--achieved at the cost of somedearly loved friend; to know that our road to fortune had led us acrossthe fallen figure of an old comrade, and that he who would have been thefirst to hail our success is already bewailing his own defeat. This wasHunter's lot at the present moment. He had been sent for to hear of amarvellous piece of good-fortune. His name and character, well known inIndia, had recommended him for an office of high trust,--the PoliticalResident of a great native court; a position not alone of power andinfluence, but as certain to secure, and within a very few years, aconsiderable fortune. It was the Governor-General who had made choiceof him; and the Prince of Wales, in the brief interview he accordedhim, was delighted with his frank and soldierlike manner, his naturalcheerfulness, and high spirit. "We 're not going to unfrock you,Hunter," said he, gayly, in dismissing him. "You shall have yourmilitary rank, and all the steps of your promotion. We only make you acivilian till you have saved some lacs of rupees, which is what I hearyour predecessor has forgotten to do."It was some time before Hunter, overjoyed as he was, even bethought himof asking who that predecessor was. What was his misery when he heardthe name of Ormsby Conyers, his oldest, best friend; the man at whosetable he had sat for years, whose confidence he had shared, whose heartwas open to him to its last secret! "No," said he, "this is impossible.Advancement at such a price has no temptation for me. I will not acceptit" He wrote his refusal at once, not assigning any definite reasons,but declaring that, after much thought and consideration, he haddecided the post was one he could not accept of. The Secretary, inwhose province the affairs of India lay, sent for him, and, after muchpressing and some ingenious cross-questioning, got at his reasons."These may be all reasonable scruples on your part," said he, "but theywill avail your friend nothing. Conyers must go; for his own interestand character's sake, he must come home and meet the charges madeagainst him, and which, from their very contradictions, we all hope tosee him treat triumphantly: some alleging that he has amassed untoldwealth; others that it is, as a ruined man, he has involved himself inthe intrigues of the native rulers. All who know him say that at thefirst whisper of a charge against him he will throw up his post and cometo England to meet his accusers. And now let me own to you that it isthe friendship in which he held you lay one of the suggestions for yourchoice. We all felt that if a man ill-disposed or ungenerously minded toConyers should go out to Agra, numerous petty and vexatious accusationsmight be forthcoming; the little local injuries and pressure, so sure tobeget grudges, would all rise up as charges, and enemies to the fallenman spring up in every quarter. It is as a successor, then, you can bestserve your friend." I need not dwell on the force and ingenuity withwhich this view was presented; enough that I say it was successful, andHunter returned to Ireland to take leave of his regiment, and preparefor a speedy departure to India.Having heard, in a brief note from young Conyers, his intentionsrespecting Tom Dill, Hunter had hastened off to prevent the possibilityof such a scheme being carried out. Not wishing, however, to divulge thecircumstances of his friend's fortune, he had in his interview with thedoctor confined himself to arguments on the score of prudence. His nextcharge was to break to Fred the tidings of his father's troubles, andit was an office he shrunk from with a coward's fear. With every milehe went his heart grew heavier. The more he thought over the matter themore difficult it appeared. To treat the case lightly, might savor ofheartlessness and levity; to approach it more seriously, might seem aneedless severity. Perhaps, too, Conyers might have written to his son;he almost hoped he had, and that the first news of disaster should notcome from him.That combination of high-heartedness and bashfulness, a blended temerityand timidity,--by no means an uncommon temperament,--renders a man'sposition in the embarrassments of life one of downright suffering. Thereare operators who feel the knife more sensitively than the patients. Fewknow what torments such men conceal under a manner of seeming slap-dashand carelessness. Hunter was of this order, and would, any day of hislife, far rather have confronted a real peril than met a contingencythat demanded such an address. It was, then, with a sense of relief helearned, on arrival at the barracks, that Conyers had gone out fora walk, so that there was a reprieve at least of a few hours of thepenalty that overhung him.The trumpet-call for the mess had just sounded as Conyers gained thedoor of the Colonel's quarters, and Hunter taking Fred's arm, theycrossed the barrack-square together."I have a great deal to say to you, Conyers," said he, hurriedly; "partof it unpleasant,--none of it, indeed, very gratifying--""I know you are going to leave us, sir," said Fred, who perceived themore than common emotion in the other's manner. "And for myself, I own Ihave no longer any desire to remain in the regiment. I might go further,and say no more zest for the service. It was through your friendship forme I learned to curb many and many promptings to resistance, and whenyou go--""I am very sorry,--very, very sorry to leave you all," said Hunter,with a broken voice. "It is not every man that proudly can point toseven-and-twenty-years' service in a regiment without one incident tobreak the hearty cordiality that bound us. We had no bickerings, nopetty jealousies amongst us. If a man joined us who wanted partisanshipand a set, he soon found it better to exchange. I never expect againto lead the happy life I have here, and I 'd rather have led our boldsquadrons in the field than have been a General of Division." Who couldhave believed that he, whose eyes ran over, as he spoke these brokenwords, was, five minutes after, the gay and rattling Colonel hisofficers always saw him, full of life, spirit, and animation, jocularlyalluding to his speedy departure, and gayly speculating on thecomparisons that would be formed between himself and his successor? "I'mleaving him the horses in good condition," said he; "and when Hargravelearns to give the word of command above a whisper, and Eyreton can ridewithout a backboard, he 'll scarcely report you for inefficiency." Itis fair to add, that the first-mentioned officer had a voice like abassoon, and the second was the beau-ideal of dragoon horsemanship.It would not have consisted with military etiquette to have askedthe Colonel the nature of his promotion, nor as to what new sphere ofservice he was called. Even the old Major, his contemporary, dared nothave come directly to the question; and while all were eager to hearit, the utmost approach was by an insinuation or an innuendo. Hunter wasknown for no quality more remarkably than for his outspoken frankness,and some surprise was felt that in his returning thanks for his healthbeing drank, not a word should escape him on this point; but the anxietywas not lessened by the last words he spoke. "It may be, it is more thanlikely, I shall never see the regiment again; but the sight of a hussarjacket or a scarlet busby will bring you all back to my memory, and youmay rely on it, that whether around the mess-table or the bivouac firemy heart will be with you."Scarcely had the cheer that greeted the words subsided, when a deepvoice from the extreme end of the table said,--"If only a new-comer in the regiment, Colonel Hunter, I am too proudof my good fortune not to associate myself with the feelings of mycomrades, and, while partaking of their deep regrets, I feel it a dutyto contribute, if in my power, by whatever may lighten the grief of ourloss. Am I at liberty to do so? Have I your free permission, I mean?""I am fairly puzzled by your question, Captain Stapylton. I have notthe very vaguest clew to your meaning, but, of course, you have mypermission to mention whatever you deem proper.""It is a toast I would propose, sir.""By all means. The thing is not very regular, perhaps, but we are notexactly remarkable for regularity this evening. Fill, gentlemen, forCaptain Stapylton's toast!""Few words will propose it," said Stapylton. "We have just drank ColonelHunter's health with all the enthusiasm that befits the toast, but indoing so our tribute has been paid to the past; of the present and thefuture we have taken no note whatever, and it is to these I would nowrecall you. I say, therefore, bumpers to the health, happiness, andsuccess of Major-General Hunter, Political Resident and Minister at theCourt of Agra!""No, no!" cried young Conyers, loudly, "this is a mistake. It is myfather--it is Lieutenant-General Conyers--who resides at Agra. Am I notright, sir?" cried he, turning to the Colonel.But Hunter's face, pale as death even to the lips, and the agitationwith which he grasped Fred's hand, so overcame the youth that with asudden cry he sprang from his seat, and rushed out of the room. Hunteras quickly followed him; and now all were grouped around Stapylton,eagerly questioning and inquiring what his tidings might mean."The old story, gentlemen,--the old story, with which we are all more orless familiar in this best of all possible worlds: General Huntergoes out in honor, and General Conyers comes home in--well, under acloud,--of course one that he is sure and certain to dispel. Iconclude the Colonel would rather have had his advancement under othercircumstances; but in this game of leap-frog that we call life, we mustoccasionally jump over our friends as well as our enemies.""How and where did you get the news?""It came to me from town. I heard it this morning, and of course Iimagined that the Colonel had told it to Conyers, whom it so intimatelyconcerned. I hope I may not have been indiscreet in what I meant as acompliment."None cared to offer their consolings to one so fully capable ofsupplying the commodity to himself, and the party broke up in twos orthrees, moodily seeking their own quarters, and brooding gloomily overwhat they had just witnessed.CHAPTER XXII. LEAVING HOMEI will ask my reader now to turn for a brief space to the "Fisherman'sHome," which is a scene of somewhat unusual bustle. The Barringtons arepreparing for a journey, and old Peter's wardrobe has been displayed forinspection along a hedge of sweet-brier in the garden,--an arrangementdevised by the genius of Darby, who passes up and down, with anexpression of admiration on his face, the sincerity of which could notbe questioned. A more reflective mind than his might have been carriedaway, at the sight to thoughts of the strange passages in the latehistory of Ireland, so curiously typified in that motley display.There, was the bright green dress-coat of Daly's club, recalling days ofpolitical excitement, and all the plottings and cabals of a once famousopposition. There was, in somewhat faded splendor it must be owned, acourt suit of the Duke of Portland's day, when Irish gentlemen were asgorgeous as the courtiers of Versailles. Here came a grand colonel'suniform, when Barrington commanded a regiment of Volunteers; and yonderlay a friar's frock and cowl, relics of those "attic nights" with theMonks of the Screw, and recalling memories of Avonmore and Curran,and Day and Parsons; and with them were mixed hunting-coats, andshooting-jackets, and masonic robes, and "friendly brother" emblems,and long-waisted garments, and swallow-tailed affectations of all shadesand tints,--reminders of a time when Buck Whalley was the eccentric, andLord Llandaff the beau of Irish society. I am not certain that MonmouthStreet would have endorsed Darby's sentiment as he said, "There wasclothes there for a king on his throne!" but it was an honestly utteredspeech, and came out of the fulness of an admiring heart, and althoughin truth he was nothing less than an historian, he was forcibly struckby the thought that Ireland must have been a grand country to live in,in those old days when men went about their ordinary avocations in suchsplendor as he saw there.[Illustration: 252]Nor was Peter Barrington himself an unmoved spectator of these oldremnants of the past Old garments, like old letters, bring oftentimesvery forcible memories of a long ago; and as he turned over thepurple-stained flap of a waistcoat, he bethought him of a night atDaly's, when, in returning thanks for his health, his shaking hand hadspilled that identical glass of Burgundy; and in the dun-colored tingeof a hunting-coat he remembered the day he had plunged into the Noreat Corrig O'Neal, himself and the huntsman, alone of all the field, tofollow the dogs!"Take them away, Darby, take them away; they only set me a-thinkingabout the pleasant companions of my early life. It was in that suitthere I moved the amendment in '82, when Henry Grattan crossed over andsaid, 'Barrington will lead us here, as he does in the hunting-field.'Do you see that peach-colored waistcoat? It was Lady Caher embroideredevery stitch of it with her own hands, for me.""Them 's elegant black satin breeches," said Darby, whose eyes ofcovetousness were actually rooted on the object of his desire."I never wore them," said Barrington, with a sigh. "I got them for aduel with Mat Fortescue, but Sir Toby Blake shot him that morning. PoorMat!""And I suppose you'll never wear them now. You couldn't bear the sightthen," said Darby, insinuatingly."Most likely not," said Barrington, as he turned away with a heavy sigh.Darby sighed also, but not precisely in the same spirit.Let me passingly remark that the total unsuitability to his conditionof any object seems rather to enhance its virtue in the eyes of a lowerIrishman, and a hat or a coat which he could not, by any possibility,wear in public, might still be to him things to covet and desire."What is the meaning of all this rag fair?" cried Miss Barrington, asshe suddenly came in front of the exposed wardrobe. "You are not surelymaking any selections from these tawdry absurdities, brother, for yourjourney?"[Illustration: 252]"Well, indeed," said Barrington, with a droll twinkle of his eye, "itwas a point that Darby and I were discussing as you came up. Darbyopines that to make a suitable impression upon the Continent, I must notdespise the assistance of dress, and he inclines much to that Corbeaucoat with the cherry-colored lining.""If Darby 's an ass, brother, I don't imagine it is a good reason toconsult him," said she, angrily. "Put all that trash where you found it.Lay out your master's black clothes and the gray shooting-coat, see thathis strong boots are in good repair, and get a serviceable lock on thatvalise."It was little short of magic the spell these few and distinctly utteredwords seemed to work on Darby, who at once descended from a realm ofspeculation and scheming to the commonplace world of duty and obedience."I really wonder how you let yourself be imposed on, brother, by theassumed simplicity of that shrewd fellow.""I like it, Dinah, I positively like it," said he, with a smile. "Iwatch him playing the game with a pleasure almost as great as hisown; and as I know that the stakes are small, I 'm never vexed at hiswinning.""But you seem to forget the encouragement this impunity suggests.""Perhaps it does, Dinah; and very likely his little rogueries areas much triumphs to him as are all the great political intrigues theglories of some grand statesman.""Which means that you rather like to be cheated," said she, scoffingly."When the loss is a mere trifle, I don't always think it ill laid out.""And I," said she, resolutely, "so far from participating in yoursentiment, feel it to be an insult and an outrage. There is a sense ofinferiority attached to the position of a dupe that would drive me toany reprisals.""I always said it; I always said it," cried he, laughing. "The women ofour family monopolized all the com-bativeness."Miss Barrington's eyes sparkled, and her cheek glowed, and she lookedlike one stung to the point of a very angry rejoinder, when by an effortshe controlled her passion, and, taking a letter from her pocket, sheopened it, and said, "This is from Withering. He has managed to obtainall the information we need for our journey. We are to sail for Ostendby the regular packet, two of which go every week from Dover. Fromthence there are stages or canal-boats to Bruges and Brussels, cheapand commodious, he says. He gives us the names of two hotels, one ofwhich--the 'Lamb,' at Brussels--he recommends highly; and the Pension ofa certain Madame Ochteroogen, at Namur, will, he opines, suit us betterthan an inn. In fact, this letter is a little road book, with theexpenses marked down, and we can quietly count the cost of our venturebefore we make it.""I 'd rather not, Dinah. The very thought of a limit is torture to me.Give me bread and water every day, if you like, but don't rob me of thenotion that some fine day I am to be regaled with beef and pudding.""I don't wonder that we have come to beggary," said she, passionately."I don't know what fortune and what wealth could compensate for atemperament like yours.""You may be right, Dinah. It may go far to make a man squander hissubstance, but take my word for it, it will help him to bear up underthe loss."If Barrington could have seen the gleam of affection that filled hissister's eyes, he would have felt what love her heart bore him; but hehad stooped down to take a caterpillar off a flower, and did not markit."Withering has seen young Conyers," she continued, as her eyes ran overthe letter "He called upon him." Barrington made no rejoinder, thoughshe waited for one. "The poor lad was in great affliction; somedistressing news from India--of what kind Withering could not guess--hadjust reached him, and he appeared overwhelmed by it.""He is very young for sorrow," said Barrington, feelingly."Just what Withering said;" and she read out, "'When I told him thatI had come to make an amende for the reception he had met with at thecottage, he stopped me at once, and said, "Great grief s are the cureof small ones, and you find me under a very heavy affliction. Tell MissBarrington that I have no other memories of the 'Fisherman's Home' thanof all her kindness towards me."'""Poor boy!" said Barrington, with emotion. "And how did Withering leavehim?""Still sad and suffering. Struggling too, Withering thought, betweena proud attempt to conceal his grief and an ardent impulse to tell allabout it 'Had you been there,' he writes, 'you'd have had the wholestory; but I saw that he could n't stoop to open his heart to a man.'""Write to him, Dinah. Write and ask him down here for a couple of days.""You forget that we are to leave this the day after tomorrow, brother.""So I did. I forgot it completely. Well, what if he were to come for oneday? What if you were to say come over and wish us good-bye?""It is so like a man and a man's selfishness never to consider adomestic difficulty," said she, tartly. "So long as a house has a roofover it, you fancy it may be available for hospitalities. You never takeinto account the carpets to be taken up, and the beds that are takendown, the plate-chest that is packed, and the cellar that is walled up.You forget, in a word, that to make that life you find so very easy,some one else must pass an existence full of cares and duties.""There 's not a doubt of it, Dinah. There 's truth and reason in everyword you 've said.""I will write to him if you like, and say that we mean to be at home byan early day in October, and that if he is disposed to see how our woodslook in autumn, we will be well pleased to have him for our guest.""Nothing could be better. Do so, Dinah. I owe the young fellow areparation, and I shall not have an easy conscience till I make it.""Ah, brother Peter, if your moneyed debts had only given you one-halfthe torment of your moral ones, what a rich man you might have beento-day!"Long after his sister had gone away and left him, Peter Barringtoncontinued to muse over this speech. He felt it, felt it keenly too, butin no bitterness of spirit.Like most men of a lax and easy temper, he could mete out to himself thesame merciful measure he accorded to others, and be as forgiving to hisown faults as to theirs. "I suppose Dinah is right, though," said he tohimself. "I never did know that sensitive irritability under debt whichinsures solvency. And whenever a man can laugh at a dun, he is prettysure to be on the high-road to bankruptcy! Well, well, it is somewhatlate to try and reform, but I'll do my best!" And thus comforted, he setabout tying up fallen rose-trees and removing noxious insects with allhis usual zeal."I half wish the place did not look in such beauty, just as I must leaveit for a while. I don't think that japonica ever had as many flowersbefore; and what a season for tulips! Not to speak of the fruit Thereare peaches enough to stock a market. I wonder what Dinah means to dowith them? She 'll be sorely grieved to make them over as perquisites toDarby, and I know she 'll never consent to have them sold. No, that isthe one concession she cannot stoop to. Oh, here she comes! What a grandyear for the wall fruit, Dinah!" cried he, aloud."The apricots have all failed, and fully one-half of the peaches areworm-eaten," said she, dryly.Peter sighed as he thought, how she does dispel an illusion, what aterrible realist is this same sister! "Still, my dear Dinah, one-half ofsuch a crop is a goodly yield.""Out with it, Peter Barrington. Out with the question that is burningfor utterance. What's to be done with them? I have thought of thatalready. I have told Polly Dill to preserve a quantity for us, and totake as much more as she pleases for her own use, and make presents toher friends of the remainder. She is to be mistress here while we areaway, and has promised to come up two or three times a week, and seeafter everything, for I neither desire to have the flower-roots sold,nor the pigeons eaten before our return.""That is an admirable arrangement, sister. I don't know a better girlthan Polly!""She is better than I gave her credit for," said Miss Barrington, whowas not fully pleased at any praise not bestowed by herself. A man'sestimate of a young woman's goodness is not so certain of findingacceptance from her own sex! "And as for that girl, the wonder is thatwith a fool for a mother, and a crafty old knave for a father, shereally should possess one good trait or one amiable quality." Barringtonmuttered what sounded like concurrence, and she went on: "And it is forthis reason I have taken an interest in her, and hope, by occupying hermind with useful cares and filling her hours with commendable duties,she will estrange herself from that going about to fine houses, andfrequenting society where she is exposed to innumerable humiliations,and worse.""Worse, Dinah!--what could be worse?""Temptations are worse, Peter Barrington, even when not yielded to; forlike a noxious climate, which, though it fails to kill, it is certain toinjure the constitution during a lifetime. Take my word for it, she'll not be the better wife to the Curate for the memory of all the finespeeches she once heard from the Captain. Very old and ascetic notionsI am quite aware, Peter; but please to bear in mind all the trouble wetake that the roots of a favorite tree should not strike into a soursoil, and bethink you how very indifferent we are as to the dailyassociates of our children!""There you are right, Dinah, there you are right,--at least, as regardsgirls.""And the rule applies fully as much to boys. All those manlyaccomplishments and out-of-door habits you lay such store by, couldbe acquired without the intimacy of the groom or the friendship of thegamekeeper. What are you muttering there about old-maids' children? Sayit out, sir, and defend it, if you have the courage!"But either that he had not said it, or failed in the requisite boldnessto maintain it, he blundered out a very confused assurance of agreementon every point.A woman is seldom merciful in argument; the consciousness that she owesvictory to her violence far more than to her logic, prompts persistencein the course she has followed so successfully, and so was it that MissDinah contrived to gallop over the battlefield long after the enemy wasrouted! But Barrington was not in a mood to be vexed; the thought of thejourney filled him with so many pleasant anticipations, the brightestof all being the sight of poor George's child! Not that this thought hadnot its dark side, in contrition for the long, long years he had lefther unnoticed and neglected. Of course he had his own excusesand apologies for all this: he could refer to his overwhelmingembarrassments, and the heavy cares that surrounded him; but thenshe--that poor friendless girl, that orphan--could have known nothingof these things; and what opinion might she not have formed of thoserelatives who had so coldly and heartlessly abandoned her! Barringtontook down her miniature, painted when she was a mere infant, and scannedit well, as though to divine what nature might possess her! There waslittle for speculation there,--perhaps even less for hope! The eyes werelarge and lustrous, it is true, but the brow was heavy, and themouth, even in infancy, had something that seemed like firmness anddecision,--strangely at variance with the lips of childhood.Now, old Barrington's heart was deeply set on that lawsuit--that greatcause against the Indian Government--that had formed the grand campaignof his life. It was his first waking thought of a morning, his last atnight. All his faculties were engaged in revolving the various pointsof evidence, and imagining how this and that missing link might besupplied; and yet, with all these objects of desire before him, he wouldhave given them up, each and all, to be sure of one thing,--that hisgranddaughter might be handsome! It was not that he did not value farabove the graces of person a number of other gifts; he would not, for aninstant, have hesitated, had he to choose between mere beauty and agood disposition. If he knew anything of himself, it was his thoroughappreciation of a kindly nature, a temper to bear well, and a spiritto soar nobly; but somehow he imagined these were gifts she was likelyenough to possess. George's child would resemble him; she would have hislight-heartedness and his happy nature, but would she be handsome? Itis, trust me, no superficial view of life that attaches a great priceto personal atractions, and Barrington was one to give these their fullvalue. Had she been brought up from childhood under his roof, he hadprobably long since ceased to think of such a point; he would haveattached himself to her by the ties of that daily domesticity whichgrow into a nature. The hundred little cares and offices that wouldhave fallen to her lot to meet, would have served as links to bind theirhearts; but she was coming to them a perfect stranger, and he wishedardently that his first impression should be all in her favor.Now, while such were Barrington's reveries, his sister took a differentturn. She had already pictured to herself the dark-orbed, heavy-browedchild, expanded into a sallow-complexioned, heavy-featured girl,ungainly and ungraceful, her figure neglected, her very feet spoiled bythe uncouth shoes of the convent, her great red hands untrained to alloccupation save the coarse cares of that half-menial existence. "As mybrother would say," muttered she, "a most unpromising filly, if it werenot for the breeding."Both brother and sister, however, kept their impressions to themselves,and of all the subjects discussed between them not one word betrayedwhat each forecast about Josephine. I am half sorry it is no part of mytask to follow them on the road, and yet I feel I could not impart to myreader the almost boylike enjoyment old Peter felt at every stage of thejourney. He had made the grand tour of Europe more than half a centurybefore, and he was in ecstasy to find so much that was unchanged aroundhim. There were the long-eared caps, and the monstrous earrings, andthe sabots, and the heavily tasselled team horses, and the chimingchurch-bells, and the old-world equipages, and the strangely undersizedsoldiers,--all just as he saw them last! And every one was so politeand ceremonious, and so idle and so unoccupied, and the theatres were solarge and the newspapers so small, and the current coin so defaced, andthe order of the meats at dinner so inscrutable, and every one seemedcontented just because he had nothing to do."Isn't it all I have told you, Dinah dear? Don't you perceivehow accurate my picture has been? And is it not very charming andenjoyable?""They are the greatest cheats I ever met in my life, brother Peter; andwhen I think that every grin that greets us is a matter of five francs,it mars considerably the pleasure I derive from the hilarity."It was in this spirit they journeyed till they arrived at Brussels.CHAPTER XXIII. THE COLONEL'S COUNSELSWhen Conyers had learned from Colonel Hunter all that he knew ofhis father's involvement, it went no further than this, that theLieutenant-General had either resigned or been deprived of his civilappointments, and Hunter was called upon to replace him. With all hishabit of hasty and impetuous action, there was no injustice inFred's nature, and he frankly recognized that, however painful to himpersonally, Hunter could not refuse to accede to what the Prince haddistinctly pressed him to accept.Young Conyers had heard over and over again the astonishment expressedby old Indian officials how his father's treatment of the Company'sorders had been so long endured. Some prescriptive immunity seemed toattach to him, or some great patronage to protect him, for he appearedto do exactly as he pleased, and the despotic sway of his rule was knownfar and near. With the changes in the constitution of the Board, somemembers might have succeeded less disposed to recognize the General'sformer services, or endure so tolerantly his present encroachments, andFred well could estimate the resistance his father would oppose to thevery mildest remonstrance, and how indignantly he would reject whatevercame in the shape of a command. Great as was the blow to the young man,it was not heavier in anything than the doubt and uncertainty about it,and he waited with a restless impatience for his father's letter,which should explain it all. Nor was his position less painful fromthe estrangement in which he lived, and the little intercourse hemaintained with his brother-officers. When Hunter left, he knew that hehad not one he could call friend amongst them, and Hunter was to go in avery few days, and even of these he could scarcely spare him more than afew chance moments!It was in one of these flitting visits that Hunter bethought him ofyoung Dill, of whom, it is only truth to confess, young Conyers hadforgotten everything. "I took time by the forelock, Fred, about thataffair," said he, "and I trust I have freed you from all embarrassmentabout it.""As how, sir?" asked Conyers, half in pique."When I missed you at the 'Fisherman's Home,' I set off to pay thedoctor a visit, and a very charming visit it turned out; a betterpigeon-pie I never ate, nor a prettier girl than the maker of it wouldI ask to meet with. We became great friends, talked of everything,from love at first sight to bone spavins, and found that we agreed toa miracle. I don't think I ever saw a girl before who suited me soperfectly in all her notions. She gave me a hint about what they call'mouth lameness' our Vet would give his eye for. Well, to come backto her brother,--a dull dog, I take it, though I have not seen him,--Isaid, 'Don't let him go to India, they 've lots of clever fellows outthere; pack him off to Australia; send him to New Zealand.' And when sheinterrupted me, 'But young Mr. Conyers insisted,--he would have it so;his father is to make Tom's fortune, and to send him back as rich as aBegum,' I said, 'He has fallen in love with you, Miss Polly, that's thefact, and lost his head altogether; and I don't wonder at it, for heream I, close upon forty-eight,--I might have said forty-nine, but nomatter,--close upon forty-eight, and I 'm in the same book!' Yes, ifit was the sister, vice the brother, who wanted to make a fortune inIndia, I almost think I could say, 'Come and share mine!'""But I don't exactly understand. Am I to believe that they wish Tom tobe off--to refuse my offer--and that the rejection comes from them?""No, not exactly. I said it was a bad spec, that you had taken a far toosanguine view of the whole thing, and that as I was an old soldier, andknew more of the world,--that is to say, had met a great many morehard rubs and disappointments,--my advice was, not to risk it. 'YoungConyers,' said I, 'will do all that he has promised to the letter.You may rely upon every word that he has ever uttered. But bear in mindthat he's only a mortal man; he's not one of those heathen gods who usedto make fellows invincible in a battle, or smuggle them off in a cloud,out of the way of demons, or duns, or whatever difficulties beset them.He might die, his father might die, any of us might die.' Yes, by Jove!there's nothing so uncertain as life, except the Horse Guards.' Andputting one thing with another, Miss Polly,' said I, 'tell him tostay where he is,'--open a shop at home, or go to one of thecolonies,--Heligoland, for instance, a charming spot for thebathing-season.""And she, what did she say?""May I be cashiered if I remember! I never do remember very clearly whatany one says. Where I am much interested on my own side, I have no timefor the other fellow's arguments. But I know if she was n't convincedshe ought to have been. I put the thing beyond a question, and I madeher cry.""Made her cry!""Not cry,--that is, she did not blubber; but she looked glassy aboutthe lids, and turned away her head. But to be sure we were parting,--arather soft bit of parting, too,--and I said something about my comingback with a wooden leg, and she said, 'No! have it of cork, they makethem so cleverly now.' And I was going to say something more, when aconfounded old half-pay Major came up and interrupted us, and--and, infact, there it rests.""I 'm not at all easy in mind as to this affair. I mean, I don't likehow I stand in it.""But you stand out of it,--out of it altogether! Can't you imagine thatyour father may have quite enough cares of his own to occupy him withoutneeding the embarrassment of looking after this bumpkin, who, for aughtyou know, might repay very badly all the interest taken in him? Ifit had been the girl,--if it had been Polly--" "I own frankly," saidConyers, tartly, "it did not occur to me to make such an offer toher!""Faith! then, Master Fred, I was deuced near doing it,--so near, thatwhen I came away I scarcely knew whether I had or had not done so.""Well, sir, there is only an hour's drive on a good road required torepair the omission.""That's true, Fred,--that's true; but have you never, by an accident,chanced to come up with a stunning fence,--a regular rasper that youtook in a fly a few days before with the dogs, and as you looked atthe place, have you not said, 'What on earth persuaded me to ride atthat?'""Which means, sir, that your cold-blooded reflections are against theproject?""Not exactly that, either," said he, in a sort of confusion; "but whena man speculates on doing something for which the first step must be anexplanation to this fellow, a half apology to that,--with a whimperingkind of entreaty not to be judged hastily, not to be condemned unheard,not to be set down as an old fool who couldn't stand the fire of a pairof bright eyes,--I say when it comes to this, he ought to feel that hisbest safeguard is his own misgiving!""If I do not agree with you, sir, it is because I incline to follow myown lead, and care very little for what the world says of it.""Don't believe a word of that, Fred; it's all brag,--all nonsense! Thevery effrontery with which you fancy you are braving public opinion isonly Dutch courage. What each of us in his heart thinks of himselfis only the reflex of the world's estimate of him; at least, whathe imagines it to be. Now, for my own part, I 'd rather ride up to abattery in full fire than I'd sit down and write to my old aunt DorothyHunter a formal letter announcing my approaching marriage, telling herthat the lady of my choice was twenty or thereabouts, not to addthat her family name was Dill. Believe me, Fred, that if you want theconcentrated essence of public opinion, you have only to do somethingwhich shall irritate and astonish the half-dozen people with whom youlive in intimacy. Won't they remind you about the mortgages on yourlands and the gray in your whiskers, that last loan you raised fromSolomon Hymans, and that front tooth you got replaced by Cartwright,though it was the week before they told you you were a miracle of orderand good management, and actually looking younger than you did fiveyears ago! You're not minding me, Fred,--not following me; you 'rethinking of your protg, Tom Dill, and what he 'll think and say ofyour desertion of him.""You have hit it, sir. It was exactly what I was asking myself.""Well, if nothing better offers, tell him to get himself in readiness,and come out with me. I cannot make him a Rajah, nor even a Zemindar;but I 'll stick him into a regimental surgeoncy, and leave him tofashion out his own future. He must look sharp, however, and lose notime. The 'Ganges' is getting ready in all haste, and will be roundat Portsmouth by the 8th, and we expect to sail on the 12th or 13th atfurthest.""I 'll write to him to-day. I 'll write this moment.""Add a word of remembrance on my part to the sister, and tell bumpkin tosupply himself with no end of letters, recommendatory and laudatory, tomuzzle our Medical Board at Calcutta, and lots of light clothing, andall the torturing instruments he 'll need, and a large stock of goodhumor, for he'll be chaffed unmercifully all the voyage." And, withthese comprehensive directions, the Colonel concluded his counsels, andbustled away to look after his own personal interests.Fred Conyers was not over-pleased with the task assigned him. Thepart he liked to fill in life, and, indeed, that which he had usuallyperformed, was the Benefactor and the Patron, and it was but anungracious office for him to have to cut the wings and disfigurethe plumage of his generosity. He made two, three, four attempts atconveying his intentions, but with none was he satisfied; so he ended bysimply saying, "I have something of importance to tell you, and which,not being altogether pleasant, it will be better to say than to write;so I have to beg you will come up here at once, and see me." Scarcelywas this letter sealed and addressed than he bethought him of theawkwardness of presenting Tom to his brother-officers, or the stillgreater indecorum of not presenting him. "How shall I ask him to themess, with the certainty of all the impertinences he will be exposedto?--and what pretext have I for not offering him the ordinary attentionshown to every stranger?" He was, in fact, wincing under that publicopinion he had only a few moments before declared he could afford todespise. "No," said he, "I have no right to expose poor Tom to this. I'll drive over myself to the village, and if any advice or counsel beneeded, he will be amongst those who can aid him."He ordered his servant to harness his handsome roan, a thoroughbredof surpassing style and action, to the dog-cart,--not over-sorry toastonish his friend Tom by the splendor of a turn-out that had won thesuffrages of Tattersall's,--and prepared for his mission to Inistioge.Was it with the same intention of "astonishing" Tom Dill that Conyersbestowed such unusual attention upon his dress? At his first visit tothe "Fisherman's Home" he had worn the homely shooting-jacket and felthat which, however comfortable and conventional, do not always redoundto the advantage of the wearer, or, if they do, it is by something,perhaps, in the contrast presented to his ordinary appearance, andthe impression ingeniously insinuated that he is one so unmistakably agentleman, no travesty of costume can efface the stamp.It was in this garb Polly had seen him, and if Polly Dill had been aduchess it was in some such garb she would have been accustomed to seeher brother or her cousin some six out of every seven mornings of theweek; but Polly was not a duchess: she was the daughter of a villagedoctor, and might, not impossibly, have acquired a very erroneousestimate of his real pretensions from having beheld him thus attired.It was, therefore, entirely by a consideration for her ignorance of theworld and its ways that he determined to enlighten her.At the time of which I am writing, the dress of the British army was afavorite study with that Prince whose taste, however questionable, neverexposed him to censure on grounds of over-simplicity and plainness. Asthe Colonel of the regiment Conyers belonged to, he had bestowed uponhis own especial corps an unusual degree of splendor in equipment, andamongst other extravagances had given them an almost boundless libertyof combining different details of dress. Availing himself of thisprivilege, our young Lieutenant invented a costume which, howeverunmilitary and irregular, was not deficient in becomingness. Undera plain blue jacket very sparingly braided he wore the rich scarletwaistcoat, all slashed with gold, they had introduced at their mess. Asimple foraging-cap and overalls, seamed with a thin gold line, made upa dress that might have passed for the easy costume of the barrack-yard,while, in reality, it was eminently suited to set off the wearer.Am I to confess that he looked at himself in the glass with veryconsiderable satisfaction, and muttered, as he turned away, "Yes, MissPolly, this is in better style than that Quakerish drab livery you sawme last in, and I have little doubt that you 'll think so!""Is this our best harness, Holt?""Yes, sir.""All right!"CHAPTER XXIV. CONYERS MAKES A MORNING CALLWhen Conyers, to the astonishment and wonder of an admiring villagepublic, drove his seventeen-hand-high roan into the market square ofInistioge, he learned that all of the doctor's family were from homeexcept Mrs. Dill. Indeed, he saw the respectable lady at the windowwith a book in her hand, from which not all the noise and clatter of hisarrival for one moment diverted her. Though not especially anxious toattract her attention, he was half piqued at her show of indifference.A dog-cart by Adams and a thoroughbred like Boanerges were, after all,worth a glance at. Little did he know what a competitor be had in thatmuch-thumbed old volume, whose quaintly told miseries were to her asher own sorrows. Could he have assembled underneath that window all theglories of a Derby Day, Mr. Richardson's "Clarissa" would have beatenthe field. While he occupied himself in dexterously tapping theflies from his horse with the fine extremity of his whip, and thusnecessitating that amount of impatience which made the spirited animalstamp and champ his bit, the old lady read on undisturbed."Ask at what hour the doctor will be at home, Holt," cried he,peevishly."Not till to-morrow, sir; he has gone to Castle Durrow.""And Miss Dill, is she not in the house?""No, sir; she has gone down to the 'Fisherman's Home' to look after thegarden,--the family having left that place this morning."After a few minutes' reflection, Conyers ordered his servant to put upthe horse at the inn, and wait for him there; and then engaging a "cot,"he set out for the "Fisherman's Home." "After having come so far, itwould be absurd to go back without doing something in this business,"thought he. "Polly, besides, is the brains carrier of these people. Thematter would be referred to her; and why should I not go at once, anddirectly address her myself? With her womanly tact, too, she will seethat for any reserve in my manner there must be a corresponding reason,and she'll not press me with awkward questions or painful inquiries, asthe underbred brother might do. It will be enough when I intimate toher that my plan is not so practicable as when I first projected it." Hereassured himself with a variety of reasonings of this stamp, which hadthe double effect of convincing his own mind and elevating Miss Polly inhis estimation. There is a very subtle self-flattery in believing thatthe true order of person to deal with us--to understand and appreciateus--is one possessed of considerable ability united with the very finestsensibility. Thus dreaming and "mooning," he reached the "Fisherman'sHome." The air of desertion struck him even as he landed; and is therenot some secret magic in the vicinity of life, of living people, whichgives the soul to the dwelling-place? Have we to more than cross thethreshold of the forsaken house to feel its desertion,--to know that ourechoing step will track us along stair and corridor, and that throughthe thin streaks of light between the shutters phantoms of the absentwill flit or hover, while the dimly descried objects of the room willbring memories of bright mornings and of happy eves? It is strangeto measure the sadness of this effect upon us when caused even by theaspect of houses which we frequented not as friends but mere visitors;just as the sight of death thrills us, even though we had not loved thedeparted in his lifetime. But so it is: there is unutterable bitternessattached to the past, and there is no such sorrow as over the bygone!All about the little cottage was silent and desolate; even the shrillpeacock, so wont to announce the coming stranger with his cry, satvoiceless and brooding on a branch; and except the dull flow of theriver, not a sound was heard. After tapping lightly at the door andpeering through the partially closed shutters, Conyers turned towardsthe garden at the back, passing as he went his favorite seat under thegreat sycamore-tree. It was not a widely separated "long ago" sincehe had sat there, and yet how different had life become to him in theinterval! With what a protective air he had talked to poor Tom onthat spot,--how princely were the promises of his patronage, yet notexaggerated beyond his conscious power of performance! He hurried on,and came to the little wicket of the garden; it was open, and hepassed in. A spade in some fresh-turned earth showed where some one hadrecently been at work, but still, as he went, he could find none. Alleyafter alley did he traverse, but to no purpose; and at last, in hisramblings, he came to a little copse which separated the main gardenfrom a small flower-plat, known as Miss Dinah's, and on which thewindows of her own little sitting-room opened. He had but seen this spotfrom the windows, and never entered it; indeed, it was a sort of sacredenclosure, within which the profane step of man was not often permittedto intrude. Nor was Conyers without a sting of self-reproach as he nowpassed in. He had not gone many steps when the reason of the seclusionseemed revealed to him. It was a small obelisk of white marble under alarge willow-tree, bearing for inscription on its side, "To the Memoryof George Barrington, the Truehearted, the Truthful, and the Brave,killed on the 19th February, 18--, at Agra, in the East Indies."How strange that he should be standing there beside the tomb of hisfather's dearest friend, his more than brother! That George who sharedhis joys and perils, the comrade of his heart! No two men had ever livedin closer bonds of affection, and yet somehow of all that love he hadnever heard his father speak, nor of the terrible fate that befell hisfriend had one syllable escaped him. "Who knows if friendships eversurvive early manhood?" said Fred, bitterly, as he sat himself downat the base of the monument: "and yet might not this same GeorgeBarrington, had he lived, been of priceless value to my father now? Isit not some such manly affection, such generous devotion as his, that hemay stand in need of?" Thus thinking, his imagination led him over thewide sea to that far-distant land of his childhood, and scenes of vastarid plains and far-away mountains, and wild ghauts, and barren-lookingnullahs, intersected with yellow, sluggish streams, on whose muddy shorethe alligator basked, rose before him, contrasted with the gorgeoussplendors of retinue and the glittering host of gold-adorned followers.It was in a vision of grand but dreary despotism, power almostlimitless, but without one ray of enjoyment, that he lost himself andlet the hours glide by. At length, as though dreamily, he thought hewas listening to some faint but delicious music; sounds seemed to comefloating towards him through the leaves, as if meant to steep him in acontinued languor, and imparted a strange half-fear that he was under aspell. With an effort he aroused himself and sprang to his legs; and nowhe could plainly perceive that the sounds came through an open window,where a low but exquisitely sweet voice was singing to the accompanimentof a piano. The melody was sad and plaintive; the very words camedropping slowly, like the drops of a distilled grief; and they sank intohis heart with a feeling of actual poignancy, for they were as thoughsteeped in sorrow. When of a sudden the singer ceased, the hands ranboldly, almost wildly, over the keys; one, two, three great massivechords were struck, and then, in a strain joyous as the skylark, theclear voice carolled forth with,--"But why should we mourn for the grief of the morrow?Who knows in what frame it may find us?Meeker, perhaps, to bend under our sorrow,Or more boldly to fling it behind us."And then, with a loud bang, the piano was closed, and Polly Dill,swinging her garden hat by its ribbon, bounded forth into the walk,calling for her terrier, Scratch, to follow."Mr. Conyers here!" cried she, in astonishment. "What miracle could haveled you to this spot?""To meet you.""To meet me!""With no other object. I came from Kilkenny this morning expresslyto see you, and learning at your house that you had come on here, Ifollowed. You still look astonished,--incredulous--""Oh, no; not incredulous, but very much astonished. I am, it is true,sufficiently accustomed to find myself in request in my own narrow homecircle, but that any one out of it should come three yards--not to saythree miles--to speak to me, is, I own, very new and very strange.""Is not this profession of humility a little--a very little--bit ofexaggeration, Miss Dill?""Is not the remark you have made on it a little--a very little--bit of aliberty, Mr. Conyers?"So little was he prepared for this retort that he flushed up to hisforehead, and for an instant was unable to recover himself: meanwhile,she was busy in rescuing Scratch from a long bramble that had mostuncomfortably associated itself with his tail, in gratitude for whichservice the beast jumped up on her with all the uncouth activity of hisrace."He at least, Miss Dill, can take liberties unrebuked," said Conyers,with irritation."We are very old friends, sir, and understand each other's humors,not to say that Scratch knows well he 'd be tied up if he were totransgress."Conyers smiled; an almost irresistible desire to utter a smartnesscrossed his mind, and he found it all but impossible to resist sayingsomething about accepting the bonds if he could but accomplish thetransgression; but he bethought in time how unequal the war of banterwould be between them, and it was with a quiet gravity he began: "I cameto speak to you about Tom--""Why, is that not all off? Colonel Hunter represented the matter soforcibly to my father, put all the difficulties so clearly before him,that I actually wrote to my brother, who had started for Dublin, begginghim on no account to hasten the day of his examination, but to come homeand devote himself carefully to the task of preparation.""It is true, the Colonel never regarded the project as I did, and sawobstacles to its success which never occurred to me; with all that,however, he never convinced me I was wrong.""Perhaps not always an easy thing to do," said she, dryly."Indeed! You seem to have formed a strong opinion on the score of myfirmness.""I was expecting you to say obstinacy," said she, laughing, "and washalf prepared with a most abject retractation. At all events, I wasaware that you did not give way.""And is the quality such a bad one?""Just as a wind may be said to be a good or a bad one; due west, forinstance, would be very unfavorable if you were bound to New York."It was the second time he had angled for a compliment, and failed;and he walked along at her side, fretful and discontented. "I begin tosuspect," said he, at last, "that the Colonel was far more eager to makehimself agreeable here than to give fair play to my reasons.""He was delightful, if you mean that; he possesses the inestimable boonof good spirits, which is the next thing to a good heart.""You don't like depressed people, then?""I won't say I dislike, but I dread them. The dear friends who go aboutwith such histories of misfortune and gloomy reflections on every one'sconduct always give me the idea of a person who should carry with hima watering-pot to sprinkle his friends in this Irish climate, where itrains ten months out of the twelve. There is a deal to like in life,--adeal to enjoy, as well as a deal to see and to do; and the spirit whichwe bring to it is even of more moment than the incidents that befallus.""That was the burden of your song awhile ago," said he, smiling; "couldI persuade you to sing it again?""What are you dreaming of, Mr. Conyers? Is not this meeting here--thisstrolling about a garden with a young gentleman, a Hussar!--compromisingenough, not to ask me to sit down at a piano and sing for him? Indeed,the only relief my conscience gives me for the imprudence of thisinterview is the seeing how miserable it makes you.""Miserable!--makes me miserable!""Well, embarrassed,--uncomfortable,--ill at ease; I don't care for theword. You came here to say a variety of things, and you don't like tosay them. You are balked in certain very kind intentions towards us, andyou don't know how very little of even intended good nature has befallenus in life to make us deeply your debtor for the mere project. Why, yourvery notice of poor Tom has done more to raise him in his own esteem anddisgust him with low associates than all the wise arguments of all hisfamily. There, now, if you have not done us all the good you meant, besatisfied with what you really have done.""This is very far short of what I intended.""Of course it is; but do not dwell upon that. I have a great stock ofvery fine intentions, too, but I shall not be in the least discouragedif I find them take wing and leave me.""What would you do then?""Raise another brood. They tell us that if one seed of every millionof acorns should grow to be a tree, all Europe would be a dense forestwithin a century. Take heart, therefore, about scattered projects; fullytheir share of them come to maturity. Oh dear! what a dreary sigh yougave! Don't you imagine yourself very unhappy?""If I did, I'd scarcely come to you for sympathy, certainly," said he,with a half-bitter smile."You are quite right there; not but that I could really condole withsome of what I opine are your great afflictions: for instance, I couldbestow very honest grief on that splint that your charger has justthrown out on his back tendon; I could even cry over the threatenedblindness of that splendid steeple-chaser; but I 'd not fret about theway your pelisse was braided, nor because your new phaeton made so muchnoise with the axles.""By the way," said Conyers, "I have such a horse to show you! He is inthe village. Might I drive him up here? Would you allow me to take youback?""Not on any account, sir! I have grave misgivings about talking to youso long here, and I am mainly reconciled by remembering how disagreeableI have proved myself.""How I wish I had your good spirits!""Why don't you rather wish for my fortunate lot in life,--so secure fromcasualties, so surrounded with life's comforts, so certain to attach toit consideration and respect? Take my word for it, Mr. Conyers, yourown position is not utterly wretched; it is rather a nice thing to bea Lieutenant of Hussars, with good health, a good fortune, and a fairpromise of mustachios. There, now, enough of impertinence for one day.I have a deal to do, and you 'll not help me to do it. I have a wholetulip-bed to transplant, and several trees to remove, and a new walk toplan through the beech shrubbery, not to speak of a change of domicilefor the pigs,--if such creatures can be spoken of in your presence. Onlythink, three o'clock, and that weary Darby not got back from his dinner!has it ever occurred to you to wonder at the interminable time peoplecan devote to a meal of potatoes?""I cannot say that I have thought upon the matter.""Pray do so, then; divide the matter, as a German would, into allits 'Bearbeitungen,' and consider it ethnologically, esculently,and aesthetically, and you'll be surprised how puzzled you 'll be!Meanwhile, would you do me a favor?--I mean a great favor.""Of course I will; only say what it is.""Well; but I 'm about to ask more than you suspect.""I do not retract. I am ready.""What I want, then, is that you should wheel that barrow-ful of mouldas far as the melon-bed. I 'd have done it myself if you had not beenhere."With a seriousness which cost him no small effort to maintain, Conyersaddressed himself at once to the task; and she walked along at his side,with a rake over her shoulder, talking with the same cool unconcern shewould have bestowed on Darby."I have often told Miss Barrington," said she, "that our rock melonswere finer than hers, because we used a peculiar composite earth, intowhich ash bark and soot entered,--what you are wheeling now, in fact,however hurtful it may be to your feelings. There! upset it exactly onthat spot; and now let me see if you are equally handy with a spade."[Illustration: 276]"I should like to know what my wages are to be after all this," said he,as he spread the mould over the bed."We give boys about eightpence a day.""Boys! what do you mean by boys?""Everything that is not married is boy in Ireland; so don't be angry, orI 'll send you off. Pick up those stones, and throw these dock-weeds toone side.""You 'll send me a melon, at least, of my own raising, won't you?""I won't promise; Heaven knows where you'll be--where I 'll be, by thattime! Would you like to pledge yourself to anything on the day theripe fruit shall glow between those pale leaves?""Perhaps I might," said he, stealing a half-tender glance towards her."Well, I would not," said she, looking him full and steadfastly in theface."Then that means you never cared very much for any one?""If I remember aright, you were engaged as a gardener, not as fatherconfessor. Now, you are really not very expert at the former; but you'll make sad work of the latter.""You have not a very exalted notion of my tact, Miss Dill.""I don't know,--I'm not sure; I suspect you have at least what theFrench call 'good dispositions.' You took to your wheelbarrow verynicely, and you tried to dig--as little like a gentleman as need be.""Well, if this does not bate Banagher, my name is n't Darby!" exclaimeda rough voice, and a hearty laugh followed his words. "By my conscience,Miss Polly, it's only yerself could do it; and it's truth they say ofyou, you 'd get fun out of an archdaycon!"Conyers flung away his spade, and shook the mould from his boots inirritation."Come, don't be cross," said she, slipping her arm within his, andleading him away; "don't spoil a very pleasant little adventure by illhumor. If these melons come to good, they shall be called after you.You know that a Duke of Montmartre gave his name to a gooseberry; so begood, and, like him, you shall be immortal.""I should like very much to know one thing," said he, thoughtfully."And what may that be?""I 'd like to know,--are you ever serious?""Not what you would call serious, perhaps; but I 'm very much inearnest, if that will do. That delightful Saxon habit of treating alltrifles with solemnity I have no taste for. I'm aware it constitutesthat great idol of English veneration, Respectability; but we have notgot that sort of thing here. Perhaps the climate is too moist for it."[Illustration: 276]"I 'm not a bit surprised that the Colonel fell in love with you,"blurted he out, with a frank abruptness."And did he,--oh, really did he?""Is the news so very agreeable, then?""Of course it is. I 'd give anything for such a conquest. There 's noglory in capturing one of those calf elephants who walk into the snareout of pure stupidity; but to catch an old experienced creature who hasbeen hunted scores of times, and knows every scheme and artifice, everybait and every pitfall, there is a real triumph in that.""Do I represent one of the calf elephants, then?""I cannot think so. I have seen no evidence of your capture--not to add,nor any presumption of my own--to engage in such a pursuit. My dear Mr.Conyers," said she, seriously, "you have shown so much real kindness tothe brother, you would not, I am certain, detract from it by one wordwhich could offend the sister. We have been the best of friends up tothis; let us part so."The sudden assumption of gravity in this speech seemed to disconcerthim so much that he made no answer, but strolled along at her side,thoughtful and silent."What are you thinking of?" said she, at last."I was just thinking," said he, "that by the time I have reached myquarters, and begin to con over what I have accomplished by this samevisit of mine, I 'll be not a little puzzled to say what it is.""Perhaps I can help you. First of all, tell me what was your object incoming.""Chiefly to talk about Tom.""Well, we have done so. We have discussed the matter, and are fullyagreed it is better he should not go to India, but stay at home here andfollow his profession, like his father.""But have I said nothing about Hunter's offer?""Not a word; what is it?""How stupid of me; what could I have been thinking of all this time?""Heaven knows; but what was the offer you allude to?""It was this: that if Tom would make haste and get his diploma orhis license, or whatever it is, at once, and collect all sorts oftestimonials as to his abilities and what not, that he'd take him outwith him and get him an assistant-surgeoncy in a regiment, and in time,perhaps, a staff-appointment.""I 'm not very certain that Tom could obtain his diploma at once.I 'm quite sure he could n't get any of those certificates you speakof. First of all, because he does not possess these same abilities youmention, nor, if he did, is there any to vouch for them. We are veryhumble people, Mr. Conyers, with a village for our world; and wecontemplate a far-away country--India, for instance--pretty much as weshould do Mars or the Pole-star.""As to that, Bengal is more come-at-able than the Great Bear," said he,laughing."For you, perhaps, not for us. There is nothing more common in people'smouths than go to New Zealand or Swan River, or some far-away island inthe Pacific, and make your fortune!--just as if every new and barbarousland was a sort of Aladdin's cave, where each might fill his pocketswith gems and come out rich for life. But reflect a little. First,there is an outfit; next, there is a voyage; thirdly, there is need ofa certain subsistence in the new country before plans can be matured torender it profitable. After all these come a host of requirements,--ofcourage, and energy, and patience, and ingenuity, and personal strength,and endurance, not to speak of the constitution of a horse, and somehave said, the heartlessness of an ogre. My counsel to Tom wouldbe, get the 'Arabian Nights' out of your head, forget the great CaliphConyers and all his promises, stay where you are, and be a villageapothecary."These words were uttered in a very quiet and matter-of-fact way, butthey wounded Conyers more than the accents of passion. He was angryat the cold realistic turn of a mind so devoid of all heroism; he wasannoyed at the half-implied superiority a keener view of life thanhis own seemed to assert; and he was vexed at being treated as awell-meaning but very inconsiderate and inexperienced young gentleman."Am I to take this as a refusal," said he, stiffly; "am I to tellColonel Hunter that your brother does not accept his offer?""If it depended on me,--yes; but it does not. I 'll write to-nightand tell Tom the generous project that awaits him; he shall decide forhimself.""I know Hunter will be annoyed; he'll think it was through some bunglingmismanagement of mine his plan has failed; he 'll be certain to say, Ifit was I myself bad spoken toner--""Well, there's no harm in letting him think so," said she, laughing."Tell him I think him charming, that I hope he 'll have a delightfulvoyage and a most prosperous career after it, that I intend to readthe Indian columns in the newspaper from this day out, and will alwayspicture him to my mind as seated in the grandest of howdabs on the verytallest of elephants, humming 'Rule Britannia' up the slopes of theHimalaya, and as the penny-a-liners say, extending the blessings ofthe English rule in India." She gave her hand to him, made a littlesalutation,--half bow, half courtesy,--and, saying "Good-bye," turnedback into the shrubbery and left him.He hesitated,--almost turned to follow her; waited a second or two more,and then, with an impatient toss of his head, walked briskly to theriver-side and jumped into his boat. It was a sulky face that hewore, and a sulky spirit was at work within him. There is no greaterdiscontent than that of him who cannot define the chagrin that consumeshim. In reality, he was angry with himself, but he turned the wholeforce of his displeasure upon her."I suppose she is clever. I 'm no judge of that sort of thing; but, formy own part, I'd rather see her more womanly, more delicate. She has nota bit of heart, that's quite clear; nor, with all her affectations, doesshe pretend it." These were his first meditations, and after them helit a cigar and smoked it. The weed was a good one; the evening wasbeautifully calm and soft, and the river scenery looked its very best.He tried to think of a dozen things: he imagined, for instance, what apicturesque thing a boat-race would be in such a spot; he fancied hesaw a swift gig sweep round the point and head up the stream; he caughtsight of a little open in the trees with a background of dark rock, andhe thought what a place for a cottage. But whether it was the "match" orthe "chalet" that occupied him, Polly Dill was a figure in the picture;and he muttered unconsciously, "How pretty she is, what a deal ofexpression those gray-blue eyes possess! She's as active as a fawn, andto the full as graceful. Fancy her an Earl's daughter; give her stationand all the advantages station will bring with it,--what a girl it wouldbe! Not that she'd ever have a heart; I'm certain of that. She's asworldly--as worldly as--" The exact similitude did not occur; but heflung the end of his cigar into the river instead, and sat broodingmournfully for the rest of the way.CHAPTER XXV. DUBLIN REVISITEDThe first stage of the Barringtons' journey was Dublin. They alightedat Reynolds's Hotel, in Old Dominick Street, the once favorite resort ofcountry celebrities. The house, it is true, was there, but Reynolds hadlong left for a land where there is but one summons and one reckoning;even the old waiter, Foster, whom people believed immortal, was gone;and save some cumbrous old pieces of furniture,--barbarous relics of badtaste in mahogany,--nothing recalled the past. The bar, where once on atime the "Beaux" and "Bloods" had gathered to exchange the smart thingsof the House or the hunting-field, was now a dingy little receptaclefor umbrellas and overcoats, with a rickety case crammed full ofunacknowledged and unclaimed letters, announcements of cattle fairs, andbills of houses to let. Decay and neglect were on everything, and thegrim little waiter who ushered them upstairs seemed as much astonishedat their coming as were they themselves with all they saw. It was notfor some time, nor without searching inquiry, that Miss Dinah discoveredthat the tide of popular favor had long since retired from this quarter,and left it a mere barren strand, wreck-strewn and deserted. The housewhere formerly the great squire held his revels had now fallen to bethe resort of the traveller by canal-boat, the cattle salesman, or thepriest. While she by an ingenious cross-examination was eliciting thesedetails, Barrington had taken a walk through the city to revisit oldscenes and revive old memories. One needs not to be as old as PeterBarrington to have gone through this process and experienced all itspain. Unquestionably, every city of Europe has made within such a periodas five-and-thirty or forty years immense strides of improvement.Wider and finer streets, more commodious thoroughfares, better bridges,lighter areas, more brilliant shops, strike one on every hand; while themore permanent monuments of architecture are more cleanly, more orderly,and more cared for than of old. We see these things with astonishmentand admiration at first, and then there comes a pang of painfulregret,--not for the old dark alley and the crooked street, or thetumbling arch of long ago,--but for the time when they were there, forthe time when they entered into our daily life, when with them wereassociated friends long lost sight of, and scenes dimly fading away frommemory. It is for our youth, for the glorious spring and elasticity ofour once high-hearted spirit, of our lives so free of care, of our daysundarkened by a serious sorrow,--it is for these we mourn, and toour eyes at such moments the spacious street is but a desert, and thesplendid monument but a whitened sepulchre!"I don't think I ever had a sadder walk in my life, Dinah," said PeterBarrington, with a weary sigh. "'Till I got into the courts of theCollege, I never chanced upon a spot that looked as I had left it.There, indeed, was the quaint old square as of old, and the greatbell--bless it for its kind voice!--was ringing out a solemn callto something, that shook the window-frames, and made the very airtremulous; and a pale-faced student or two hurried past, and thosecenturions in the helmets,--ancient porters or Senior Fellows,--I forgetwhich,--stood in a little knot to stare at me. That, indeed, was likeold times, Dinah, and my heart grew very full with the memory. Afterthat I strolled down to the Four Courts. I knew you 'd laugh, Dinah. Iknew well you 'd say, 'Was there nothing going on in the King's Bench orthe Common Pleas?' Well, there was only a Revenue case, my dear, butit was interesting, very interesting; and there was my old friend HarryBushe sitting as the Judge. He saw me, and sent round the tipstaffto have me come up and sit on the bench with him, and we had manya pleasant remembrance of old times--as the cross-examination wenton--between us, and I promised to dine with him on Saturday.""And on Saturday we will dine at Antwerp, brother, if I know anything ofmyself.""Sure enough, sister, I forgot all about it Well, well, where could myhead have been?""Pretty much where you have worn it of late years, Peter Barrington. Andwhat of Withering? Did you see him?""No, Dinah, he was attending a Privy Council; but I got his address, andI mean to go over to see him after dinner.""Please to bear in mind that you are not to form any engagements,Peter,--we leave this to-morrow evening by the packet,--if it was theViceroy himself that wanted your company.""Of course, dear, I never thought of such a thing. It was only whenHarry said, 'You 'll be glad to meet Casey and Burrowes, and a fewothers of the old set,' I clean forgot everything of the present, andonly lived in the long-past time, when life really was a very jollything.""How did you find your friend looking?""Old, Dinah, very old! That vile wig has, perhaps, something to say toit; and being a judge, too, gives a sternness to the mouth and a haughtyimperiousness to the brow. It spoils Harry; utterly spoils that laughingblue eye, and that fine rich humor that used to play about his lips.""Which did, you ought to say,--which did some forty years ago. Whatare you laughing at, Peter? What is it amuses you so highly?""It was a charge of O'Grady's, that Harry told me,--a charge to one ofthose petty juries that, he says, never will go right, do what you may.The case was a young student of Trinity, tried for a theft, and whosedefence was only by witnesses to character, and O'Grady said, 'Gentlemenof the jury, the issue before you is easy enough. This is a younggentleman of pleasing manners and the very best connections, who stolea pair of silk stockings, and you will find accordingly.' And what d'yethink, Dinah? They acquitted him, just out of compliment to the Bench.""I declare, brother Peter, such a story inspires any other sentimentthan mirth to me.""I laughed at it till my sides ached," said he, wiping his eyes. "Itook a peep into the Chancery Court and saw O'Connell, who has plenty ofbusiness, they tell me. He was in some altercation with the Court. LordManners was scowling at him, as if he hated him. I hear that no daypasses without some angry passage between them.""And is it of these jangling, quarrelsome, irritable, and insolent menyour ideal of agreeable society is made up, brother Peter?""Not a doubt of it, Dinah. All these displays are briefed to them.They cannot help investing in their client's cause the fervor of theirnatures, simply because they are human; but they know how to leave allthe acrimony of the contest in the wig-box, when they undress and comeback to their homes,--the most genial, hearty, and frank fellows in allthe world. If human nature were all bad, sister, he who saw it closestwould be, I own, most like to catch its corruption, but it is not so,far from it. Every day and every hour reveals something to make a manright proud of his fellow-men."Miss Barrington curtly recalled her brother from these speculations tothe practical details of their journey, reminding him of much that hehad to consult Withering upon, and many questions of importance to putto him. Thoroughly impressed with the perils of a journey abroad, sheconjured up a vast array of imaginary difficulties, and demanded specialinstructions how each of them was to be met. Had poor Peter been--whathe certainly was not--a most accomplished casuist, he might have beenpuzzled by the ingenious complexity of some of those embarrassments.As it was, like a man in the labyrinth, too much bewildered to attemptescape, he sat down in a dogged insensibility, and actually heardnothing."Are you minding me, Peter?" asked she, fretfully, at last; "are youpaying attention to what I am saying?""Of course I am, Dinah dear; I'm listening with all ears.""What was it, then, that I last remarked? What was the subject to whichI asked your attention?"Thus suddenly called on, poor Peter started and rubbed his forehead.Vague shadows of passport people, and custom-house folk, and waiters,and money-changers, and brigands; insolent postilions, importunatebeggars, cheating innkeepers, and insinuating swindlers were passingthrough his head, with innumerable incidents of the road; and, trying tocatch a clew at random, he said, "It was to ask the Envoy, her Majesty'sMinister at Brussels, about a washerwoman who would not tear off myshirt buttons--eh, Dinah? wasn't that it?""You are insupportable, Peter Barrington," said she, rising in anger. "Ibelieve that insensibility like this is not to be paralleled!" and sheleft the room in wrath.Peter looked at his watch, and was glad to see it was past eighto'clock, and about the hour he meant for his visit to Withering. He setout accordingly, not, indeed, quite satisfied with the way he had latelyacquitted himself, but consoled by thinking that Dinah rarely went backof a morning on the dereliction of the evening before, so that theyshould meet good friends as ever at the breakfast-table. Withering wasat home, but a most discreet-looking butler intimated that he had dinedthat day tte--tte with a gentleman, and had left orders not to bedisturbed on any pretext "Could you not at least, send in my name?"said Barrington; "I am a very old friend of your master's, whom he wouldregret not having seen." A little persuasion aided by an argument thatbutlers usually succumb to succeeded, and before Peter believed that hiscard could have reached its destination, his friend was warmly shakinghim by both hands, as he hurried him into the dinner-room."You don't know what an opportune visit you have made me, Barrington,"said he; "but first, to present you to my friend, Captain Stapylton--orMajor--which is it?""Captain. This day week, the 'Gazette,' perhaps, may call me Major.""Always a pleasure to me to meet a soldier, sir," said Barrington; "andI own to the weakness of saying, all the greater when a Dragoon. My ownboy was a cavalryman.""It was exactly of him we were talking," said Withering; "my friend herehas had a long experience of India, and has frankly told me much I wastotally ignorant of. From one thing to another we rambled on till wecame to discuss our great suit with the Company, and Captain Stapyltonassures me that we have never taken the right road in the case.""Nay, I could hardly have had such presumption; I merely remarked, thatwithout knowing India and its habits, you could scarcely be preparedto encounter the sort of testimony that would be opposed to you, or tobenefit by what might tend greatly in your favor.""Just so--continue," said Withering, who looked as though he had got anadmirable witness on the table."I'm astonished to hear from the Attorney-General," resumed Stapylton,"that in a case of such magnitude as this you have never thought ofsending out an efficient agent to India to collect evidence, sifttestimony, and make personal inquiry as to the degree of credit to beaccorded to many of the witnesses. This inquisitorial process is thevery first step in every Oriental suit; you start at once, in fact, bysapping all the enemy's works,--countermining him everywhere.""Listen, Barrington,--listen to this; it is all new to us.""Everything being done by documentary evidence, there is a wide fieldfor all the subtlety of the linguist; and Hindostanee has complexitiesenough to gratify the most inordinate appetite for quibble. A learnedscholar--a Moonshee of erudition--is, therefore, the very firstrequisite, great care being taken to ascertain that he is not in the payof the enemy.""What rascals!" muttered Barrington."Very deep--very astute dogs, certainly, but perhaps not much moreunprincipled than some fellows nearer home," continued the Captain,sipping his wine; "the great peculiarity of this class is, that whileemploying them in the most palpably knavish manner, and obtaining fromthem services bought at every sacrifice of honor, they expect all thedeference due to the most umblemished integrity.""I'd see them--I won't say where--first," broke out Barrington; "and I'd see my lawsuit after them, if only to be won by their intervention.""Remember, sir," said Stapylton, calmly, "that such are the weaponsemployed against you. That great Company does not, nor can it afford to,despise such auxiliaries. The East has its customs, and the natures ofmen are not light things to be smoothed down by conventionalities. Wereyou, for instance, to measure a testimony at Calcutta by the standard ofWestminster Hall, you would probably do a great and grievous injustice.""Just so," said Withering; "you are quite right there, and I havefrequently found myself posed by evidence that I felt must beassailable. Go on, and tell my friend what you were mentioning to mebefore he came in.""I am reluctant, sir," said Stapylton, modestly, "to obtrude upon you,in a matter of such grand importance as this, the mere gossip ofa mess-table, but, as allusion has been made to it, I can scarcelyrefrain. It was when serving in another Presidency an officer of ours,who had been long in Bengal, one night entered upon the question ofColonel Barrington's claims. He quoted the words of an uncle--I thinkhe said his uncle--who was a member of the Supreme Council, and said,'Barrington ought to have known we never could have conceded this rightof sovereignty, but he ought also to have known that we would ratherhave given ten lacs of rupees than have it litigated.'""Have you that gentleman's name?" asked Barrington, eagerly."I have; but the poor fellow is no more,--he was of that fatalexpedition to Beloochistan eight years ago.""You know our case, then, and what we claim?" asked Barrington."Just as every man who has served in India knows it,--popularly,vaguely. I know that Colonel Barrington was, as the adopted son of aRajah, invested with supreme power, and only needed the ratificationof Great Britain to establish a sovereignty; and I have heard"--he laidstress on the word "heard"--"that if it had not been for some allegationof plotting against the Company's government, he really might ultimatelyhave obtained that sanction.""Just what I have said over and over again?" burst in Barrington. "Itwas the worst of treachery that mined my poor boy.""I have heard that also," said Stapylton, and with a degree of feelingand sympathy that made the old man's heart yearn towards him."How I wish you had known him!" said he, as he drew his hand over hiseyes. "And do you know, sir," said he, warming, "that if I still followup this suit, devoting to it the little that is left to me of life orfortune, that I do so less for any hope of gain than to place my poorboy before the world with his honor and fame unstained.""My old friend does himself no more than justice there!" criedWithering."A noble object,--may you have all success in it!" said Stapylton. Hepaused, and then, in a tone of deeper feeling, added: "It will, perhaps,seem a great liberty, the favor I'm about to ask; but remember that,as a brother soldier with your son I have some slight claim to approachyou. Will you allow me to offer you such knowledge as I possess ofIndia, to aid your suit? Will you associate me, in fact, with yourcause? No higher one could there be than the vindication of a braveman's honor.""I thank you with all my heart and soul!" cried the old man, graspinghis hand. "In my own name, and in that of my poor dear granddaughter, Ithank you.""Oh, then, Colonel Barrington has left a daughter? I was not aware ofthat," said Stapylton, with a certain coldness."And a daughter who knows no more of this suit than of our presentdiscussion of it," said Withering.In the frankness of a nature never happier than when indulging its owncandor, Barrington told how it was to see and fetch back with him thesame granddaughter he had left a spot he had not quitted for years. "She's coming back to a very humble home, it is true; but if you, sir," saidhe, addressing Stapylton, "will not despise such lowly fare as a cottagecan afford you, and would condescend to come and see us, you shall havethe welcome that is due to one who wishes well to my boy's memory.""And if you do," broke in Withering, "you'll see the prettiest cottageand the first hostess in Europe; and here 's to her health,--Miss DinahBarrington!""I 'm not going to refuse that toast, though I have just passed thedecanter," said Peter. "Here 's to the best of sisters!""Miss Barrington!" said Stapylton, with a courteous bow; and he drainedhis glass to the bottom."And that reminds me I promised to be back to tea with her," saidBarrington; and renewing with all warmth his invitation to Stapylton,and cordially taking leave of his old friend, he left the house andhastened to his hotel."What a delightful evening I have passed, Dinah!" said he, cheerfully,as he entered."Which means that the Attorney-General gave you a grand review andsham fight of all the legal achievements of the term; but bear in mind,brother, there is no professional slang so odious to me as the lawyer's,and I positively hate a joke which cost six-and-eightpence, or eventhree-and-fourpence." <"Nothing of this kind was there at all, Dinah! Withering had a friendwith him, a very distinguished soldier, who had seen much Indianservice, and entered with a most cordial warmth into poor George's case.He knew it,--as all India knows it, by report,--and frankly told uswhere our chief difficulties lay, and the important things we wereneglecting.""How generous! of a perfect stranger too!" said she, with a scarcelydetectable tone of scorn."Not--so to say--an utter stranger, for George was known to him byreputation and character.""And who is, I suppose I am to say, your friend, Peter?""Captain or Major Stapylton, of the Regent's Hussars?""Oh! I know him,--or, rather, I know of him.""What and how, Dinah? I am very curious to hear this.""Simply, that while young Conyers was at the cottage he showed me aletter from that gentleman, asking him in the Admiral's name, to Cobham,and containing, at the same time, a running criticism on the house andhis guests far more flippant than creditable.""Men do these things every day, Dinah, and there is no harm in it.""That all depends upon whom the man is. The volatile gayety of ahigh-spirited nature, eager for effect and fond of a sensation, willlead to many an indiscretion; but very different from this is thewell-weighed sarcasm of a more serious mind, who not only shots hisgun home, but takes time to sight ere he fires it. I hear that CaptainStapylton is a grand, cold, thoughtful man, of five or six-and-thirty.Is that so?""Perhaps he may be. He 's a splendid fellow to look at, and all thesoldier. But you shall see for yourself, and I 'll warrant you 'll notharbor a prejudice against him.""Which means, you have asked him on a visit, brother Peter?""Scarcely fair to call it on a visit, Dinah," blundered he out, inconfusion; "but I have said with what pleasure we should see him underour roof when we returned.""I solemnly declare my belief, that if you went to a cattle-show you 'dinvite every one you met there, from the squire to the pig-jobber,never thinking the while that nothing is so valueless as indiscriminatehospitality, even if it were not costly. Nobody thanks you,--no one isgrateful for it.""And who wants them to be grateful, Dinah? The pleasure is in thegiving, not in receiving. You see your friends with their holiday faceson, when they sit round the table. The slowest and dreariest of themtries to look cheery; and the stupid dog who has never a jest in him hasat least a ready laugh for the wit of his neighbor.""Does it not spoil some of your zest for this pleasantry to think how itis paid for, brother?""It might, perhaps, if I were to think of it; but, thank Heaven! it'sabout one of the last things would come into my head. My dear sister,there's no use in always treating human nature as if it was sick, for ifyou do, it will end by being hypochondriac!""I protest, brother Peter, I don't know where you meet all the good andexcellent people you rave about, and I feel it very churlish of you thatyou never present any of them to me!" And so saying, she gathered herknitting materials hastily together, and reminding him that it was pasteleven o'clock, she uttered a hurried good-night, and departed.CHAPTER XXVI. A VERY SAD GOOD-BYEConyers sat alone in his barrack-room, very sad and dispirited.Hunter had left that same morning, and the young soldier felt utterlyfriendless. He had obtained some weeks' leave of absence, and alreadytwo days of the leave had gone over, and he had not energy to set outif he had even a thought as to the whither. A variety of plans passedvaguely through his head. He would go down to Portsmouth and see Hunteroff; or he would nestle down in the little village of Inistioge anddream away the days in quiet forgetfulness; or he would go over toParis, which he had never seen, and try whether the gay dissipationsof that brilliant city might not distract and amuse him. The mail fromIndia had arrived and brought no letter from his father, and this,too, rendered him irritable and unhappy. Not that his father was a goodcorrespondent; he wrote but rarely, and always like one who snatched ahurried moment to catch a post. Still, if this were a case of emergency,any great or critical event in his life, he was sure his father wouldhave informed him; and thus was it that he sat balancing doubt againstdoubt, and setting probability against probability, till his very headgrew addled with the labor of speculation.It was already late; all the usual sounds of barrack life had subsided,and although on the opposite side of the square the brilliant lights ofthe mess-room windows showed where the convivial spirits of the regimentwere assembled, all around was silent and still. Suddenly there came adull heavy knock to the door, quickly followed by two or three others.Not caring to admit a visitor, whom, of course, he surmised would besome young brother-officer full of the plans and projects of the mess,he made no reply to the summons, nor gave any token of his presence. Thesounds, however, were redoubled, and with an energy that seemed to vouchfor perseverance; and Conyers, partly in anger, and partly in curiosity,went to the door and opened it. It was not till after a minute or twothat he was able to recognize the figure before him. It was TomDill, but without a hat or neckcloth, his hair dishevelled, his facecolorless, and his clothes torn, while from a recent wound in one handthe blood flowed fast, and dropped on the floor. The whole air andappearance of the young fellow so resembled drunkenness that Conyersturned a stern stare upon him as he stood in the centre of the room, andin a voice of severity said, "By what presumption, sir, do you dare topresent yourself in this state before me?""You think I'm drunk, sir, but I am not," said he, with a falteringaccent and a look of almost imploring misery."What is the meaning of this state, then? What disgraceful row have youbeen in?""None, sir. I have cut my hand with the glass on the barrack-wall, andtorn my trousers too; but it's no matter, I 'll not want them long.""What do you mean by all this? Explain yourself.""May I sit down, sir, for I feel very weak?" but before the permissioncould be granted, his knees tottered, and he fell in a faint on thefloor. Conyers knelt down beside him, bathed his temples with water, andas soon as signs of animation returned, took him up in his arms and laidhim at full length on a sofa.In the vacant, meaningless glance of the poor fellow as he looked firstaround him, Conyers could mark how he was struggling to find out wherehe was."You are with me, Tom,--with your friend Conyers," said he, holding thecold clammy hand between his own."Thank you, sir. It is very good of you. I do not deserve it," said he,in a faint whisper."My poor boy, you mustn't say that; I am your friend. I told you alreadyI would be so.""But you 'll not be my friend when I tell you--when I tell you--all;"and as the last word dropped, he covered his face with both his hands,and burst into a heavy passion of tears."Come, come, Tom, this is not manly; bear up bravely, bear up withcourage, man. You used to say you had plenty of pluck if it were to betried.""So I thought I had, sir, but it has all left me;" and he sobbed as ifhis heart was breaking. "But I believe I could bear anything butthis," said he, in a voice shaken by convulsive throes. "It is thedisgrace,--that 's what unmans me.""Take a glass of wine, collect yourself, and tell me all about it.""No, sir. No wine, thank you; give me a glass of water. There, Iam better now; my brain is not so hot. You are very good to me, Mr.Conyers, but it 's the last time I'll ever ask it,--the very last time,sir; but I 'll remember it all my life.""If you give way in this fashion, Tom, I 'll not think you thestout-hearted fellow I once did.""No, sir, nor am I. I 'll never be the same again. I feel it here. Ifeel as if something gave, something broke." And he laid his hand overhis heart and sighed heavily."Well, take your own time about it, Tom, and let me hear if I cannot beof use to you.""No, sir, not now. Neither you nor any one else can help me now. It'sall over, Mr. Conyers,--it's all finished.""What is over,--what is finished?""And so, as I thought it would n't do for one like me to be seenspeaking to you before people, I stole away and climbed over thebarrack-wall. I cut my hand on the glass, too, but it's nothing. Andhere I am, and here's the money you gave me; I've no need of it now."And as he laid some crumpled bank-notes on the table, his overchargedheart again betrayed him, and he burst into tears. "Yes, sir, that'swhat you gave me for the College, but I was rejected.""Rejected, Tom! How was that? Be calm, my poor fellow, and tell me allabout it quietly.""I'll try, sir, I will, indeed; and I'll tell you nothing but the truth,that you may depend upon." He took a great drink of water, and wenton. "If there was one man I was afraid of in the world, it was SurgeonAsken, of Mercer's Hospital. I used to be a dresser there, and hewas always angry with me, exposing me before the other students, andridiculing me, so that if anything was done badly in the wards, he 'dsay, 'This is some of Master Dill's work, is n't it?' Well, sir, wouldyou believe it, on the morning I went up for my examination, Dr. Colestakes ill, and Surgeon Asken is called on to replace him. I did n't knowit till I was sent for to go in, and my head went round, and I could n'tsee, and a cold sweat came over me, and I was so confused that when Igot into the room I went and sat down beside the examiners, and neverknew what they were laughing at."'I have no doubt, Mr. Dill, you 'll occupy one of these places at somefuture day,' says Dr. Willes, 'but for the present your seat is yonder.'I don't remember much more after that, till Mr. Porter said, 'Don't beso nervous, Mr. Dill; collect yourself; I am persuaded you know what Iam asking you, if you will not be flurried.' And all I could say was,'God bless you for that speech, no matter how it goes with me' and theyall laughed out."It was Asken's turn now, and he began. 'You are destined for the navy,I understand, sir?'"'No, sir; for the army,' said I."'From what we have seen to-day, you 'll prove an ornament to eitherservice. Meanwhile, sir, it will be satisfactory to the court to haveyour opinion on gun-shot wounds. Describe to us the case of a manlaboring under the worst form of concussion of the brain, and by whatindications you would distinguish it from fracture of the base of theskull, and what circumstances might occur to render the distinction moredifficult, and what impossible?' That was his question, and if I was tolive a hundred years I 'll never forget a word in it,--it's written onmy heart, I believe, for life."'Go on, sir,' said he, 'the court is waiting for you.'"'Take the case of concussion first,' said Dr. Willes."'I hope I may be permitted to conduct my own examination in my ownmanner,' said Asken."That finished me, and I gave a groan that set them all laughing again."'Well, sir, I 'm waiting,' said Asken. 'You can have no difficulty todescribe concussion, if you only give us your present sensations.'"'That's as true as if you swore it,' said I. 'I 'm just as if I had afall on the crown of my head. There's a haze over my eyes, and a ringingof bells in my ears, and a feeling as if my brain was too big.'"'Take my word for it, Mr. Dill,' said he, sneeringly, 'the latter isa purely deceptive sensation; the fault lies in the opposite direction.Let us, however, take something more simple;' and with that he describeda splinter wound of the scalp, with the whole integuments torn infragments, and gunpowder and sticks and sand all mixed up with theflap that hung down over the patient's face. 'Now,' said he, after tenminutes' detail of this,--'now,' said he, 'when you found the man inthis case, you 'd take out your scalpel, perhaps, and neatly cut awayall these bruised and torn integuments?'"'I would, sir,' cried I, eagerly."'I knew it,' said he, with a cry of triumph,--'I knew it. I 've no moreto ask you. You may retire.'"I got up to leave the room, but a sudden flash went through me, and Isaid out boldly,--"'Am I passed? Tell me at once. Put me out of pain, for I can't bear anymore!'"'If you'll retire for a few minutes,' said the President--"'My heart will break, sir,' said I, 'if I 'm to be in suspense anymore. Tell me the worst at once.'"And I suppose they did tell me, for I knew no more till I found myselfin the housekeeper's room, with wet cloths on my head, and the money yousee there in the palm of my hand. That told everything. Many were verykind to me, telling how it happened to this and to that man, the firsttime; and that Asken was thought very unfair, and so on; but I justwashed my face with cold water, and put on my hat and went away home,that is, to where I lodged, and I wrote to Polly just this one line:'Rejected; I 'm not coming back.' And then I shut the shutters and wentto bed in my clothes as I was, and I slept sixteen hours without everwaking. When I awoke, I was all right. I could n't remember everythingthat happened for some time, but I knew it all at last, and so I wentoff straight to the Royal Barracks and 'listed.""Enlisted?--enlisted?""Yes, sir, in the Forty-ninth Regiment of Foot, now in India, andsending off drafts from Cork to join them on Tuesday. It was out of thedpt at the bridge I made my escape to-night to come and see you oncemore, and to give you this with my hearty blessing, for you were theonly one ever stood to me in the world,--the only one that let me thinkfor a moment I could be a gentleman!""Come, come, this is all wrong and hasty and passionate, Tom. You haveno right to repay your family in this sort; this is not the way to treatthat fine-hearted girl who has done so much for you; this is but anoutbreak of angry selfishness.""These are hard words, sir, very hard words, and I wish you had not saidthem.""Hard or not, you deserve them; and it is their justice that woundsyou.""I won't say that it is not, sir. But it isn't justice I 'm askingfor, but forgiveness. Just one word out of your mouth to say, 'I 'msorry for you, Tom;' or, 'I wish you well.'""So I do, my poor fellow, with all my heart," cried Con-yers, graspinghis hand and pressing it cordially, "and I 'll get you out of thisscrape, cost what it may.""If you mean, sir, that I am to get my discharge, it's better to tellthe truth at once. I would n't take it. No, sir, I 'll stand by what I've done. I see I never could be a doctor, and I have my doubts, too, ifI ever could be a gentleman; but there's something tells me I could be asoldier, and I'll try."Conyers turned from him with an impatient gesture, and walked the roomin moody silence."I know well enough, sir," continued Tom, "what every one will say;perhaps you yourself are thinking it this very minute: 'It 's all out ofhis love of low company he 's gone and done this; he's more at home withthose poor ignorant boys there than he would be with men of educationand good manners.' Perhaps it's true, perhaps it is 'n't! But there 'sone thing certain, which is, that I 'll never try again to be anythingthat I feel is clean above me, and I 'll not ask the world to give mecredit for what I have not the least pretension to.""Have you reflected," said Conyers, slowly, "that if you reject myassistance now, it will be too late to ask for it a few weeks, or even afew days hence?""I have thought of all that, sir. I 'll never trouble you about myselfagain.""My dear Tom," said Conyers, as he laid his arm on the other's shoulder,"just think for one moment of all the misery this step will cause yoursister,--that kind, true-hearted sister, who has behaved so nobly byyou.""I have thought of that, too, sir; and in my heart I believe, though she'll fret herself at first greatly, it will all turn out best in the end.What could I ever be but a disgrace to her? Who 'd ever think the sameof Polly after seeing me? Don't I bring her down in spite of herself;and is n't it a hard trial for her to be a lady when I am in the sameroom with her? No, sir, I'll not go back; and though I haven't much hopein me, I feel I'm doing right.""I know well," said Conyers, pettishly, "that your sister will throwthe whole blame on me. She 'll say, naturally enough, You could haveobtained his discharge,--you should have insisted on his leaving.""That's what you could not, sir," said Tom, sturdily. "It's a poor hearthasn't some pride in it; and I would not go back and meet my father,after my disgrace, if it was to cost me my right hand,--so don't sayanother word about it. Good-bye, sir, and my blessing go with youwherever you are. I 'll never forget how you stood to me.""That money there is yours, Dill," said Conyers, half haughtily. "Youmay refuse my advice and reject my counsel, but I scarcely suppose you'll ask me to take back what I once have given."Tom tried to speak, but he faltered and moved from one foot to theother, in an embarrassed and hesitating way. He wanted to say how thesum originally intended for one object could not honestly be claimed foranother; he wanted to say, also, that he had no longer the need ofso much money, and that the only obligation he liked to submit to wasgratitude for the past; but a consciousness that in attempting tosay these things some unhappy word, some ill-advised or ungraciousexpression might escape him, stopped him, and he was silent."You do not wish that we should part coldly, Tom?""No, sir,--oh, no!" cried he, eagerly."Then let not that paltry gift stand in the way of our esteem. Now,another thing. Will you write to me? Will you tell me how the worldfares with you, and honestly declare whether the step you have takento-day brings with it regret or satisfaction?""I'm not over-much of a letter-writer," said he, falter-ingly, "but I'lltry. I must be going, Mr. Conyers," said he, after a moment's silence;"I must get back before I'm missed.""Not as you came, Tom, however. I'll pass you out of the barrack-gate."As they walked along side by side, neither spoke till they came close tothe gate; then Conyers halted and said, "Can you think of nothing I cando for you, or is there nothing you would leave to my charge after youhave gone?""No, sir, nothing." He paused, and then, as if with a struggle, said,"Except you 'd write one line to my sister Polly, to tell her that Iwent away in good heart, that I did n't give in one bit, and that if itwas n't for thinking that maybe I 'd never see her again--" He faltered,his voice grew thick, he tried to cough down the rising emotion, butthe feeling overcame him, and he burst out into tears. Ashamed at theweakness he was endeavoring to deny, he sprang through the gate anddisappeared.Conyers slowly returned to his quarters, very thoughtful and very sad.CHAPTER XXVII. THE CONVENT ON THE MEUSEWhile poor Tom Dill, just entering upon life, went forth in gloom anddisappointment to his first venture, old Peter Barrington, broken byyears and many a sorrow, set out on his journey with a high heart and aspirit well disposed to see everything in its best light and be pleasedwith all around him. Much of this is, doubtless, matter of temperament;but I suspect, too, that all of us have more in our power in this waythan we practise. Barrington had possibly less merit than his neighbors,for nature had given him one of those happy dispositions upon whichthe passing vexations of life produce scarcely any other effect thana stimulus to humor, or a tendency to make them the matter of amusingmemory.He had lived, besides, so long estranged from the world, that life hadfor him all the interests of a drama, and he could no more have feltangry with the obtrusive waiter or the roguish landlord than he wouldwith their fictitious representatives on the stage. They were, in hiseyes, parts admirably played, and no more; he watched them with a senseof humorous curiosity, and laughed heartily at successes of which hewas himself the victim. Miss Barrington was no disciple of this school;rogues to her were simply rogues, and no histrionic sympathies dulledthe vexation they gave her. The world, out of which she had lived solong, had, to her thinking, far from improved in the mean while. Peoplewere less deferential, less courteous than of old. There was an indecenthaste and bustle about everything, and a selfish disregard of one'sneighbor was the marked feature of all travel. While her brother repaidhimself for many an inconvenience by thinking over some strange caprice,or some curious inconsistency in human nature,--texts for amusingafterthought,--she only winced under the infliction, and chafed at everyinstance of cheating or impertinence that befell them.The wonderful things she saw, the splendid galleries rich in art, thegorgeous palaces, the grand old cathedrals, were all marred to herby the presence of the loquacious lackey whose glib tongue had to beretained at the salary of the "vicar of our parish," and who neverdescanted on a saint's tibia without costing the price of a dinner; sothat old Peter at last said to himself, "I believe my sister Dinah wouldn't enjoy the garden of Eden if Adam had to go about and show her itsbeauties."The first moment of real enjoyment of her tour was on that morning whenthey left Namur to drive to the Convent of Bramaigne, about threemiles off, on the banks of the Meuse. A lovelier day never shone upon alovelier scene. The river, one side guarded by lofty cliffs, was on theother bounded by a succession of rich meadows, dotted with picturesquehomesteads half hidden in trees. Little patches of cultivation, laboredto the perfection of a garden, varied the scene, and beautiful cattlelay lazily under the giant trees, solemn voluptuaries of the peacefulhappiness of their lot.Hitherto Miss Dinah had stoutly denied that anything they had seen couldcompare with their own "vale and winding river," but now she franklyowned that the stream was wider, the cliffs higher, the trees taller andbetter grown, while the variety of tint in the foliage far exceededall she had any notion of; but above all these were the evidences ofabundance, the irresistible charm that gives the poetry to peasantlife; and the picturesque cottage, the costume, the well-stored granary,bespeak the condition with which we associate our ideas of ruralhappiness. The giant oxen as they marched proudly to their toil, thegay-caparisoned pony who jingled his bells as he trotted by, the peasantgirls as they sat at their lace cushions before the door, the rosyurchins who gambolled in the deep grass, all told of plenty,--thatblessing which to man is as the sunlight to a landscape, making thefertile spots more beautiful, and giving even to ruggedness an aspect ofstern grandeur."Oh, brother Peter, that we could see something like this at home,"cried she. "See that girl yonder watering the flowers in her littlegarden,--how prettily that old vine is trained over the balcony,--markthe scarlet tassels in the snow-white team,--are not these signs of anexistence not linked to daily drudgery? I wish our people could be likethese.""Here we are, Dinah: there is the convent!" cried Barrington, as a tallmassive roof appeared over the tree-tops, and the little carriage nowturned from the high-road into a shady avenue of tall elms. "What agrand old place it is! some great seigniorial chteau once on a time."As they drew nigh, nothing bespoke the cloister. The massive oldbuilding, broken by many a projection and varied by many a gable, stood,like the mansion of some rich proprietor, in a vast wooded lawn. Thewindows lay open, the terrace was covered with orange and lemon treesand flowering plants, amid which seats were scattered; and in the roomswithin, the furniture indicated habits of comfort and even of luxury.With all this, no living thing was to be seen; and when Barrington gotdown and entered the hall, he neither found a servant nor any means tosummon one."You'll have to move that little slide you see in the door there," saidthe driver of the carriage, "and some one will come to you."He did so; and after waiting a few moments, a somewhat ruddy, cheerfulface, surmounted by a sort of widow's cap, appeared, and asked hisbusiness."They are at dinner, but if you will enter the drawing-room she willcome to you presently."They waited for some time; to them it seemed very long, for they neverspoke, but sat there in still thoughtfulness, their hearts very full,for there was much in that expectancy, and all the visions of manya wakeful night or dreary day might now receive their shock or theirsupport. Their patience was to be further tested; for, when the dooropened, there entered a grim-looking little woman in a nun's costume,who, without previous salutation, announced herself as Sister Lydia.Whether the opportunity for expansiveness was rare, or that her especialgift was fluency, never did a little old woman hold forth more volubly.As though anticipating all the worldly objections to a conventualexistence, or rather seeming to suppose that every possible thing hadbeen actually said on that ground, she assumed the defence the verymoment she sat down. Nothing short of long practice with this argumentcould have stored her mind with all her instances, her quotations, andher references. Nor could anything short of a firm conviction have madeher so courageously indifferent to the feelings she was outraging,for she never scrupled to arraign the two strangers before her forignorance, apathy, worldliness, sordid and poor ambitions, and, last ofall, a levity unbecoming their time of life.[Illustration: 304]"I 'm not quite sure that I understand her aright," whispered Peter,whose familiarity with French was not what it had once been; "but if Ido, Dinah, she 's giving us a rare lesson.""She's the most insolent old woman I ever met in my life," said hissister, whose violent use of her fan seemed either likely to provoke orto prevent a fit of apoplexy."It is usual," resumed Sister Lydia, "to give persons who are about toexercise the awful responsibility now devolving upon you the opportunityof well weighing and reflecting over the arguments I have somewhatfaintly shadowed forth.""Oh, not faintly!" groaned Barrington.But she minded nothing the interruption, and went on,--"And for this purpose a little tract has been composed, entitled 'AWord to the Worldling.' This, with your permission, I will place in yourhands. You will there find at more length than I could bestow--But Ifear I impose upon this lady's patience?""It has left me long since, madam," said Miss Dinah, as she actuallygasped for breath.In the grim half-smile of the old nun might be seen the triumphantconsciousness that placed her above the "mundane;" but she did notresent the speech, simply saying that, as it was the hour of recreation,perhaps she would like to see her young ward in the garden with hercompanions."By all means. We thank you heartily for the offer," cried Barrington,rising hastily.[Illustration: 304]With another smile, still more meaningly a reproof, Sister Lydiareminded him that the profane foot of a man had never transgressed thesacred precincts of the convent garden, and that he must remain where hewas."For Heaven's sake! Dinah, don't keep me a prisoner here a momentlonger than you can help it," cried he, "or I'll not answer for my goodbehavior."As Barrington paced up and down the room with impatient steps, he couldnot escape the self-accusation that all his present anxiety was scarcelycompatible with the long, long years of neglect and oblivion he hadsuffered to glide over.The years in which he had never heard of Josephine--never asked forher--was a charge there was no rebutting. Of course he could fall backupon all that special pleading ingenuity and self-love will supply abouthis own misfortunes, the crushing embarrassments that befell him, andsuch like. But it was no use, it was desertion, call it how he would;and poor as he was he had never been without a roof to shelter her, andif it had not been for false pride he would have offered her that refugelong ago. He was actually startled as he thought over all this. Yourgenerous people, who forgive injuries with little effort, who bear nomalice nor cherish any resentment, would be angels--downright angels--ifwe did not find that they are just as indulgent, just as merciful tothemselves as to the world at large. They become perfect adepts inapologies, and with one cast of the net draw in a whole shoal ofattenuating circumstances. To be sure, there will now and then breakin upon them a startling suspicion that all is not right, and thatconscience has been "cooking" the account; and when such a moment doescome, it is a very painful one."Egad!" muttered he to himself, "we have been very heartless all thistime, there's no denying it; and if poor George's girl be a discipleof that grim old woman with the rosary and the wrinkles, it is nobody'sfault but our own." He looked at his watch; Dinah had been gone morethan half an hour. What a time to keep him in suspense! Of course therewere formalities,--the Sister Lydia described innumerable ones,--jaildelivery was nothing to it, but surely five-and-thirty minutes wouldsuffice to sign a score of documents. The place was becoming hateful tohim. The grand old park, with its aged oaks, seemed sad as a graveyard,and the great silent house, where not a footfall sounded, appeared atomb. "Poor child! what a dreary spot you have spent your brightestyears in,--what a shadow to throw over the whole of a lifetime!"He had just arrived at that point wherein his granddaughter arose beforehis mind a pale, careworn, sorrow-struck girl, crushed beneath thedreary monotony of a joyless life, and seeming only to move in a sortof dreamy melancholy, when the door opened, and Miss Barrington enteredwith her arm around a young girl tall as herself, and from whosecommanding figure even the ungainly dress she wore could not take awaythe dignity."This is Josephine, Peter," said Miss Dinah; and though Barringtonrushed forward to clasp her in his arms, she merely crossed hersdemurely on her breast and courtesied deeply."It is your grandpapa, Josephine," said Miss Dinah, half tartly.The young girl opened her large, full, lustrous eyes, and staredsteadfastly at him, and then, with infinite grace, she took his hand andkissed it."My own dear child," cried the old man, throwing his arms around her,"it is not homage, it is your love we want.""Take care, Peter, take care," whispered his sister; "she is very timidand very strange.""You speak English, I hope, dear?" said the old man."Yes, sir, I like it best," said she. And there was the very faintestpossible foreign accent in the words."Is n't that George's own voice, Dinah? Don't you think you heardhimself there?""The voice is certainly like him," said Miss Dinah, with a markedemphasis."And so are--no, not her eyes, but her brow, Dinah. Yes, darling, youhave his own frank look, and I feel sure you have his own generousnature.""They say I'm like my mother's picture," said she, unfastening a locketshe wore from its chain and handing it. And both Peter and his sistergazed eagerly at the miniature. It was of a very dark but handsome womanin a rich turban, and who, though profusely ornamented with costly gems,did, in reality, present a resemblance to the cloistered figure beforethem."Am I like her?" asked the girl, with a shade more of earnestness in hervoice."You are, darling; but like your father, too, and every word you utterbrings back his memory; and see, Dinah, if that is n't George's oldtrick,--to lay one hand in the palm of the other."As if corrected, the young girl dropped her arms to her sides and stoodlike a statue."Be like him in everything, dearest child," said the old man, "if youwould have my heart all your own.""I must be what I am," said she, solemnly."Just so, Josephine; well said, my good girl. Be natural," said MissDinah, kissing her, "and our love will never fail you."There was the faintest little smile of acknowledgment to this speech;but faint as it was, it dimpled her cheek, and seemed to have lefta pleasant expression on her face, for old Peter gazed on her withincreased delight as he said, "That was George's own smile; just theway he used to look, half grave, half merry. Oh, how you bring him backtome!""You see, my dear child, that you are one of us; let us hope you willshare in the happiness this gives us."The girl listened attentively to Miss Dinah's words, and after a pauseof apparent thought over them, said, "I will hope so.""May we leave this, Dinah? Are we free to get away?" whisperedBarrington to his sister, for an unaccountable oppression seemed toweigh on him, both from the place and its belongings."Yes; Josephine has only one good-bye to say; her trunks are already onthe carriage, and there is nothing more to detain us.""Go and say that farewell, dear child," said he, affectionately; "and bespeedy, for there are longing hearts here to wish for your return."With a grave and quiet mien she walked away, and as she gained thedoor turned round and made a deep, respectful courtesy,--a movement soceremonious that the old man involuntarily replied to it by a bow asdeep and reverential.CHAPTER XXVIII. GEORGE'S DAUGHTERI suppose, nay, I am certain, that the memory of our happiest momentsought ever to be of the very faintest and weakest, since, could werecall them in all their fulness and freshness, the recollection wouldonly serve to deepen the gloom of age, and imbitter all its dailytrials. Nor is it, altogether, a question of memory! It is in the veryessence of happiness to be indescribable. Who could impart in words thesimple pleasure he has felt as he lay day-dreaming in the deep grass,lulled by the humming insect, or the splash of falling water, withteeming fancy peopling the space around, and blending the possible withthe actual? The more exquisite the sense of enjoyment, the more willit defy delineation. And so, when we come to describe the happiness ofothers, do we find our words weak, and our attempt mere failure.It is in this difficulty that I now find myself. I would tell, if Icould, how enjoyably the Barringtons sauntered about through the oldvillages on the Rhine and up the Moselle, less travelling than strollingalong in purposeless indolence, resting here, and halting there, alwaysinterested, always pleased. It was strange into what perfect harmonythese three natures--unlike as they were--blended!Old Peter's sympathies went with all things human, and he loved to watchthe village life and catch what he could of its ways and instincts. Hissister, to whom the love of scenery was a passion, never wearied of thepicturesque land they travelled; and as for Josephine, she was no longerthe demure pensionnaire of the convent,--thoughtful and reserved,even to secrecy,--but a happy child, revelling in a thousand senses ofenjoyment, and actually exulting in the beauty of all she saw aroundher. What depression must come of captivity, when even its faintestimage, the cloister, could have weighed down a heart like hers! Such wasBarrington's thought as he beheld her at play with the peasant children,weaving garlands for a village fte, or joyously joining the chorus ofa peasant song. There was, besides, something singularly touching in thehalf-consciousness of her freedom, when recalled for an instant to thepast by the tinkling bell of a church. She would seem to stop in herplay, and bethink her how and why she was there, and then, with a cry ofjoy, bound away after her companions in wild delight."Dearest aunt," said she, one day, as they sat on a rocky ledge over thelittle river that traverses the Lahnech, "shall I always find the sameenjoyment in life that I feel now, for it seems to me this is a measureof happiness that could not endure?""Some share of this is owing to contrast, Fifine. Your convent life hadnot too many pleasures.""It was, or rather it seems to me now, as I look back, a long and wearydream; but, at the same time, it appears more real than this; for dowhat I may I cannot imagine this to be the world of misery and sorrowI have heard so much of. Can any one fancy a scene more beautiful thanthis before us? Where is the perfume more exquisite than these violetsI now crush in my hand? The peasants, as they salute us, look happy andcontented. Is it, then, only in great cities that men make each othermiserable?"Dinah shook her head, but did not speak."I am so glad grandpapa does not live in a city. Aunt, I am neverwearied of hearing you talk of that dear cottage beside the river; andthrough all my present delight I feel a sense of impatience to be there,to be at 'home.'""So that you will not hold us to our pledge to bring you back toBramaigne, Fifine," said Miss Dinah, smiling."Oh no, no! Not if you will let me live with you. Never!""But you have been happy up to this, Fifine? You have said over andover again that your convent life was dear to you, and all its wayspleasant.""It is just the same change to me to live as I now do, as in my heartI feel changed after reading out one of those delightful stories tograndpapa,--Rob Roy, for instance. It all tells of a world so much morebright and beautiful than I know of, that it seems as though new senseswere given to me. It is so strange and so captivating, too, to hear ofgenerous impulses, noble devotion,--of faith that never swerved, andlove that never faltered."In novels, child; these were in novels.""True, aunt; but they had found no place there had they been incredible;at least, it is clear that he who tells the tale would have us believeit to be true."Miss Dinah had not been a convert to her brother's notions as toFifine's readings; and she was now more disposed to doubt than ever. Tooverthrow of a sudden, as though by a great shock, all the stem realismof a cloister existence, and supply its place with fictitious incidentsand people, seemed rash and perilous; but old Peter only thought ofgiving a full liberty to the imprisoned spirit,--striking off chain andfetter, and setting the captive free,--free in all the glorious libertyof a young imagination."Well, here comes grandpapa," said Miss Dinah, "and, if I don't mistake,with a book in his hand for one of your morning readings."Josephine ran eagerly to meet him, and, fondly drawing her arm withinhis own, came back at his side."The third volume, Fifine, the third volume," said he, holding thebook aloft. "Only think, child, what fates are enclosed within athird volume! What a deal of happiness or long-living misery are hereincluded!"[Illustration: 312]She straggled to take the book from his hand, but he evaded her grasp,and placed it in his pocket, saying,--"Not till evening, Fifine. I am bent on a long ramble up the Glen thismorning, and you shall tell me all about the sisterhood, and sing me oneof those little Latin canticles I'm so fond of.""Meanwhile, I 'll go and finish my letter to Polly Dill. I told her,Peter, that by Thursday next, or Friday, she might expect us.""I hope so, with all my heart; for, beautiful as all this is, it wantsthe greatest charm,--it's not home! Then I want, besides, to see Fifinefull of household cares.""Feeding the chickens instead of chasing the butterflies, Fifine.Totting up the house-bills, in lieu of sighing over 'Waverley.'""And, if I know Fifine, she will be able to do one without relinquishingthe other," said Peter, gravely. "Our daily life is all the morebeautiful when it has its landscape reliefs of light and shadow.""I think I could, too," cried Fifine, eagerly. "I feel as though I couldwork in the fields and be happy, just in the conscious sense of doingwhat it was good to do, and what others would praise me for.""There's a paymaster will never fail you in such hire," said Miss Dinah,pointing to her brother; and then, turning away, she walked back to thelittle inn. As she drew nigh, the landlord came to tell her that a younggentleman, on seeing her name in the list of strangers, had made manyinquiries after her, and begged he might be informed of her return. Onlearning that he was in the garden, she went thither at once."I felt it was you. I knew who had been asking for me, Mr. Conyers,"said she, advancing towards Fred with her hand out. "But what strangechance could have led you here?""You have just said it, Miss Barrington; a chance,--a mere chance. Ihad got a short leave fron| my regiment, and came abroad to wander aboutwith no very definite object; but, growing impatient of the wearisomehordes of our countrymen on the Rhine, I turned aside yesterday fromthat great high-road and reached this spot, whose greatest charm--shallI own it?--was a fancied resemblance to a scene I loved far better.""You are right. It was only this morning my brother said it was so likeour own cottage.""And he is here also?" said the young man, with a half-constraint."Yes, and very eager to see you, and ask your forgive ness for hisungracious manner to you; not that I saw it, or understand what it couldmean, but he says that he has a pardon to crave at your hands."So confused was Conyers for an instant that he made no answer, and whenhe did speak it was falteringly and with embarrassment, "I never couldhave anticipated meeting you here. It is more good fortune than I everlooked for."[Illustration: 312]"We came over to the Continent to fetch away my grand-niece, thedaughter of that Colonel Barrington you have heard so much of.""And is she--" He stopped, and grew scarlet with confusion; but shebroke in, laughingly,--"No, not black, only dark-complexioned; in fact, a brunette, and nomore.""Oh, I don't mean,--I surely could not have said--""No matter what you meant or said. Your unuttered question was one thatkept occurring to my brother and myself every morning as we journeyedhere, though neither of us had the courage to speak it. But our wondersare over; she is a dear good, girl, and we love her better every day wesee her. But now a little about yourself. Why do I find you so low anddepressed?""I have had much to fret me, Miss Barrington. Some were things thatcould give but passing unhappiness; others were of graver import.""Tell me so much as you may of them, and I will try to help you to bearup against them.""I will tell you all,--everything!" cried he. "It is the very moment Ihave been longing for, when I could pour out all my cares before you andask, What shall I do?"Miss Barrington silently drew her arm within his, and they strolledalong the shady alley without a word."I must begin with my great grief,--it absorbs all the rest," said he,suddenly. "My father is coming home; he has lost, or thrown up, I can'ttell which, his high employment. I have heard both versions of thestory; and his own few words, in the only letter he has written me, donot confirm either. His tone is indignant; but far more it is sad anddepressed,--he who never wrote a line but in the joyousness of hishigh-hearted nature; who met each accident of life with an undauntedspirit, and spurned the very thought of being cast down by fortune. Seewhat he says here." And he took a much crumpled letter from his pocket,and folded down a part of it "Read that. 'The time for men of my stampis gone by in India. We are as much bygones as the old flint musket orthe matchlock. Soldiers of a different temperament are the fashion now;and the sooner we are pensioned or die off the better. For my own part,I am sick of it. I have lost my liver and have not made my fortune,and like men who have missed their opportunities, I come away toodiscontented with myself to think well of any one. They fancied that bycoldness and neglect they might get rid of me, as they did once beforeof a far worthier and better fellow; but though I never had the couragethat he had, they shall not break my heart.' Does it strike you towhom he alludes there?" asked Conyers, suddenly; "for each time that Iread the words I am more disposed to believe that they refer to ColonelBarrington.""I am sure of it!" cried she. "It is the testimony of a sorrow-strickenheart to an old friend's memory; but I hear my brother's voice; let mego and tell him you are here." But Barrington was already coming towardsthem."Ah, Mr. Conyers!" cried he. "If you knew how I have longed for thismoment! I believe you are the only man in the world I ever ill treatedon my own threshold; but the very thought of it gave me a fit ofillness, and now the best thing I know on my recovery is, that I am hereto ask your pardon.""I have really nothing to forgive. I met under your roof with a kindnessthat never befell me before; nor do I know the spot on earth where Icould look for the like to-morrow.""Come back to it, then, and see if the charm should not be there still.""Where 's Josephine, brother?" asked Miss Barrington, who, seeing theyoung man's agitation, wished to change the theme."She's gone to put some ferns in water; but here she comes now."Bounding wildly along, like a child in joyous freedom, Josephine cametowards them, and, suddenly halting at sight of a stranger, she stoppedand courtesied deeply, while Conyers, half ashamed at his own unhappyblunder about her, blushed deeply as he saluted her. Indeed, theirmeeting was more like that of two awkward timid children than of twoyoung persons of their age; and they eyed each other with the distrustschool boys and girls exchange on a first acquaintance."Brother, I have something to tell you," said Miss Barrington, who waseager to communicate the news she had just heard of General Conyers; andwhile she drew him to one side, the young people still stood there,each seeming to expect the other would make some advance towardsacquaintanceship. Conyers tried to say some commonplace,--some one ofthe fifty things that would have occurred so naturally in presence ofa young lady to whom he had been just presented; but he could think ofnone, or else those that he thought of seemed inappropriate. Howtalk, for instance, of the world and its pleasures to one who had beenestranged from it! While he thus struggled and contended with himself,she suddenly started as if with a flash of memory, and said, "Howforgetful!""Forgetful!--and of what?" asked he."I have left the book I was reading to grandpapa on the rock where wewere sitting. I must go and fetch it.""May I go with you?" asked he, half timidly."Yes, if you like.""And your book,--what was it?""Oh, a charming book,--such a delightful story! So many people onewould have loved to know!--such scenes one would have loved tovisit!--incidents, too, that keep the heart in intense anxiety, thatyou wonder how he who imagined them could have sustained the thrillinginterest, and held his own heart so long in terrible suspense!""And the name of this wonderful book is--""'Waverley.'""I have read it," said he, coldly."And have you not longed to be a soldier? Has not your heart boundedwith eagerness for a life of adventure and peril?""I am a soldier," said he, quietly."Indeed!" replied she, slowly, while her steadfast glance scanned himcalmly and deliberately."You find it hard to recognize as a soldier one dressed as I am, andprobably wonder how such a life as this consorts with enterprise anddanger. Is not that what is passing in your mind?""Mayhap," said she, in a low voice."It is all because the world has changed a good deal since Waverley'stime.""How sorry I am to hear it!""Nay, for your sake it is all the better. Young ladies have a pleasanterexistence now than they had sixty years since. They lived then lives ofhousehold drudgery or utter weariness.""And what have they now?" asked she, eagerly."What have they not! All that can embellish life is around them; theyare taught in a hundred ways to employ the faculties which give toexistence its highest charm. They draw, sing, dance, ride, dressbecomingly, read what may give to their conversation an added eleganceand make their presence felt as an added lustre.""How unlike all this was our convent life!" said she, slowly. "The beadsin my rosary were not more alike than the days that followed each other,and but for the change of season I should have thought life a drearysleep. Oh, if you but knew what a charm there is in the changeful yearto one who lives in any bondage!""And yet I remember to have heard how you hoped you might not be takenaway from that convent life, and be compelled to enter the world," saidhe, with a malicious twinkle of the eye."True; and had I lived there still I had not asked for other. But howcame it that you should have heard of me? I never heard of you!""That is easily told. I was your aunt's guest at the time she resolvedto come abroad to see you and fetch you home. I used to hear all herplans about you, so that at last--I blush to own--I talked of Josephineas though she were my sister.""How strangely cold you were, then, when we met!" said she, quietly."Was it that you found me so unlike what you expected?""Unlike, indeed!""Tell me how--tell me, I pray you, what you had pictured me.""It was not mere fancy I drew from. There was a miniature of you as achild at the cottage, and I have looked at it till I could recall everyline of it.""Go on!" cried she, as he hesitated."The child's face was very serious,--actually grave for childhood,--andhad something almost stern in its expression; and yet I see nothing ofthis in yours.""So that, like grandpapa," said she, laughing, "you were disappointed innot finding me a young tiger from Bengal; but be patient, and rememberhow long it is since I left the jungle."Sportively as the words were uttered, her eyes flashed and her cheekcolored, and Conyers saw for the first time how she resembled herportrait in infancy."Yes," added she, as though answering what was passing in his mind, "youare thinking just like the sisters, 'What years and years it would taketo discipline one of such a race!' I have heard that given as a reasonfor numberless inflictions. And now, all of a sudden, comes grandpapato say, 'We love you so because you are one of us.' Can you understandthis?""I think I can,--that is, I think I can understand why--" he was goingto add, "why they should love you;" but he stopped, ashamed of his owneagerness.She waited a moment for him to continue, and then, herself blushing, asthough she had guessed his embarrassment, she turned away."And this book that we have been forgetting,--let us go and search forit," said she, walking on rapidly in front of him; but he was speedilyat her side again."Look there, brother Peter,--look there!" said Miss Dinah, as shepointed after them, "and see how well fitted we are to be guardians to ayoung lady!""I see no harm in it, Dinah,--I protest, I see no harm in it.""Possibly not, brother Peter, and it may only be a part of your systemfor making her--as you phrase it--feel a holy horror of the convent.""Well," said he, meditatively, "he seems a fine, frank-hearted youngfellow, and in this world she is about to enter, her first experiencesmight easily be worse.""I vow and declare," cried she, warmly, "I believe it is your slipshodphilosophy that makes me as severe as a holy inquisitor!""Every evil calls forth its own correction, Dinah," said he, laughing."If there were no fools to skate on the Serpentine, there had been noHumane Society.""One might grow tired of the task of resuscitating, Peter Barrington,"said she, hardly."Not you, not you, Dinah,--at least, if I was the drowned man," saidhe, drawing her affectionately to his side; "and as for those youngcreatures yonder, it's like gathering dog-roses, and they 'll stop whenthey have pricked their fingers.""I'll go and look after the nosegay myself," said she, turning hastilyaway, and following them.A real liking for Conyers, and a sincere interest in him were the greatcorrectives to the part of Dragon which Miss Dinah declared she foresawto be her future lot in life. For years and years had she believed thatthe cares of a household and the rule of servants were the last trialsof human patience. The larder, the dairy, and the garden were eachof them departments with special opportunities for deception andembezzlement, and it seemed to her that new discoveries in roguery keptpace with the inventions of science; but she was energetic and active,and kept herself at what the French would call "the level of thesituation;" and neither the cook nor the dairymaid nor Darby could bevainglorious over their battles with her. And now, all of a sudden, anew part was assigned her, with new duties, functions, and requirements;and she was called on to exercise qualities which had lain long dormantand in disuse, and renew a knowledge she had not employed for many ayear. And what a strange blending of pleasure and pain must have comeof that memory of long ago! Old conquests revived, old rivalries andjealousies and triumphs; glorious little glimpses of brilliant delight,and some dark hours, too, of disappointment,--almost despair!"Once a bishop, always a bishop," says the canon; but might we not withalmost as much truth say, "Once a beauty, always a beauty"?--not inlineament and feature, in downy cheek or silky tresses, but in theheartfelt consciousness of a once sovereign power, in that sense ofhaving been able to exact a homage and enforce a tribute. And as we seein the deposed monarch how the dignity of kingcraft clings to him, howthrough all he does and says there runs a vein of royal graciousness asfrom one the fount of honor, so it is with beauty. There lives throughall its wreck the splendid memory of a despotism the most absolute, themost fascinating of all!"I am so glad that young Conyers has no plans, Dinah," said Barrington;"he says he will join us if we permit him.""Humph!" said Miss Barrington, as she went on with her knitting."I see nothing against it, sister.""Of course not, Peter," said she, snappishly; "it would surprise me muchif you did.""Do you, Dinah?" asked he, with a true simplicity of voice and look."I see great danger in it, if that be what you mean. And what answer didyou make him, Peter?""The same answer that I make to every one,--I would consult my sisterDinah. 'Le Roi s'avisera' meant, I take it, that he 'd be led by a wiserhead than his own.""He was wise when he knew it," said she, sententiously, and continuedher work.And from that day forth they all journeyed together, and one of themwas very happy, and some were far more than happy; and Aunt Dinah wasanxious even beyond her wont.CHAPTER XXIX. THE RAMBLEDay after day, week after week rolled on, and they still rambledabout among the picturesque old villages on the Moselle, almost losingthemselves in quaint unvisited spots, whose very names were new to them.To Barrington and his sister this picture of a primitive peasant life,with its own types of costume and custom, had an indescribable charm.Though debarred, from his ignorance of their dialect, of anything likeintercourse with the people, he followed them in their ways with intenseinterest, and he would pass hours in the market-place, or stroll throughthe fields watching the strange culture, and wondering at the veryimplements of their labor. And the young people all this while? Theywere never separate. They read, and walked, and sat together from dawnto dark. They called each other Fifine and Freddy. Sometimes she sang,and he was there to listen; sometimes he drew, and she was as sure to beleaning over him in silent wonder at his skill; but with all this therewas no love-making between them,--that is, no vows were uttered, nopledges asked for. Confidences, indeed, they interchanged, and withoutend. She told the story of her friendless infancy, and the long drearyyears of convent life passed in a dull routine that had almost barredthe heart against a wish for change; and he gave her the story of hismore splendid existence, charming her imagination with a picture ofthat glorious Eastern life, which seemed to possess an instinctivecaptivation for her. And at last he told her, but as a great secretnever to be revealed, how his father and her own had been the dearest,closest friends; that for years and years they had lived together likebrothers, till separated by the accidents of life. Her father wentaway to a long distant station, and his remained to hold a highmilitary charge, from which he was now relieved and on his way back toEurope. "What happiness for you, Freddy," cried she, as her eyes ranover, "to see him come home in honor! What had I given that such a fatewere mine!"For an instant he accepted her words in all their flattery, but thehypocrisy was brief; her over-full heart was bursting for sympathy, andhe was eager to declare that his sorrows were scarcely less thanher own. "No, Fifine," said he, "my father is coming back to demandsatisfaction of a Government that has wronged him, and treated himwith the worst ingratitude. In that Indian life men of station wield analmost boundless power; but if they are irresponsible as to the means,they are tested by the results, and whenever an adverse issue succeedsthey fall irrevocably. What my father may have done, or have leftundone, I know not. I have not the vaguest clew to his presentdifficulty, but, with his high spirit and his proud heart, that he wouldresent the very shadow of a reproof I can answer for, and so I believe,what many tell me, that it is a mere question of personal feeling,--somesmall matter in which the Council have not shown him the deference hefelt his due, but which his haughty nature would not forego."Now these confidences were not love-making, nor anything approaching toit, and yet Josephine felt a strange half-pride in thinking that she hadbeen told a secret which Conyers had never revealed to any other; thatto her he had poured forth the darkest sorrow of his heart, and actuallyconfided to her the terrors that beset him, for he owned that his fatherwas rash and headstrong, and if he deemed himself wronged would bereckless in his attempt at justification."You do not come of a very patient stock, then," said she, smiling."Not very, Fifine.""Nor I," said she, as her eyes flashed brightly. "My poor Ayah, who diedwhen I was but five years old, used to tell me such tales of my father'sproud spirit and the lofty way he bore himself, so that I often fancy Ihave seen him and heard him speak. You have heard he was a Rajah?" askedshe, with a touch of pride.The youth colored deeply as he muttered an assent, for he knew that shewas ignorant of the details of her father's fate, and he dreaded anydiscussion of her story."And these Rajahs," resumed she, "are really great princes, with powerof life and death, vast retinues, and splendid armies. To my mind, theypresent a more gorgeous picture than a small European sovereignty withsome vast Protectorate looming over it. And now it is my uncle," saidshe, suddenly, "who rules there.""I have heard that your own claims, Fifine, are in litigation," said he,with a faint smile."Not as to the sovereignty," said she, with a grave look, half rebukefulof his levity. "The suit grandpapa prosecutes in my behalf is formy mother's jewels and her fortune; a woman cannot reign in theTannanoohr."There was a haughty defiance in her voice as she spoke, that seemed tosay, "This is a theme I will not suffer to be treated lightly,--bewarehow you transgress here.""And yet it is a dignity would become you well," said he, seriously."It is one I would glory to possess," said she, as proudly."Would you give me a high post, Fifine, if you were on thethrone?--would you make me Commander-in-Chief of your army?""More likely that I would banish you from the realm," said she, witha haughty laugh; "at least, until you learned to treat the head of thestate more respectfully.""Have I ever been wanting in a proper deference?" said he, bowing, witha mock humility."If you had been, sir, it is not now that you had first heard of it,"said she, with a proud look, and for a few seconds it seemed as thoughtheir jesting was to have a serious ending. She was, however, theearliest to make terms, and in a tone of hearty kindliness said: "Don'tbe angry, Freddy, and I 'll tell you a secret. If that theme be touchedon, I lose my head: whether it be in the blood that circles in my veins,or in some early teachings that imbued my childhood, or long dreamingover what can never be, I cannot tell, but it is enough to speak ofthese things, and at once my imagination becomes exalted and my reasonis routed.""I have no doubt your Ayah was to blame for this; she must have filledyour head with ambitions, and hopes of a grand hereafter. Even I myselfhave some experiences of this sort; for as my father held a high postand was surrounded with great state and pomp, I grew at a very earlyage to believe myself a very mighty personage, and gave my orders withdespotic insolence, and suffered none to gainsay me.""How silly!" said she, with a supercilious toss of her head that madeConyers flush up; and once again was peace endangered between them."You mean that what was only a fair and reasonable assumption in youwas an absurd pretension in me, Miss Barrington; is it not so?" askedhe, in a voice tremulous with passion."I mean that we must both have been very naughty children, and theless we remember of that childhood the better for us. Are we friends,Freddy?" and she held out her hand."Yes, if you wish it," said he, taking her hand half coldly in his own."Not that way, sir. It is I who have condescended; not you.""As you please, Fifine,--will this do?" and kneeling with well-assumedreverence, he lifted her hand to his lips."If my opinion were to be asked, Mr. Conyers, I would say it would notdo at all," said Miss Dinah, coming suddenly up, her cheeks crimson, andher eyes flashing."It was a little comedy we were acting, Aunt Dinah," said the girl,calmly."I beg, then, that the piece may not be repeated," said she, stiffly."Considering how ill Freddy played his part, aunt, he will scarcelyregret its withdrawal."Conyers, however, could not get over his confusion, and looked perfectlymiserable for very shame."My brother has just had a letter which will call us homeward, Mr.Conyers," said Miss Dinah, turning to him, and now using a tone devoidof all irritation. "Mr. Withering has obtained some information whichmay turn out of great consequence in our suit, and he wishes to consultwith my brother upon it.""I hope--I sincerely hope--you do not think--" he began, in a low voice."I do not think anything to your disadvantage, and I hope I never may,"replied she, in a whisper low as his own; "but bear in mind, Josephineis no finished coquette like Polly Dill, nor must she be the mark oflittle gallantries, however harmless. Josephine, grandpapa has some newsfor you; go to him.""Poor Freddy," whispered the girl in the youth's ear as she passed,"what a lecture you are in for!" "You mustn't be angry with me if I playDuenna a little harshly, Mr. Conyers," said Miss Dinah; "and I amfar more angry with myself than you can be. I never concurred with mybrother that romance reading and a young dragoon for a companion werethe most suitable educational means for a young lady fresh from aconvent, and I have only myself to blame for permitting it."Poor Conyers was so overwhelmed that he could say nothing; for thoughhe might, and with a safe conscience, have answered a direct charge, yetagainst a general allegation he was powerless. He could not say thathe was the best possible companion for a young lady, though he felt,honestly felt, that he was not a bad one. He had never trifled with herfeelings, nor sought to influence her in his favor. Of all flirtation,such as he would have adventured with Polly Dill, for instance, he wasguiltless. He respected her youth and ignorance of life too deeply totake advantage of either. He thought, perhaps, how ungenerous it wouldhave been for a man of the world like himself to entrap the affectionsof a young, artless creature, almost a child in her innocence. He wasrather fond of imagining himself "a man of the world," old soldier, andwhat not,--a delusion which somehow very rarely befalls any but veryyoung men, and of which the experience of life from thirty to forty isthe sovereign remedy. And so overwhelmed and confused and addled was hewith a variety of sensations, he heard very little of what Miss Dinahsaid to him, though that worthy lady talked very fluently and very well,concluding at last with words which awoke Conyers from his half-trancewith a sort of shock. "It is for these reasons, my dear Mr.Conyers,--reasons whose force and nature you will not dispute,--that Iam forced to do what, were the occasion less important, would be a mostungenerous task. I mean, I am forced to relinquish all the pleasure thatI had promised ourselves from seeing you our guest at the cottage. Ifyou but knew the pain I feel to speak these words--""There is no occasion to say more, madam," said he; for, unfortunately,so unprepared was he for the announcement, its chief effect was towound his pride. "It is the second time within a few months destiny hasstopped my step on your threshold. It only remains for me to submit tomy fate, and not adventure upon an enterprise above my means.""You are offended with me, and yet you ought not," said she,sorrowfully; "you ought to feel that I am consulting your interestsfully as much as ours.""I own, madam," said he, coldly, "I am unable to take the view you haveplaced before me.""Must I speak out, then?--must I declare my meaning in all itsmatter-of-fact harshness, and say that your family and your friendswould have little scruple in estimating the discretion which encouragedyour intimacy with my niece,--the son of the distinguished andhighly favored General Conyers with the daughter of the ruined GeorgeBarring-ton? These are hard words to say, but I have said them.""It is to my father you are unjust now, Miss Harrington.""No, Mr. Conyers; there is no injustice in believing that a father loveshis son with a love so large that it cannot exclude even worldliness.There is no injustice in believing that a proud and successful manwould desire to see his son successful too; and we all know what we callsuccess. I see you are very angry with me. You think me very worldlyand very small-minded; perhaps, too, you would like to say that all theperils I talk of are of my own inventing; that Fifine and you could bethe best of friends, and never think of more than friendship; and thatI might spare my anxieties, and not fret for sorrows that have noexistence;--and to all this I would answer, I 'll not risk the chance.No, Mr. Conyers, I 'll be no party to a game where the stakes are sounequal. What might give you a month's sorrow might cost her themisery of a life long.""I have no choice left me. I will go,--I will go to-night, MissBarrington.""Perhaps it would be better," said she, gravely, and walked slowly away.I will not tell the reader what harsh and cruel things Conyers said ofevery one and everything, nor how severely he railed at the world andits ways. Lord Byron had taught the youth of that age a very heartyand wholesome contempt for all manner of conventionalities, into whichcategory a vast number of excellent customs were included, and Conyerscould spout "Manfred" by heart, and imagine himself, on very smallprovocation, almost as great a man-hater; and so he set off on a longwalk into the forest, determined not to appear at dinner, and equallydetermined to be the cause of much inquiry, and, if possible, of someuneasiness. "I wonder what that old-maid,"--alas for his gallantry,it was so he called her,--"what she would say if her harsh, ungenerouswords had driven me to--" what he did not precisely define, thoughit was doubtless associated with snow peaks and avalanches, eternalsolitudes and demoniac possessions. It might, indeed, have been somesolace to him had he known how miserable and anxious old Peter became athis absence, and how incessantly he questioned every one about him."I hope that no mishap has befallen that boy, Dinah; he was alwayspunctual. I never knew him stray away in this fashion before.""It would be rather a severe durance, brother Peter, if a younggentleman could not prolong his evening walk without permission.""What says Fifine? I suspect she agrees with me.""If that means that he ought to be here, grandpapa, I do.""I must read over Withering's letter again, brother," said Miss Dinah,by way of changing the subject "He writes, you say, from the Home?""Yes; he was obliged to go down there to search for some papers hewanted, and he took Stapylton with him; and he says they had two capitaldays at the partridges. They bagged,--egad! I think it was eight or tenbrace before two o'clock, the Captain or Major, I forget which, being afirst-rate shot.""What does he say of the place,--how is it looking?""In perfect beauty. Your deputy, Polly, would seem to have fulfilledher part admirably. The garden in prime order; and that little spot nextyour own sitting-room, he says, is positively a better flower-show thanone he paid a shilling to see in Dublin. Polly herself, too, comes infor a very warm share of his admiration.""How did he see her, and where?""At the Home. She was there the evening they arrived, and Witheringinsisted on her presiding at the tea-table for them.""It did not require very extraordinary entreaty, I will make bold tosay, Peter.""He does not mention that; he only speaks of her good looks, and whathe calls her very pretty manners. In a situation not devoid of a certainawkwardness he says she displayed the most perfect tact; and althoughdoing the honors of the house, she, with some very nice ingenuity,insinuated that she was herself but a visitor.""She could scarce have forgotten herself so far as to think anythingelse, Peter," said Miss Dinah, bridling up. "I suspect her very prettymanners were successfully exercised. That old gentleman is exactly ofthe age to be fascinated by her.""What! Withering, Dinah,--do you mean Withering?" cried he, laughing."I do, brother; and I say that he is quite capable of making her theoffer of his hand. You may laugh, Peter Barrington, but my observationof young ladies has been closer and finer than yours." And theglance she gave at Josephine seemed to say that her gun had beendouble-shotted."But your remark, sister Dinah, rather addresses itself to old gentlementhan to young ladies.""Who are much the more easily read of the two," said she, tartly. "Butreally, Peter, I will own that I am more deeply concerned to knowwhat Mr. Withering has to say of our lawsuit than about Polly Dill'sattractions.""He speaks very hopefully,--very hopefully, indeed. In turning overGeorge's papers some Hindoo documents have come to light, whichStapylton has translated, and it appears that there is a certainMoonshee, called Jokeeram, who was, or is, in the service of MeerRustum, whose testimony would avail us much. Stapylton inclines to thinkhe could trace this man for us. His own relations are principally inMadras, but he says he could manage to institute inquiries in Bengal.""What is our claim to this gentleman's interest for us, Peter?""Mere kindness on his part; he never knew George, except from hearsay.Indeed, they could not have been contemporaries. Stapylton is not, Ishould say, above five-and-thirty.""The search after this creature with the horrid name will be, of course,costly, brother Peter. It means, I take it, sending some one out toIndia; that is to say, sending one fool after another. Are you preparedfor this expense?""Withering opines it would be money well spent. What he says is this:The Company will not willingly risk another inquiry before Parliament,and if we show fight and a firm resolve to give the case publicity, theywill probably propose terms. This Moonshee had been in his service,but was dismissed, and his appearance as a witness on our side wouldoccasion great uneasiness.""You are going to play a game of brag, then, brother Peter, well awarethat the stronger purse is with your antagonist?""Not exactly, Dinah; not exactly. We are strengthening our position sofar that we may say, 'You see our order of battle; would it not be aswell to make peace?' Listen to what Withering says." And Peter opened aletter of several sheets, and sought out the place he wanted."Here it is, Dinah. 'From one of these Hindoo papers we learn that RamShamsoolah Sing was not at the Meer's residence during the feast of theRhamadan, and could not possibly have signed the document to which hisname and seal are appended. Jokeeram, who was himself the Moon-sheeinterpreter in Luckerabad, writes to his friend Cossien Aga, andsays--'""Brother Peter, this is like the Arabian Nights in all but theentertainment to me, and the jumble of these abominable names onlydrives me mad. If you flatter yourself that you can understandone particle of the matter, it must be that age has sharpened yourfaculties, that's all.""I'm not quite sure of that, Dinah," said he, laughing. "I 'm halfdisposed to believe that years are not more merciful to our brains thanto our ankles; but I'll go and take a stroll in the shady alleys underthe linden-trees, and who knows how bright it will make me!""Am I to go with you, grandpapa?" said the young girl, rising."No, Fifine; I have something to say to you here," said Miss Dinah; andthere was a significance in the tone that was anything but reassuring.CHAPTER XXX. UNDER THE LINDENThat shady alley under the linden-trees was a very favorite walk withPeter Barrington. It was a nice cool lane, with a brawling littlerivulet close beside it, with here and there a dark silent pool for thedragon-fly to skim over and see his bronzed wings reflected in the stillwater; and there was a rustic bench or two, where Peter used to sitand fancy he was meditating, while, in reality, he was only watching aspeckled lizard in the grass, or listening to the mellow blackbird overhis head. I have had occasion once before to remark on the resources ofthe man of imagination, but I really suspect that for the true luxury ofidleness there is nothing like the temperament devoid of fancy. There isa grand breadth about those quiet, peaceful minds over which no shadowsflit, and which can find sufficient occupation through the senses, andnever have to go "within" for their resources. These men can sit thelivelong day and watch the tide break over a rock, or see the sparrowteach her young to fly, or gaze on the bee as he dives into the deep cupof the foxglove, and actually need no more to fill the hours. For themthere is no memory with its dark bygones, there is no looming futurewith its possible misfortunes; there is simply a half-sleepy present,with soft sounds and sweet odors through it,--a balmy kind of stupor,from which the awaking comes without a shock.When Barrington reached his favorite seat, and lighted his cigar,--itis painting the lily for such men to smoke,--he intended to have thoughtover the details of Withering's letter, which were both curious andinteresting; he intended to consider attentively certain points which,as Withering said, "he must master before he could adopt a finalresolve;" but they were knotty points, made knottier, too, by hardHindoo words for things unknown, and names totally unpronounceable. Heused to think that he understood "George's claim" pretty well; he hadfancied it was a clear and very intelligible case, that half a dozenhonest men might have come to a decision on in an hour's time; but nowhe began to have a glimmering perception that George must have beenegregiously duped and basely betrayed, and that the Company were notaltogether unreasonable in assuming their distrust of him. Now, allthese considerations coming down upon him at once were overwhelming, andthey almost stunned him. Even his late attempt to enlighten his sisterDinah on a matter he so imperfectly understood now recoiled upon him,and added to his own mystification."Well, well," muttered he, at last, "I hope Tom sees his way throughit,"--Tom was Withering,--"and if he does, there's no need of mybothering my head about it. What use would there be in lawyers if theyhadn't got faculties sharper than other folk? and as to 'making up mymind,' my mind is made up already, that I want to win the cause if he'llonly show me how." From these musings he was drawn off by watching alarge pike,--the largest pike, he thought, he had ever seen,--whichwould from time to time dart out from beneath a bank, and after lyingmotionless in the middle of the pool for a minute or so, would, with onewhisk of its tail, skim back again to its hiding-place. "That fellow hasinstincts of its own to warn him," thought he; "he knows he was n't safeout there. He sees some peril that I cannot see; and that ought tobe the way with Tom, for, after all, the lawyers are just pikes, neithermore nor less." At this instant a man leaped across the stream, andhurriedly passed into the copse. "What! Mr. Conyers--Conyers, is thatyou?" cried Barrington; and the young man turned and came towards him."I am glad to see you all safe and sound again," said Peter; "we waiteddinner half an hour for you, and have passed all the time since inconjecturing what might have befallen you.""Did n't Miss Barrington say--did not Miss Barrington know--" He stoppedin deep confusion, and could not finish his speech."My sister knew nothing,--at least, she did not tell me any reason foryour absence.""No, not for my absence," began he once more, in the same embarrassment;"but as I had explained to her that I was obliged to leave thissuddenly,--to start this evening--""To start this evening! and whither?""I cannot tell; I don't know,--that is, I have no plans.""My dear boy," said the old man, affectionately, as he laid his hand onthe other's arm, "if you don't know where you are going, take my wordfor it there is no such great necessity to go.""Yes, but there is," replied he, quickly; "at least Miss Barringtonthinks so, and at the time we spoke together she made me believe she wasin the right.""And are you of the same opinion now?" asked Peter, with a humorousdrollery in his eye."I am,--that is, I was a few moments back. I mean, that whenever Irecall the words she spoke to me, I feel their full conviction.""Come, now, sit down here beside me! It can scarcely be anything Imay not be a party to. Just let me hear the case like a judge inchamber"--and he smiled at an illustration that recalled his favoritepassion, "I won't pretend to say my sister has not a wiser head--as Iwell know she has a far better heart--than myself, but now and then shelets a prejudice or a caprice or even a mere apprehension run awaywith her, and it's just possible it is some whim of this kind is nowuppermost."Conyers only shook his head dissentingly, and said nothing."Maybe I guess it,--I suspect that I guess it," said Peter, with a slydrollery about his mouth. "My sister has a notion that a young man anda young woman ought no more to be in propinquity than saltpetre andcharcoal. She has been giving me a lecture on my blindness, and askingif I can't see this, that, and the other; but, besides being the leastobservant of mankind, I'm one of the most hopeful as regards whatever Iwish to be. Now we have all of us gone on so pleasantly together, withsuch a thorough good understanding--such loyalty, as the French wouldcall it--that I can't, for the life of me, detect any ground formistrust or dread. Have n't I hit the blot, Conyers--eh?" cried he, asthe young fellow grew redder and redder, till his face became crimson."I assured Miss Barrington," began he, in a faltering, broken voice,"that I set too much store on the generous confidence you extended tome to abuse it; that, received as I was, like one of your own bloodand kindred, I never could forget the frank trustfulness with which youdiscussed everything before me, and made me, so to say, 'One of you.'The moment, however, that my intimacy suggested a sense of constraint, Ifelt the whole charm of my privilege would have departed, and it is forthis reason I am going!" The last word was closed with a deep sigh, andhe turned away his head as he concluded."And for this reason you shall not go one step," said Peter, slappinghim cordially on the shoulder. "I verily believe that women think theworld was made for nothing but love-making, just as the crack engineerbelieved rivers were intended by Providence to feed navigable canals;but you and I know a little better, not to say that a young fellow withthe stamp gentleman indelibly marked on his forehead would not think ofmaking a young girl fresh from a convent--a mere child in the ways oflife--the mark of his attentions. Am I not right?""I hope and believe you are!""Stay where you are, then; be happy, and help us to feel so; and theonly pledge I ask is, that whenever you suspect Dinah to be a shrewderobserver and a truer prophet than her brother--you understand me--you'lljust come and say, 'Peter Barrington, I'm off; good-bye!'""There's my hand on it," said he, grasping the old man's with warmth."There's only one point--I have told Miss Barrington that I would startthis evening.""She'll scarcely hold you very closely to your pledge.""But, as I understand her, you are going back to Ireland?""And you are coming along with us. Isn't that a very simplearrangement?""I know it would be a very pleasant one.""It shall be, if it depend on me. I want to make you a fisherman too.When I was a young man, it was my passion to make every one a goodhorseman. If I liked a fellow, and found out that he couldn't ride tohounds, it gave me a shock little short of hearing that there was a bloton his character, so associated in my mind had become personal dash andprowess in the field with every bold and manly characteristic. As Igrew older, and the rod usurped the place of the hunting-whip, I grew tofancy that your angler would be the truest type of a companion; and ifyou but knew," added he, as a glassy fulness dulled his eyes, "what aflattery it is to an old fellow when a young one will make a comradeof him,--what a smack of bygone days it brings up, and what sunshine itlets in on the heart,--take my word for it, you young fellows are neverso vain of an old companion as we are of a young one! What are you sothoughtful about?""I was thinking how I was to make this explanation to Miss Barrington.""You need not make it at all; leave the whole case in my hands. Mysister knows that I owe you an amende and a heavy one. Let this gotowards a part payment of it. But here she comes in search of me. Stepaway quietly, and when we meet at the tea-table all will have beensettled."Conyers had but time to make his escape, when Miss Barrington came up."I thought I should find you mooning down here, Peter," said she,sharply. "Whenever there is anything to be done or decided on, aBarrington is always watching a fly on a fish-pond.""Not the women of the family, Dinah,--not the women. But what greatemergency is before us now?""No great emergency, as you phrase it, at all, but what to men likeyourself is frequently just as trying,--an occasion that requires alittle tact. I have discovered--what I long anticipated has come topass--Conyers and Fifine are on very close terms of intimacy, whichmight soon become attachment. I have charged him with it, and he has notaltogether denied it. On the whole he has behaved well, and he goes awayto-night.""I have just seen him, Dinah. I got at his secret, not without a littledexterity on my part, and learned what had passed between you. We talkedthe thing over very calmly together, and the upshot is--he's not going.""Not going! not going! after the solemn assurance he gave me!""But of which I absolved him, sister Dinah; or rather, which I made himretract.""Peter Barrington, stop!" cried she, holding her hands to her temples."I want a little time to recover myself. I must have time, or I'll notanswer for my senses. Just reply to one question. I 'll ask you, haveyou taken an oath--are you under a vow to be the ruin of your family?""I don't think I have, Dinah. I 'm doing everything for the best.""If there's a phrase in the language condemns the person that uses it,it's 'Doing everything for the best.' What does it mean but a blind,uninquiring, inconsiderate act, the work of a poor brain and sicklyconscience? Don't talk to me, sir, of doing for the best, but do thebest, the very best, according to the lights that guide you. You knowwell, perfectly well, that Fifine has no fortune, and that this youngman belongs to a very rich and a very ambitious family, and that toencourage what might lead to attachment between them would be to storeup a cruel wrong and a great disappointment.""My dear Dinah, you speak like a book, but I don't agree with you.""You don't. Will you please to state why?""In the first place, Dinah, forgive me for saying it, but we men donot take your view of these cases. We neither think that love is ascatching or as dangerous as the smallpox. We imagine that two youngpeople can associate together every day and yet never contract a lienthat might break their hearts to dissolve.""Talking politics together, perhaps; or the state of the Three perCents?""Not exactly that, but talking of fifty other things that interesttheir time of life and tempers. Have they not songs, drawings, flowers,landscapes, and books, with all their thousand incidents, todiscuss? Just remember what that writer who calls himself 'Author ofWaverley'--what he alone has given us of people to talk over just as ifwe knew them.""Brother Peter, I have no patience with you. You enumerate one by oneall the ingredients, and you disparage the total. You tell of the flour,and the plums, and the suet, and the candied lemon, but you cry outagainst the pudding! Don't you see that the very themes you leave forthem all conduce to what you ignore, and that your music and paintingand romance-reading only lead to love-making? Don't you see this, or areyou in reality--I didn't want to say it, but you have made me--are youan old fool?""I hope not, Dinah; but I'm not so sure you don't think me one.""It's nothing to the purpose whether I do or not," said she; "thequestion is, have you asked this young man to come back with us toIreland?""I have, and he is coming.""I could have sworn to it," said she, with a sudden energy; "and ifthere was anything more stupid, you 'd have done it also." And with thisspeech, more remarkable for its vigor than its politeness, she turnedaway and left him.Ere I close the chapter and the subject, let me glance, and only glance,at the room where Conyers is now standing beside Josephine. She isdrawing, not very attentively or carefully, perhaps, and he is bendingover her and relating, as it seems, something that has occurred to him,and has come to the end with the words, "And though I was to have gonethis evening, it turns out that now I am to stay and accompany you toIreland.""Don't sigh so painfully over it, however," said she, gravely; "for whenyou come to mention how distressing it is, I 'm sure they 'll let youoff.""Fifine," said he, reproachfully, "is this fair, is this generous?""I don't know whether it be unfair, I don't want it to be generous,"said she, boldly."In point of fact, then, you only wish for me here to quarrel with, isthat the truth?""I think it better fun disagreeing with you than always saying howaccurate you are, and how wise, and how well-judging. That atmosphere ofeternal agreement chokes me; I feel as if I were suffocating.""It's not a very happy temperament; it's not a disposition to boast of.""You never did hear me boast of it; but I have heard you veryvainglorious about your easy temper and your facile nature, whichwere simply indolence. Now, I have had more than enough of that in theconvent, and I long for a little activity.""Even if it were hazardous?""Even if it were hazardous," echoed she. "But here comes Aunt Dinah,with a face as stern as one of the sisters, and an eye that reminds meof penance and bread and water; so help me to put up my drawings, andsay nothing of what we were talking.""My brother has just told me, Mr. Conyers," said she, in a whisper, "apiece of news which it only depends upon you to make a most agreeablearrangement.""I trust you may count upon me, madam," said he, in the same tone, andbowed low as he spoke."Then come with me and let us talk it over," said she, as she took hisarm and led him away.END OF VOL. I.CHAPTER I. FIFINE AND POLLY
There are a few days in our autumnal season--very few and rare!--when we
draw the curtain against the glare of the sun at breakfast, and yet in
the evening are glad to gather around the cheerful glow of the fire.
These are days of varied skies, with fleecy clouds lying low beneath a
broad expanse of blue, with massive shadows on the mountains, and here
and there over the landscape tips of sunlight that make the meanest
objects pictures; and, with all these, a breezy wind that scatters the
yellow leaves and shakes the tree-tops, while it curls the current of
the bright river into mimic waves. The sportsman will tell you that on
such days the birds are somewhat wild, and the angler will vow that no
fish will rise to the fly, nor is it a scent-lying day for the harriers;
and yet, with all this, there is a spring and elasticity in the air that
impart themselves to the temperament, so that the active grow energetic,
and even the indolent feel no touch of lassitude.
It was on the morning of such a day that Barrington, with his sister
and granddaughter, drew nigh the Home. Conyers had parted with them at
Dublin, where his regiment was now stationed, but was to follow in a day
or two. All the descriptions--descriptions which had taken the shape
of warnings--which they had given Josephine of the cottage could not
prevent her asking at each turn of the road if that large house yonder,
if that sombre tower over the trees, if that massive gate-lodge were
not theirs. "I know this is it, grandpapa," said she, clapping her
hands with delight as they came opposite a low wall within which lay the
spacious lawn of Cobham Park, a portion of the house itself being just
visible through the trees; "don't tell me, aunt," cried she, "but let me
guess it."
"It is the seat of Sir Charles Cobham, child, one of the richest
baronets in the kingdom."
"There it is at last,--there it is!" cried she, straining oat of the
carriage to see the handsome portico of a very large building, to which
a straight avenue of oaks led up from the high-road. "My heart tells me,
aunt, that this is ours!"
"It was once on a time, Fifiue," said the old man, with a quivering
voice, and a glassy film over his eyes; "it was once, but it is so no
longer."
"Barrington Hall has long ceased to belong to us," said Miss Dinah; "and
after all the pains I have taken in description, I cannot see how you
could possibly confound it with our little cottage."
The young girl sat back without a word, and, whether from disappointment
or the rebuke, looked forth no more.
"We are drawing very near now, Fifine," said the old man, after a long
silence, which lasted fully two miles of the way. "Where you see the
tall larches yonder--not there--lower down, at the bend of the stream;
those are the trees. I declare, Dinah, I fancy they have grown since we
saw them last."
"I have no doubt you do, Peter; not that you will find the cottage far
more commodious and comfortable than you remembered it."
"Ah, they've repaired that stile, I see," cried he; "and very well
they've done it, without cutting away the ivy. Here we are, darling;
here we are!" and he grasped the young girl's hand in one of his, while
he drew the other across his eyes.
"They 're not very attentive, I must say, brother Peter, or they would
not leave us standing, with our own gate locked against us."
"I see Darby running as fast as he can. Here he comes!"
"Oh, by the powers, ye're welcome home, your honor's reverence, and the
mistresses!" cried Darby, as he fumbled at the lock, and then failing in
all his efforts,--not very wonderful, seeing that he had taken a wrong
key,--he seized a huge stone, and, smashing the padlock at a blow, threw
wide the gate to admit them.
"You are initiated at once into our Irish ways, Fifine," said Miss
Barrington. "All that you will see here is in the same style. Let that
be repaired this evening, sir, and at your own cost," whispered she to
Darby, into whose hand at the same moment Peter was pressing a crown
piece.
"'T is the light of my eyes to see your honors home again! 'Tis like
rain to the new potatoes what I feel in my heart, and looking so fresh
and well too! And the young lady, she isn't--"
From what dread anticipation Darby's sudden halt saved him the
expression is not for me to say, but that Peter Barrington guessed it is
probable, for he lay back in the carriage and shook with laughter.
"Drive on, sir," said Miss Dinah to the postilion, "and pull up at the
stone cross."
"You can drive to the door now, ma'am," said Darby, "the whole way; Miss
Polly had the road made while you were away."
"What a clever girl! Who could have thought it?" said Barrington.
"I opine that we might have been consulted as to the change. On a matter
as important as this, Peter, I think our voices might have been asked."
"And how well she has done it too!" muttered he, half aloud; "never
touched one of those copper beeches, and given us a peep of the bright
river through the meadows."
As the carriage rolled briskly along, Darby, who trotted alongside, kept
up a current narrative of the changes effected during their absence.
"The ould pigeon-house is tuck down, and an iligant new one put up in
the island; and the calves' paddock is thrown into the flower-garden,
and there's a beautiful flight of steps down to the river, paved with
white stones,--sorrow one is n't white as snow."
"It is a mercy we had not a sign over the door, brother Peter,"
whispered Miss Dinah, "or this young lady's zeal would have had it
emblazoned like a shield in heraldry."
"Oh, how lovely, how beautiful, how exquisite!" cried Josephine, as they
came suddenly round the angle of a copse and directly in front of the
cottage.
Nor was the praise exaggerated. It was all that she had said. Over
a light trellis-work, carried along under the thatch, the roses and
jessamine blended with the clematis and the passion-flower, forming
a deep eave of flowers, drooping in heavy festoons across the spaces
between the windows, and meeting the geraniums which grew below. Through
the open sashes the rooms might be seen, looking more like beautifnl
bowers than the chambers of a dwelling-house. And over all, in sombre
grandeur, bent the great ilex-trees, throwing their grand and tranquil
shade over the cottage and the little grass-plot and even the river
itself, as it swept smoothly by. There was in the stillness of that
perfumed air, loaded with the sweet-brier and the rose, a something of
calm and tranquillity; while in the isolation of the spot there was a
sense of security that seemed to fill op the measure of the young
girl's hopes, and made her exclaim with rapture, "Oh, this, indeed, is
beautiful!"
"Yes, my darling Fifine!" said the old man, as he pressed her to his
heart; "your home, your own home! I told you, my dear child, it was not
a great castle, no fine chteau, like those on the Meuse and the Sambre,
but a lowly cottage with a thatched roof and a rustic porch."
"In all this ardor for decoration and smartness," broke in Miss Dinah,
"it would not surprise me to find that the peacock's tail had been
picked out in fresh colors and varnished."
"Faix! your honor is not far wrong," interposed Darby, who had an Irish
tendency to side with the majority. "She made us curry and wash ould
Sheela, the ass, as if she was a race-horse."
"I hope poor Wowsky escaped," said Barrington, laughing.
"That's what he didn't! He has to be scrubbed with soap and water
every morning, and his hair divided all the way down his back, like a
Christian's, and his tail looks like a bunch of switch grass."
"That 's the reason he has n't come out to meet me; the poor fellow
is like his betters,--he's not quite sure that his altered condition
improves him."
"You have at least one satisfaction, brother Peter," said Miss Dinah,
sharply; "you find Darby just as dirty and uncared for as you left him."
"By my conscience, there 's another of us is n't much changed since we
met last," muttered Darby, but in a voice only audible to himself.
"Oh, what a sweet cottage! What a pretty summer-house!" cried Josephine,
as the carriage swept round the copse, and drew short up at the door.
"This summer-house is your home, Fifine," said Miss Barrington, tartly.
"Home! home! Do you mean that we live here,--live here always, aunt?"
"Most distinctly I do," said she, descending and addressing herself to
other cares. "Where's Jane? Take these trunks round by the back door.
Carry this box to the green-room,--to Miss Josephine's room," said she,
with a stronger stress on the words.
"Well, darling, it is a very humble, it is a very lowly," said
Barrington, "but let us see if we cannot make it a very happy home;" but
as he turned to embrace her, she was gone.
"I told you so, brother Peter,--I told you so, more than once; but, of
course, you have your usual answer, 'We must do the best we can!' which
simply means, doing worse than we need do."
Barrington was in no mood for a discussion; he was too happy to be once
more at home to be ruffled by any provocation his sister could give him.
Wherever he turned, some old familiar object met his eye and seemed
to greet him, and he bustled in and out from his little study to the
garden, and then to the stable, where he patted old Roger; and across
to the cow-house, where Maggie knew him, and bent her great lazy eyes
softly on him; and then down to the liver-side, where, in gilt letters,
"Josephine" shone on the trim row-boat he had last seen half rotten on
the bank; for Polly had been there too, and her thoughtful good-nature,
forgetting nothing which might glad them on their coming.
Meanwhile, Josephine had reached her chamber, and, locking the door,
sat down and leaned her head on the table. Though no tears fell from
her eyes, her bosom heaved and fell heavily, and more than one deep sigh
escaped her. Was it disappointment that had so overcome her? Had she
fancied something grander and more pretentious than this lonely
cottage? Was it that Aunt Dinah's welcome was wanting in affection? What
revulsion could it be that so suddenly overwhelmed her? Who can tell
these things, who can explain how it is that, without any definite
picture of an unexpected joy, imagination will so work upon us that
reality will bring nothing but a blank? It is not that the object is
less attractive than is hoped for, it is simply that a dark shadow has
passed over our own hearts; the sense of enjoyment has been dulled, and
we are sad without a reason. If we underrate sorrows of our youth,--and
this is essentially one of them,--it is because our mature age leaves us
nothing of that temperament on which such afflictions preyed.
Josephine, without knowing why, without even a reason, wished herself
back in the convent. There, if there was a life of sombre monotony and
quietude, there was at least companionship; she had associates of her
own age. They had pursuits in common, shared the same hopes and wishes
and fears; but here--but here--Just as her thoughts had carried her so
far, a tap--a very gentle tap--came to the door. Josephine heard it, but
made no answer. It was repeated a little louder, and then a low pleasing
voice she had never heard before said, "May I come in?"
"No," said Josephine,--"yes--that is--who are you?"
"Polly Dill," was the answer; and Josephine arose and unlocked the door.
"Miss Barrington told me I might take this liberty," said Polly, with a
faint smile. "She said, 'Go and make acquaintance for yourself; I never
play master of the ceremonies.'"
"And you are Polly,--the Polly Dill I have heard so much of?" said
Josephine, regarding her steadily and fixedly.
"How stranded your friends must have been for a topic when they talked
of me!" said Polly, laughing.
"It is quite true you have beautiful teeth,--I never saw such beautiful
teeth," said Josephine to herself, while she still gazed earnestly at
her.
"And you," said Polly, "are so like what I had pictured you,--what I
hoped you would be. I find it hard to believe I see you for the first
time."
"So, then, you did not think the Rajah's daughter should be a
Moor?" said Josephine, half haughtily. "It is very sad to see what
disappointments I had caused." Neither the saucy toss of the head, nor
the tone that accompanied these words, were lost upon Polly, who began
to feel at once that she understood the speaker.
"And your brother," continued Josephine, "is the famous Tom Dill I have
heard such stories about?"
"Poor Tom! he is anything rather than famous."
"Well, he is remarkable; he is odd, original, or whatever you would call
it. Fred told me he never met any one like him."
"Tom might say as much of Mr. Conyers, for, in truth, no one ever showed
him such kindness."
"Fred told me nothing of that; but perhaps," added she, with a flashing
eye, "you were more in his confidence than I was."
"I knew very little of Mr. Conyers; I believe I could count on the
fingers of one hand every time I met him."
"How strange that you should have made so deep an impression, Miss
Dill!"
"I am flattered to hear it, but more surprised than flattered."
"But I don't wonder at it in the least," said Josephine, boldly. "You
are very handsome, you are very graceful, and then--" She hesitated and
grew confused, and stammered, and at last said, "and then there is that
about you which seems to say, 'I have only to wish, and I can do it.'"
"I have no such gift, I assure you," said Polly, with a half-sad smile.
"Oh, I know you are very clever; I have heard how accomplished you were,
how beautifully you rode, how charmingly you sang. I wish he had not
told me of it all--for if--for if--"
"If what? Say on!"
"If you were not so superior to me, I feel that I could love you;" and
then with a bound she threw her arms around Polly's neck, and clasped
her affectionately to her bosom.
Sympathy, like a fashionable physician, is wonderfully successful where
there is little the matter. In the great ills of life, when the
real afflictions come down to crush, to wound, or to stun us, we are
comparatively removed from even the kindest of our comforters. Great
sorrows are very selfish things. In the lighter maladies, however, in
the smaller casualties of fortune, sympathy is a great remedy, and we
are certain to find that, however various our temperaments, it has a
sort of specific for each. Now Josephine Barrington had not any great
cares upon her heart; if the balance were to be struck between them,
Polly Dill could have numbered ten, ay, twenty, for her one, but
she thought hers was a case for much commiseration, and she liked
commiseration, for there are moral hypochondrias as well as physical
ones. And so she told Polly how she had neither father nor mother, nor
any other belongings than "dear old grandpapa and austere Aunt Dinah;"
that she had been brought up in a convent, never knowing one of the
pleasures of youth, or her mind being permitted to stray beyond the
dreary routine of prayer and penance. Of music she knew nothing but the
solemn chants of the organ, and even flowers were to her eyes but the
festal decorations of the high altar; and, lastly, she vaguely balanced
between going back to the dismal existence of the cloister, or entering
upon the troubled sea of life, so full of perils to one unpractised
and unskilled as she was. Now Polly was a very pretty comforter through
these afflictions; her own home experiences were not all rose-colored,
but the physician who whispers honeyed consolations to the patient has
often the painful consciousness of a deeper malady within than that for
which he ministers. Polly knew something of a life of struggle and small
fortune, with its daily incident of debt and dun. She knew what it was
to see money mix itself with every phase of existence, throwing its
damper over joy, arresting the hand of benevolence, even denying to the
sick-bed the little comforts that help to cheat misery. She knew how
penury can eat its canker into the heart till all things take the color
of thrift, and life becomes at last the terrible struggle of a swimmer
storm-tossed and weary; and yet, with all this experience in her heart,
she could whisper cheerful counsels to Josephine, and tell her that
the world had a great many pleasant paths through it, though one was
occasionally footsore before reaching them; and in this way they talked
till they grew very fond of each other, and Josephine was ready to
confess that the sorrow nearest to her heart was parting with her. "But
must you go, dearest Polly,--must you really go?"
"I must, indeed," said she, laughing; "for if I did not, two little
sisters of mine would go supperless to bed, not to speak of a small boy
who is waiting for me with a Latin grammar before him; and the cook
must get her orders for to-morrow; and papa must have his tea; and this
short, stumpy little key that you see here unlocks the oat-bin, without
which an honest old pony would share in the family fast: so that, all
things considered, my absence would be far from advisable."
"And when shall we meet again, Polly?"
"Not to-morrow, dear; for to-morrow is our fair at Inistioge, and I have
yarn to buy, and some lambs to sell."
"And could you sell lambs, Polly?" said Josephine, with an expression of
blank disappointment in her face.
Polly smiled, but not without a certain sadness, as she said, "There are
some sentimentalities which, to one in my condition, would just be as
unsuitable as Brussels lace or diamonds. They are born of luxury and
indolence, and pertain to those whose existence is assured to them; and
my own opinion is, they are a poor privilege. At all events," added she,
rapidly, "they are not for me, and I do not wish for them."
"The day after to-morrow, then, you will come here,--promise me that."
"It will be late, then, towards evening, for I have made an engagement
to put a young horse in harness,--a three-year-old, and a sprightly one,
they tell me,--so that I may look on the morning as filled. I see, my
dear child, how shocked you are with all these unladylike cares and
duties; but poor Tom and I used to weld our lives together, and while
I took my share of boat-building one day, he helped me in the dairy the
day after; but now that he is gone, our double functions devolve upon
me."
"How happy you must be!"
"I think I am; at least, I have no time to spare for unhappiness."
"If I could but change with you, Polly!"
"Change what, my dear child?"
"Condition, fortune, belongings,--everything."
"Take my word for it, you are just as well as you are; but I suppose
it's very natural for one to fancy he could carry another's burden
easier than his own, for it was only a few moments back I thought how I
should like to be you."
"To be me,--to be me!"
"Of course I was wrong, dearest. It was only a passing, fleeting
thought, and I now see how absurd I was to wish to be very beautiful,
dearly loved, and affectionately cared for, with a beautiful home to
live in, and every hour free to be happy. Oh, what a sigh, dearest, what
a sigh! but I assure you I have my calamities too; the mice have got at
the seeds in my onion-bed, and I don't expect to see one come up."
If Josephine's first impulse was to feel angry, her next was to laugh
out, which she did heartily; and passing her arm fondly round Polly's
waist, she said, "I 'll get used to your raillery, Polly, and not feel
sore at it; but remember, too, it's a spirit I never knew before."
"How good and generous, then, to bear it so well!" said Polly,
affectionately; "your friend Mr. Conyers did not show the same
patience."
"You tried him, then?" said Josephine, with a half-eager glance.
"Of course; I talked to him as I do to every one. But there goes your
dinner-bell." Checking herself on a reflection over the pretension of
this summons of three people to a family meal in a cottage, Polly tied
on her bonnet and said "Good-bye."
CHAPTER II. AT HOME AGAIN
The Barringtons had not been quite a fortnight settled in their home,
when a note came from Conyers, lamenting, in most feeling terms, that he
could not pay them his promised visit. If the epistle was not very long,
it was a grumble from beginning to end. "Nobody would know," wrote he,
"it was the same regiment poor Colonel Hunter commanded. Our Major is
now in command,--the same Stapylton you have heard me speak of; and if
we never looked on him too favorably, we now especially detest him.
His first step was to tell us we were disorderly, ill-dressed, and
ill-disciplined; but we were even less prepared to hear that we could
not ride. The result of all this is, we have gone to school again,--even
old captains, who have served with distinction in the field, have been
consigned to the riding-house; and we poor subs are treated as if we
were the last refuse of all the regiments of the army, sent here to
be reformed and corrected. We have incessant drills, parades, and
inspections, and, worse again, all leave is stopped. If I was not in the
best of temper with the service before, you may judge how I feel towards
it now. In fact, if it were not that I expect my father back in England
by the middle of May, I 'd send in my papers and leave at once. How I
fall back now in memory to the happy days of my ramble with you, and
wonder if I shall ever see the like again. And how I hate myself for not
having felt at the time how immeasurably delightful they were! Trust me
never to repeat the mistake if I have the opportunity given me. I asked
this morning for three days--only three--to run down and see you once
more before we leave,--for we are ordered to Honnslow,--and I was
refused. But this was not all: not content with rejecting my request,
he added what he called an expression of astonishment that an officer
so deficient in his duties should care to absent himself from regimental
discipline."
"Poor boy!--this is, indeed, too bad," said Miss Dinah, as she had read
thus far; "only think, Peter, how this young fellow, spoiled and petted
as he was as a child,--denied nothing, pampered as though he were a
prince,--should find himself the mark of so insulting a tyranny. Are you
listening to me, Peter Barrington?"
"Eh,--what? No, thank you, Dinah; I have made an excellent breakfast,"
said Barrington, hurriedly, and again addressed himself to the letter he
was reading. "That's what I call a Trump, Dinah,--a regular Trump."
"Who is the especial favorite that has called for the very choice
eulogy?" said she, bridling up.
"Gone into the thing, too, with heart and soul,--a noble fellow!"
continued Barrington.
"Pray enlighten us as to the name that calls forth such enthusiasm."
"Stapylton, my dear Dinah,--Major Stapylton. In all my life I do not
remember one instance to parallel with this generous and disinterested
conduct. Listen to what Withering says,--not a man given to take up rash
impressions in favor of a stranger. Listen to this: 'Stapylton has been
very active,--written to friends, both at Calcutta and Agra, and shown,
besides, an amount of acuteness in pursuit of what is really important,
that satisfies me a right good common lawyer has been lost by his being
a soldier.' And here, again he recurs to him: it is with reference to
certain documents: 'S. persists in believing that with proper diligence
these may be recovered; he says that it is a common practice with the
Moonshees to retain papers, in the hope of their being one day deemed
of value; and he is fully persuaded that they have not been destroyed.
There is that about the man's manner of examining a question,--his
patience, his instinctive seizure of what is of moment, and his
invariable rejection of whatever is immaterial; and, lastly, his
thorough appreciation of the character of that evidence which would have
most weight with the Indian Board, which dispose me to regard him as an
invaluable ally to our cause.'"
"Do me the favor to regard this picture of your friend now," said Miss
Barrington, as she handed the letter from Conyers across the table.
Barrington read it over attentively. "And what does this prove, my dear
sister?" said he. "This is the sort of stereotyped complaint of every
young fellow who has been refused a leave. I have no doubt Hunter was
too easy-tempered to have been strict in discipline, and the chances
are these young dogs had everything their own way till Stapylton
came amongst them. I find it hard to believe that any man likes
unpopularity."
"Perhaps not, Peter Barrington; but he may like tyranny more than he
hates unpopularity; and, for my own part, this man is odious to me."
"Don't say so, Dinah,--don't say so, I entreat of you, for he will be
our guest here this very day."
"Our guest!--why, is not the regiment under orders to leave?"
"So it is; but Withering says it would be a great matter if we could
have a sort of consultation together before the Major leaves Ireland.
There are innumerable little details which he sees ought to be discussed
between us; and so he has persuaded him to give us a day,--perhaps two
days,--no small boon, Dinah, from one so fully occupied as he is."
"I wish he would not make the sacrifice, Peter."
"My dear sister, are we so befriended by Fortune that we can afford to
reject the kindness of our fellows?"
"I'm no believer in chance friendships, Peter Barrington; neither you
nor I are such interesting orphans as to inspire sympathy at first
sight."
Josephine could not help a laugh at Miss Dinah's illustration, and old
Barriqgton himself heartily joined in the merriment, not sorry the while
to draw the discussion into a less stern field. "Come, come, Dinah,"
said he, gayly, "let us put out a few bottles of that old Madeira in
the sun; and if Darby can find us a salmon-trout, we 'll do our best to
entertain our visitors."
"It never occurred to me to doubt the probability of their enjoying
themselves, Peter; my anxieties were quite on another score."
"Now, Fifine," continued Barrington, "we shall see if Polly Dill has
really made you the perfect housekeeper she boasted. The next day or two
will put your talents to the test."
"Oh, if we could only have Polly herself here!"
"What for?--on what pretext, Miss Barrington?" said Dinah, haughtily.
"I have not, so far as I am aware, been accounted very ignorant of
household cares."
"Withering declares that your equal is not in Europe, Dinah."
"Mr. Withering's suffrage can always be bought by a mock-turtle soup,
and a glass of Roman punch after it."
"How he likes it,--how he relishes it! He says that he comes back to the
rest of the dinner with the freshness of a man at an assize case."
"So like him!" said Dinah, scornfully; "he has never an illustration
that is not taken from the Four Courts. I remember one day, when asking
for the bill of fare, he said, 'Will you kindly let me look at the cause
list.' Prepare yourself, Josephine, for an avalanche of law anecdotes
and Old Bailey stories, for I assure you you will hear nothing for the
next three days but drolleries that have been engrossed on parchment and
paid stamp duty to the Crown."
Barrington gave a smile, as though in protest against the speech, and
left the room. In truth, he was very anxious to be alone, and to think
over, at his leisure, a short passage in his letter which he had not
summoned courage to read aloud. It was Withering's opinion that to
institute the inquiries in India a considerable sum of money would be
required, and he had left it for Barrington's consideration whether it
were wiser to risk the great peril of this further involvement, or once
more to try what chance there might be of a compromise. Who knows what
success might have attended the suggestion if the old lawyer had but
employed any other word! Compromise, however, sounded to his ears like
an unworthy concession,--a surrender of George's honor. Compromise might
mean money for his granddaughter, and shame to her father's memory. Not,
indeed, that Withering was, as a man, one to counsel such a course, but
Withering was a lawyer, and in the same spirit that he would have
taken a verdict for half his claim if he saw an adverse feeling in the
jury-box, so he would bow to circumstances that were stronger than him,
and accept the best he could, if he might not have all that he ought But
could Barrington take this view? He thought not. His conviction was that
the main question to establish was the fair fame and honor of his son;
his guide was, how George himself would have acted--would have felt--in
the same contingency; and he muttered, "He'd have been a hardy fellow
who would have hinted at compromise to him."
The next point was how the means for the coming campaign were to be
provided. He had already raised a small sum by way of mortgage on the
"Home," and nothing remained but to see what further advance could be
made on the same security. When Barrington was a great estated gentleman
with a vast fortune at his command, it cost him wonderfully little
thought to contract a loan, or even to sell a farm. A costly election,
a few weeks of unusual splendor, an unfortunate night at play, had made
such sacrifices nothing very unusual, and he would give his orders on
this score as unconcernedly as he would bid his servant replenish his
glass at table. Indeed, he had no more fear of exhausting his fortune
than he felt as to out-drinking his cellar. There was enough there,
as he often said, for those who should come after him. And now, what a
change! He stood actually appalled at the thought of a mortgage for less
than a thousand pounds. But so it is; the cockboat may be more to a man
than was once the three-decker. The cottage was his all now; that lost,
and they were houseless. Was it not a bold thing to risk everything on
one more throw? There was the point over which he now pondered as he
walked slowly along in the little shady alley between the laurel hedges.
He had no friend nearer his heart than Withering, no one to whom he
could unbosom himself so frankly and so freely, and yet this was a
case on which he could not ask his counsel. All his life long he had
strenuously avoided suffering a question of the kind to intervene
between them. Of his means, his resources, his straits, or his demands,
Withering knew positively nothing. It was with Barrington a point of
delicacy to maintain this reserve towards one who was always his lawyer,
and often his guest. The very circumstance of his turning innkeeper was
regarded by Withering as savoring far more of caprice than necessity,
and Barrington took care to strengthen this impression.
If, then, Withering's good sense and worldly knowledge would have been
invaluable aids to him in this conjunction, he saw he could not have
them. The same delicacy which debarred him heretofore, would still
interpose against his appeal to that authority. And then he thought
how he had once troops of friends to whom he could address himself for
counsel. There is nothing more true, indeed, than the oft-uttered scoff
on the hollowness of those friendships which attach to the days of
prosperous fortune, and the world is very prone to point to the utter
loneliness of him who has been shipwrecked by Fate; but let us be just
in our severity, and let us own that a man's belongings, his associates,
his--what common parlance calls--friends, are the mere accidents of his
station, and they no more accompany him in his fall than do the luxuries
he has forfeited. From the level from which he has lapsed they have not
descended. They are there, living to-day as they lived yesterday.
If their sympathy is not with him, it is because neither are they
themselves; they cross each other no more. Such friendships are like the
contracts made with a crew for a particular voyage,--they end with the
cruise. No man ever understood this better than Barrington; no man ever
bore the world less of ill will for its part towards himself. If now
and then a sense of sadness would cloud him at some mark of passing
forgetfulness, he would not own to the gloomy feeling; while to any show
of recognition, to any sign of a grateful remembrance of the past, he
would grow boastful to very vanity. "Look there, Dinah," he would say,
"what a noble-hearted fellow that is! I scarcely was more than commonly
civil to him formerly, and you saw how courteous he was in making a
place for us, how heartily he hoped I was in good health."
"I'll send over to Dill and have a talk with him," was Barrington's last
resolve, as he turned the subject over and over in his mind. "Dill 's a
shrewd fellow, and I 'm not sure that he has not laid by a little
money; he might feel no objection to a good investment for it, with such
security." And he looked around as he spoke on the trees, some of which
he planted, every one of which he knew, and sighed heavily. "He 'll
scarce love the spot more than I did," muttered he, and walked along
with his head down. After a while he took out Withering's letter from
his pocket and re-read it. Somehow, it was hard to say why, it did not
read so promisingly as at first. The difficulties to be encountered were
very stubborn ones, so much so that he very palpably hinted how much
better some amicable settlement would be than an open contest wherein
legal subtlety and craft should be evoked. There was so much of that
matter always taken for granted, to be proved, to be demonstrated true
on evidence, that it actually looked appalling. "Of the searches and
inquiries instituted in India," wrote Withering, "I can speak but
vaguely; but I own the very distance magnifies them immensely to my
eyes." "Tom is growing old, not a doubt of it," muttered Barrington;
"these were not the sort of obstacles that could have terrified him once
on a time. He 'd have said, 'If there 's evidence, we 'll have it; if
there's a document, we 'll find it.' It's India, that far-away land,
that has frightened him. These lawyers, like certain sportsmen, lose
their nerve if you take them out of their own country. It 's the new
style of fences they can't face. Well, thanks to him who gave it, I have
my stout heart still, and I 'll go on."
"Going on" was, however, not the easy task it first seemed, nor was
the pleasantest part of it the necessity of keeping the secret from his
sister. Miss Dinah had from the first discouraged the whole suit. The
adversary was too powerful, the odds against them were too great; the
India Board had only to protract and prolong the case and they must
be beaten from sheer exhaustion. How, then, should he reconcile her to
mortgaging the last remnant of all their fortune for "one more throw on
the table"? "No chance of persuading a woman that this would be wise,"
said he. And he thought, when he had laid the prejudice of sex as the
ground of error, he had completed his argument.
"Going on" had its fine generous side about it, also, that cheered and
elevated him. It was for George he was doing it, and that dear girl,
whose every trait recalled her father; for let those explain it who can,
she, who had never seen nor even heard of her father since her infancy,
inherited all his peculiar ways and habits, and every trick of his
manner. Let me own that these, even more than any qualities of sterling
worth, endeared her to her grandfather; and just as he had often
declared no rank or position that could befall George would have been
above his deserts, so he averred that if Josephine were to be the
greatest heiress in England to-morrow, she would be a grace and an
ornament to the station. If Aunt Dinah would occasionally attempt to
curb this spirit, or even limit its extravagance, his invariable answer
was, "It may be all as you say, sister, but for the life of me I cannot
think my swans to be geese."
As he thus mused and meditated, he heard the wicket of the garden open
and shut, and shortly afterwards a half-shambling shuffling step on the
gravel. Before he had time to speculate on whose it should be, he saw
Major M'Cormick limping laboriously towards him.
"How is this, Major?" cried he; "has the change of weather disagreed
with your rheumatism?"
"It's the wound; it's always worse in the fall of the year," croaked the
other. "I'd have been up to see you before but for the pains, and that
old fool Dill--a greater fool myself for trusting him--made me put on
a blister down what he calls the course of the nerve, and I never knew
torture till I tried it."
"My sister Dinah has, I verily believe, the most sovereign remedy for
these pains."
"Is it the green draught? Oh, don't I know it," burst out the Major.
"You might hear my shouts the day I took it down at Inistioge. There was
n't a bit of skin left on my lips, and when I wiped the perspiration off
my head my hair came off too. Aquafortis is like egg-flip compared
to that blessed draught; and I remember well how I crawled to my
writing-desk and wrote, 'Have me opened,' for I knew I was poisoned."
"Did you tell my sister of your sufferings?"
"To be sure I did, and she only smiled and said that I took it when I
was fasting, or when I was full, I forget which; and that I ought to
have taken a brisk walk, and I only able to creep; and only one spoonful
at a time, and it was the whole bottle I swallowed. In fact, she owned
afterwards that nothing but the strength of a horse could have saved
me."
Peter found it very hard to maintain a decent gravity at the play of
the Major's features, which during the narrative recalled every dire
experience of his medicine.
"Well, come into the house and we'll give you something better," said
Barrington, at last.
"I think I saw your granddaughter at the window as I came by,--a
good-looking young woman, and not so dark as I suspected she 'd be."
"There's not a handsomer girl in Ireland; and as to skin, she 's not as
brown as her father."
"It wouldn't be easy to be that; he was about three shades deeper than a
Portuguese."
"George Barrington was confessedly the finest-looking fellow in the
King's army, and as English-looking a gentleman as any man in it."
The tone of this speech was so palpably that of one who would not stand
the very shadow of a rejoinder, that the Major held his peace, and
shuffled along without a word. The thought, however, of administering a
rebuke to any one within the precincts of his home was so repugnant to
Barrington's nature, that he had scarcely uttered the words than he was
eager to repair them, and with a most embarrassed humility he stammered
out something about their recent tour abroad and all the enjoyment it
had given them.
"Maybe so," rejoined the other, dryly; "but I never saw any pleasure in
spending money you could keep."
"My dear Major, that is precisely the very money that does procure
pleasure."
"Wasn't that a post-chaise I saw through the trees? There it is again;
it's making straight for the 'Home,'" said M'Cormick, pointing with his
stick.
"Yes," said Peter; "I was expecting a couple of friends to pass a day or
so with me here. Will you excuse me if I hurry forward to welcome them?"
"Don't make a stranger of me; I'll saunter along at my leisure," said
the Major, as Barrington walked briskly on towards the cottage.
CHAPTER III. A SMALL DINNER-PARTY
Withering and Stapylton had arrived fully two hoars earlier than they
were expected, and Miss Dinah was too deeply engaged in the household
cares that were to do them honor to receive them. Josephine, too, was
not less busily occupied, for her conventual education had made her
wonderfully skilful in all sorts of confectionery, and she was mistress
of devices in spun sugar and preserved fruits, which rose in Aunt
Dinah's eyes to the dignity of high art. Barrington, however, was there
to meet them, and with a cordial welcome which no man could express more
gracefully. The luncheon hour passed pleasantly over, for all were in
good humor and good spirits. Withering's holiday always found him ready
to enjoy it, and when could old Peter feel so happy as when he had
a guest beneath his roof who thoroughly appreciated the cottage, and
entered into the full charm of its lovely scenery! Such was Stapylton;
he blended a fair liking for the picturesque with a natural instinct for
comfort and homeliness, and he saw in this spot what precisely embraced
both elements. It was very beautiful; but, better still, it was very
lovable. "It was so rare"--so, at least, he told Barrington--"to find
a cottage wherein internal comfort had not been sacrificed to some
requirement of outward show. There was only one way of doing this,"
said he, as Barrington led him through the little flower-garden,
giving glimpses of the rooms within as they passed,--"only one way, Mr.
Barrington; a man must have consummate taste, and strong credit at his
banker's." Barrington's cheek grew a thought redder, and he smiled that
faint sad smile which now and then will break from one who feels that he
could rebut what he has just heard, if it were but right or fitting he
should do so. Of course, amongst really distressing sensations this has
no place; but yet there is a peculiar pain in being complimented by your
friend on the well-to-do condition of your fortune when your conscience
is full of the long watching hours of the night, or, worse still, the
first awaking thought of difficulties to which you open your eyes of
a morning. It is not often, nor are there many to whom you can say, "I
cannot tell the day or the hour when all this shall pass away from
me; my head is racked with care, and my heart heavy with anxiety." How
jarring to be told of all the things you ought to do! You who could
so well afford it! And how trying to have to take shelter from your
necessity under the shadow of a seeming stinginess, and to bear every
reflection on your supposed thrift rather than own to your poverty!
If Withering had been with them as they strolled, this, perhaps, might
have been avoided; he had all a lawyer's technical skill to change a
topic; but Withering had gone to take his accustomed midday nap, the
greatest of all the luxuries his time of idleness bestowed upon him.
Now, although Stapylton's alludings--and they were no more--to
Barrington's gifts of fortune were such as perfectly consisted with
good taste and good breeding, Barring-ton felt them all painfully, and
probably nothing restrained him from an open disclaimer of their
fitness save the thought that from a host such an avowal would sound
ungracefully. "It is my duty now," reasoned he, "to make my guest feel
that all the attentions he receives exact no sacrifice, and that the
pleasure his presence affords is unalloyed by a single embarrassment.
If he must hear of my difficulties, let it be when he is not beneath my
roof." And so he let Stapylton talk away about the blessings of tranquil
affluence, and the happiness of him whose only care was to find time
for the enjoyments that were secured to him. He let him quote Pope and
Wharton and Edmund Burke, and smiled the blandest concurrence with what
was irritating him almost to fever.
"This is Withering's favorite spot," said Peter, as they gained the
shade of a huge ilex-tree, from which two distinct reaches of the river
were visible.
"And it shall be mine, too," said Stapylton, throwing himself down in
the deep grass; "and as I know you have scores of things which claim
your attention, let me release you, while I add a cigar--the only
possible enhancement--to the delight of this glorious nook."
"Well, it shall be as you wish. We dine at six. I 'll go and look after
a fish for our entertainment;" and Barrington turned away into the
copse, not sorry to release his heart by a heavy sigh, and to feel he
was alone with his cares.
Let us turn for a moment to M'Cormick, who continued to saunter slowly
about the garden, in the expectation of Barrington's return. Wearied
at length with waiting, and resolved that his patience should not go
entirely unrequited, he turned into a little shady walk on which the
windows of the kitchen opened. Stationing himself there, in a position
to see without being seen, he took what he called an observation of all
within. The sight was interesting, even if he did not bring to it the
appreciation of a painter. There, upon a spacious kitchen table, lay a
lordly sirloin, richly and variously colored, flanked by a pair of plump
guinea-hens and a fresh salmon of fully twenty pounds' weight. Luscious
fruit and vegetables were heaped and mingled in a wild profusion, and
the speckled plumage of game was half hidden under the massive bunches
of great hot-house grapes. It is doubtful if Sneyders himself could have
looked upon the display with a higher sense of enjoyment It is, indeed,
a question between the relative merits of two senses, and the issue lies
between the eye and the palate.
Wisely reasoning that such preparations were not made for common guests,
M'Cormick ran over in his mind all the possible and impossible names he
could think of, ending at last with the conviction it was some "Nob" he
must have met abroad, and whom in a moment of his expansive hospitality
he had invited to visit him. "Isn't it like them!" muttered he. "It
would be long before they'd think of such an entertainment to an
old neighbor like myself; but here they are spending--who knows how
much?--for somebody that to-morrow or next day won't remember their
names, or maybe, perhaps, laugh when they think of the funny old woman
they saw,--the 'Fright' with the yellow shawl and the orange bonnet. Oh,
the world, the world!"
It is not for me to speculate on what sort of thing the world had been,
if the Major himself had been intrusted with the control and fashion of
it; but I have my doubts that we are just as well off as we are. "Well,
though they haven't the manners to say 'M'Cormick; will you stop and
dine?' they haven't done with me yet; not a bit!" And with this resolve
he entered the cottage, and found his way to the drawing-room. It was
unoccupied; so he sat himself down in a comfortable armchair, to await
events and their issue. There were books and journals and newspapers
about; but the Major was not a reader, and so he sat musing and
meditating, while the time went by. Just as the clock struck five, Miss
Dinah, whose various cares of housewifery had given her a very busy day,
was about to have a look at the drawing-room before she went to dress,
and being fully aware that one of her guests was asleep, and the other
full stretched beside the river, she felt she could go her "rounds"
without fear of being observed. Now, whatever had been the peculiar
functions she was lately engaged in, they had exacted from her certain
changes in costume more picturesque than flattering. In the first place,
the sleeves of her dress were rolled up above the elbows, displaying
arms more remarkable for bone than beauty. A similar curtailment of her
petticoats exhibited feet and ankles which--not to be ungallant--might
be called massive rather than elegant; and lastly, her two long curls
of auburn hair--curls which, in the splendor of her full toilette,
were supposed to be no mean aids to her captivating powers--were now
tastefully festooned and fastened to the back of her head, pretty
much as a pair of hawsers are occasionally disposed on the bow of a
merchantman! Thus costumed, she had advanced into the middle of the room
before she saw the Major.
"A pleasure quite unexpected, sir, is this," said she, with a vigorous
effort to shake out what sailors would call her "lower courses." "I was
not aware that you were here."
"Indeed, then, I came in myself, just like old times. I said this
morning, if it 's fine to-day, I 'll just go over to the 'Fisherman's
Home.'"
"'The Home,' sir, if you please. We retain so much of the former name."
But just as she uttered the correction, a chance look at the glass
conveyed the condition of her head-gear,--a startling fact which made
her cheeks perfectly crimson. "I lay stress upon the change of name,
sir," continued she, "as intimating that we are no longer innkeepers,
and expect something, at least, of the deference rendered to those who
call their house their own."
"To be sure, and why not?" croaked out the Major, with a malicious grin.
"And I forgot all about it, little thinking, indeed, to surprise you in
'dishabille,' as they call it."
"You surprise me, sir, every time we meet," said she, with flashing
eyes. "And you make me feel surprised with myself for my endurance!"
And so saying, she retired towards the door, covering her retreat as
she went by every object of furniture that presented itself, and, like
a skilful general, defending her rear by every artifice of the ground.
Thus did she exit, and with a bang of the door--as eloquent as any
speech--close the colloquy.
"Faix! and the Swiss costume doesn't become you at all!" said the Major,
as he sat back in his chair, and cackled over the scene.
As Miss Barrington, boiling with passion, passed her brother's door, she
stopped to knock.
"Peter!" cried she. "Peter Barrington, I say!" The words were, however,
not well out, when she heard a step ascending the stair. She could not
risk another discovery like the last; so, opening the door, she said,
"That hateful M'Cormick is below. Peter, take care that on no account--"
There was no time to finish, and she had barely an instant to gain her
own room, when Stapylton reached the corridor.
Peter Barrington had, however, heard enough to inform him of his
sister's high behest. Indeed, he was as quick at interpreting brief
messages as people have grown in these latter days of telegraphic
communication. Oracular utterings had been more than once in his life
his only instructors, and he now knew that he had been peremptorily
ordered not to ask the Major to dinner.
There are, doubtless, people in this world--I almost fancy I have met
one or two such myself--who would not have felt peculiar difficulty in
obeying this command; who would have gone down to the drawing-room
and talked coolly to the visitor, discussing commonplaces, easily and
carelessly, noting the while how at every pause of the conversation each
was dwelling on the self-same point, and yet, with a quiet abstinence,
never touching it, till with a sigh, that was half a malediction, the
uninvited would rise to take leave. Barrington was not of this number.
The man who sat under his roof was sacred. He could have no faults; and
to such a pitch had this punctilio carried him, that had an actual enemy
gained the inside of his threshold, he would have spared nothing to
treat him with honor and respect.
"Well, well," muttered he, as he slowly descended the stairs, "it will
be the first time in my life I ever did it, and I don't know how to go
about it now."
When a frank and generous man is about to do something he is ashamed
of, how readily will a crafty and less scrupulous observer detect it!
M'Cormick read Barrington's secret before he was a minute in the room.
It was in vain Peter affected an off-hand easy manner, incidentally
dropping a hint that the Attorney-General and another friend had just
arrived,--a visit, a mere business visit it was, to be passed with
law papers and parchments. "Poor fun when the partridges were in the
stubble, but there was no help for it. Who knew, however, if he could
not induce them to give him an extra day, and if I can, Major, you must
promise to come over and meet them. You 'll be charmed with Withering,
he has such a fund of agreeability. One of the old school, but not the
less delightful to you and me. Come, now, give me your word--for--shall
we say Saturday?--Yes, Saturday!"
"I 've nothing to say against it," grumbled out M'Cormick, whose assent
was given, as attorneys say, without prejudice to any other claim.
"You shall hear from me in the morning, then," said Peter. "I 'll send
you a line to say what success I have had with my friends."
"Any time in the day will do," said the Major, unconcernedly; for, in
truth, the future never had in his estimation the same interest as the
present. As for the birds in the bush, he simply did not believe in them
at all.
"No, no," said Barrington, hurriedly. "You shall hear from me early,
for I am anxious you should meet Withering and his companion, too,--a
brother-soldier."
"Who may he be?" asked M'Cormick.
"That's my secret, Major,--that's my secret," said Peter, with a forced
laugh, for it now wanted but ten minutes to six; "but you shall know all
on Saturday."
Had he said on the day of judgment, the assurance would have been as
palatable to M'Cormick. Talking to him of Saturday on a Monday was
asking him to speculate on the infinite. Meanwhile he sat on, as only
they sit who understand the deep and high mystery of that process. Oh,
if you who have your fortunes to make in life, without any assignable
mode for so doing, without a craft, a calling, or a trade, knew what
success there was to be achieved merely by sitting--by simply being
"there," eternally "there"--a warning, an example, an illustration, a
what you will, of boredom or infliction; but still "there." The butt
of this man, the terror of that,--hated, feared, trembled at,--but yet
recognized as a thing that must be, an institution that was, and is, and
shall be, when we are all dead and buried.
Long and dreary may be the days of the sitter, but the hour of his
reward will come at last. There will come the time when some one--any
one--will be wanted to pair off with some other bore, to listen to his
stories and make up his whist-table; and then he will be "there." I knew
a man who, merely by sitting on patiently for years, was at last chosen
to be sent as a Minister and special Envoy to a foreign Court just
to get rid of him. And for the women sitters,--the well-dressed
and prettily got-up simperers, who have sat their husbands into
Commissionerships, Colonial Secretaryships, and such like,--are they not
written of in the Book of Beauty?
"Here 's M'Cormick, Dinah," said Barrington, with a voice shaking with
agitation and anxiety, "whom I want to pledge himself to us for Saturday
next. Will you add your persuasions to mine, and see what can be done?"
"Don't you think you can depend upon me?" cackled out the Major.
"I am certain of it, sir; I feel your word like your bond on such a
matter," said Miss Dinah. "My grandniece, Miss Josephine Barrington,"
said she, presenting that young lady, who courtesied formally to the
unprepossessing stranger.
"I'm proud of the honor, ma'am," said M'Cormick, with a deep bow, and
resumed his seat; to rise again, however, as Withering entered the room
and was introduced to him.
"This is intolerable, Peter," whispered Miss Barrington, while the
lawyer and the Major were talking together. "You are certain you have
not asked him?"
"On my honor, Dinah! on my honor!"
"I hope I am not late?" cried Stapylton, entering; then turning hastily
to Barrington, said, "Pray present me to your niece."
"This is my sister, Major Stapylton; this is my granddaughter;" and the
ladies courtesied, each with a degree of satisfaction which the reader
shall be left to assign them.
After a few words of commonplace civility, uttered, however, with
a courtesy and tact which won their way for the speaker, Stapylton
recognized and shook hands with M'Cormick.
"You know my neighbor, then?" said Barrington, in some surprise.
"I am charmed to say I do; he owes me the denouement of a most amusing
story, which was suddenly broken off when we last parted, but which I
shall certainly claim after dinner."
"He has been kind enough to engage himself to us for Saturday," began
Dinah. But M'Cormick, who saw the moment critical, stepped in,--
"You shall hear every word of it before you sleep. It's all about
Walcheren, though they think Waterloo more the fashion now."
"Just as this young lady might fancy Major Stapylton a more interesting
event than one of us," said Withering, laughing. "But what 's become of
your boasted punctuality, Barrington? A quarter past,--are you waiting
for any one?"
"Are we, Dinah?" asked Barrington, with a look of sheepishness.
"Not that I am aware of, Peter. There is no one to come;" and she
laid such an emphasis on the word as made the significance palpable.
To Barrington it was painful as well as palpable; so painful, indeed,
that he hurriedly rang the bell, saying, in a sharp voice, "Of course,
we are all here,--there are six of us. Dinner, Darby!"
The Major had won, but he was too crafty to show any triumph at his
victory, and he did not dare even to look towards where Miss Barrington
stood, lest he should chance to catch her eye. Dinner was at length
announced. Withering gave his arm to Miss Barrington, Stapylton took
charge of Josephine, and old Peter, pleasantly drawing his arm within
M'Cormick's, said, "I hope you 've got a good appetite, Major, for I
have a rare fish for you to-day, and your favorite sauce, too,--smelt,
not lobster."
Poor Barrington! it was a trying moment for him, that short walk into
the dinner-room, and he felt very grateful to M'Cormick that he said
nothing peevish or sarcastic to him on the way. Many a dinner begins in
awkwardness, but warms as it proceeds into a pleasant geniality. Such
was the case here. Amongst those, besides, who have not the ties of
old friendship between them, or have not as yet warmed into that genial
good-fellowship which is, so to say, its foster-brother, a character of
the M'Cormick class is not so damaging an element as might be imagined,
and at times there is a positive advantage in having one of whose
merits, by a tacit understanding, all are quite agreed. Withering
and Stapylton both read the man at once, and drew out his salient
points--his parsimony, his malice, and his prying curiosity--in various
ways, but so neatly and so advisedly as to make him fancy he was the
attacking party, and very successful, too, in his assaults upon the
enemy. Even Barrington, in the honest simplicity of his nature, was
taken in, and more than once thought that the old Major was too severe
upon the others, and sat in wondering admiration of their self-command
and good temper. No deception of this sort prevailed with Miss
Barrington, who enjoyed to the fullest extent the subtle raillery with
which they induced him to betray every meanness of his nature, and yet
never suffered the disclosure to soar above the region of the ludicrous.
"You have been rather hard upon them, Major," said Barrington, as they
strolled about on the greensward after dinner to enjoy their coffee and
a cigar. "Don't you think you have been a shade too severe?"
"It will do them good. They wanted to turn me out like a bagged fox, and
show the ladies some sport; but I taught them a thing or two."
"No, no, M'Cormick, you wrong them there; they had no such intentions,
believe me."
"I know that you did n't see it," said he, with emphasis, "but your
sister did, and liked it well, besides; ay, and the young one joined in
the fun. And, after all, I don't see that they got much by the victory,
for Withering was not pleased at my little hit about the days when he
used to be a Whig and spout liberal politics; and the other liked just
as little my remark about the fellows in the Company's service, and how
nobody knew who they were or where they came from. He was in the Madras
army himself, but I pretended not to know it; but I found his name
written on the leaf of an old book he gave me, and the regiment he was
in: and did you see how he looked when I touched on it? But here he
comes now."
"Make your peace with him, M'Cormick, make your peace!" said Barrington,
as he moved away, not sorry, as he went, to mark the easy familiarity
with which Stapylton drew his arm within the other's, and walked along
at his side.
"Wasn't that a wonderful dinner we had to-day, from a man that hasn't a
cross in his pocket?" croaked out M'Cormick to Stapylton.
"Is it possible?"
"Sherry and Madeira after your soup, then Sauterne,--a thing I don't
care for any more than the oyster patties it came with; champagne next,
and in tumblers too! Do you ever see it better done at your mess? Or
where did you ever taste a finer glass of claret?"
"It was all admirable."
"There was only one thing forgotten,--not that it signifies to me."
"And what might that be?"
"It was n't paid for! No, nor will it ever be!"
"You amaze me, Major. My impression was that our friend here was,
without being rich, in very comfortable circumstances; able to live
handsomely, while he carried on a somewhat costly suit."
"That 's the greatest folly of all," broke out M'Cormick; "and it's to
get money for that now that he's going to mortgage this place here,--ay,
the very ground under our feet!" And this he said with a sort of
tremulous indignation, as though the atrocity bore especially hard upon
them. "Kinshela, the attorney from Kilkenny, was up with me about it
yesterday. 'It's an elegant investment, Major,' says he, 'and you 're
very likely to get the place into your hands for all the chance old
Peter has of paying off the charge. His heart is in that suit, and he
'll not stop as long as he has a guinea to go on with it.'
"I said, 'I 'd think of it: I 'd turn it over in my mind;' for there's
various ways of looking at it."
"I fancy I apprehend one of them," said Stapylton, with a half-jocular
glance at his companion. "You have been reflecting over another
investment, eh? Am I not right? I remarked you at dinner. I saw how the
young brunette had struck you, and I said to myself, 'She has made a
conquest already!'"
"Not a bit of it; nothing of the kind," said M'Cormick, awkwardly. "I 'm
too 'cute to be caught that way."
"Yes, but remember it might be a very good catch. I don't speak of the
suit, because I agree with you, the chances in that direction are very
small, indeed, and I cannot understand the hopeful feeling with which
he prosecutes it; but she is a fine, handsome girl, very attractive in
manner, and equal to any station."
"And what's the good of all that to me? Wouldn't it be better if she
could make a pease-pudding, like Polly Dill, or know how to fatten a
turkey, or salt down a side of bacon?"
"I don't think so; I declare, I don't think so," said Stapylton, as he
lighted a fresh cigar. "These are household cares, and to be bought with
money, and not expensively, either. What a man like you or I wants is
one who should give a sort of tone,--impart a degree of elegance to his
daily life. We old bachelors grow into self-indulgence, which is only
another name for barbarism. With a mistaken idea of comfort we neglect
scores of little observances which constitute the small currency of
civilization, and without which all intercourse is unpleasing and
ungraceful."
"I'm not quite sure that I understand you aright, but there's one thing
I know, I 'd think twice of it before I 'd ask that young woman to be
Mrs. M'Cormick. And, besides," added he, with a sly side-look, "if it's
so good a thing, why don't you think of it for yourself?"
"I need not tell an old soldier like you that full pay and a wife are
incompatible. Every wise man's experience shows it; and when a fellow
goes to the bishop for a license, he should send in his papers to the
Horse Guards. Now, I 'm too poor to give up my career. I have not, like
you, a charming cottage on a river's bank, and a swelling lawn dotted
over with my own sheep before my door. I cannot put off the harness."
"Who talks of putting off the harness?" cried Withering, gayly, as he
joined them. "Who ever dreamed of doing anything so ill-judging and so
mistaken? Why, if it were only to hide the spots where the collar has
galled you, you ought to wear the trappings to the last. No man ever
knew how to idle, who had n't passed all his life at it! Some go so far
as to say that for real success a man's father and grandfather should
have been idlers before him. But have you seen Barrington? He has been
looking for you all over the grounds."
"No," said Stapylton; "my old brother-officer and myself got into
pipeclay and barrack talk, and strolled away down here unconsciously."
"Well, we 'd better not be late for tea," broke in the Major, "or we
'll hear of it from Miss Dinah!" And there was something so comic in
the seriousness of his tone, that they laughed heartily as they turned
towards the house.
CHAPTER IV. A MOVE IN ADVANCE
How pleasantly did the next day break on the "Home"! Polly Dill arrived
in the best of possible spirits. A few lines from Tom had just reached
them. They were written at sea; but the poor fellow's notions of
latitude and longitude were so confused that it was not easy to say from
whence. They were cheery, however, he was in good health, his comrades
were kind-hearted creatures, and evidently recognized in him one of
a station above their own. He said that he could have been appointed
hospital sergeant-if he liked, but that whatever reminded him of his old
calling was so distasteful that he preferred remaining as he was, the
rather as he was given to believe he should soon be a corporal.
"Not that I mean to stop there, Polly; and now that I have n't got to
study for it, I feel a courage as to the future I never knew before.
Give my love to Mr. Conyers, and say that I 'm never tired of thinking
over the last night I saw him, and of all his good nature to me, and
that I hope I 'll see his father some day or other to thank him. I
suppose father does n't miss me? I 'm sure mother does n't; and it
's only yourself, Polly, will ever feel a heavy heart for the poor
castaway! But cheer up! for as sure as my name is Tom, I 'll not bring
discredit on you, and you 'll not be ashamed to take my arm down the
main street when we meet. I must close now, for the boat is going.
"P. S. I dreamed last night you rode Sid Davis's brown mare over the
Millrace at Graigue. Would n't it be strange if it came true? I wish I
could know it."
"May I show this to my friend here, Polly?" said Barrington, pointing
to Withering. "It's a letter he 'd like to read; and as she nodded
assent, he handed it across the breakfast-table.
"What is your brother's regiment, Miss Dill?" said Stapylton, who had
just caught a stray word or two of what passed.
"The Forty-ninth."
"The Forty-ninth," said he, repeating the words once or twice. "Let me
see,--don't I know some Forty-ninth men? To be sure I do. There's Rep
ton and Hare. Your brother will be delighted with Hare."
"My brother is in the ranks, Major Stapylton," said she, flushing a deep
scarlet; and Barrington quickly interposed,--
"It was the wild frolic of a young man to escape a profession he had no
mind for."
"But in foreign armies every one does it," broke in Stapylton,
hurriedly. "No matter what a man's rank may be, he must carry the
musket; and I own I like the practice,--if for nothing else for that
fine spirit of camaraderie which it engenders."
Fifine's eyes sparkled with pleasure at what she deemed the well-bred
readiness of this speech, while Polly became deadly pale, and seemed
with difficulty to repress the repartee that rose to her mind. Not so
Miss Dinah, who promptly said, "No foreign customs can palliate a breach
of our habits. We are English, and we don't desire to be Frenchmen or
Germans."
"Might we not occasionally borrow from our neighbors with advantage?"
asked Stapylton, blandly.
"I agree with Miss Barrington," said Withering,--"I agree with Miss
Barrington, whose very prejudices are always right. An army formed by a
conscription which exempts no man is on a totally different footing from
one derived from voluntary enlistment."
"A practice that some say should be reserved for marriage," said
Barrington, whose happy tact it was to relieve a discussion by a ready
joke.
They arose from table soon after,--Polly to accompany Miss Barrington
over the garden and the shrubberies, and show all that had been done
in their absence, and all that she yet intended to do, if approved of;
Withering adjourned to Barrington's study to pore over parchments; and
Stapylton, after vainly seeking to find Josephine in the drawing-room,
the flower-garden, or the lawn, betook himself with a book, the first he
could find on the table, to the river's side, and lay down, less to read
than to meditate and reflect.
A breezy morning of a fine day in early autumn, with slow sailing clouds
above and a flickering sunlight on the grass below, besides a rippling
river, whose banks are glowing with blue and purple heath-bells,--all
these and a Waverley novel were not enough to distract Stapylton from
the cares that pressed upon his mind; for so it is, look where we may on
those whom Fortune would seem to have made her especial favorites, and
we shall find some unsatisfied ambition, some craving wish doomed to
disappointment, some hope deferred till the heart that held it has
ceased to care for its accomplishment. To the world's eyes, here was a
man eminently fortunate: already high up in the service, with health,
vigor, and good looks, a reputation established for personal gallantry
in the field, and an amount of capacity that had already won for him
more than one distinction, and yet all these, great and solid advantages
as they are, were not sufficient to give the ease of mind we call
happiness.
He had debts, some of them heavy debts, but these sat lightly on him.
He was one of those men creditors never crush, some secret consciousness
seeming to whisper that, however ill the world may go with them for a
while, in the long run they must triumph; and thus Mr. Hirman Davis, to
whom he owed thousands, would have cashed him another bill to-morrow,
all on the faith of that future which Stapylton talked about with the
careless confidence of a mind assured.
He had enemies, too,--powerful and determined enemies,--who opposed his
advancement for many a year, and were still adverse to him; but, like
the creditors, they felt he was not a man to be crushed, and so he and
his ill-wishers smiled blandly when they met, exchanged the most
cordial greetings, and even imparted little confidences of their
several fortunes with all that well-bred duplicity which so simulates
friendship.
He had been crossed,--no, not in love, but in his ambition to marry one
greatly above him in station; but her subsequent marriage had been so
unfortunate that he felt in part recompensed for the slight she passed
upon him; so that, taking it all and all, fate had never been cruel to
him without a compensation.
There are men who feel their whole existence to be a hand-to-hand
struggle with the world, who regard the world as an adversary to be
worsted, and all whose efforts are devoted to reach that point upon
which they can turn round and say, "You see that I have won the game.
I was unknown, and I am famous; I was poor, and I am rich; I was passed
over and ignored, and now the very highest are proud to recognize me!"
Stapylton was one of these. All the egotism of his nature took this
form, and it was far more in a spirit against his fellows than in any
indulgence of himself he fought and struggled with Fortune. Intrusted by
Withering with much of the secret history of Barring-ton's claim against
the India Company, he had learned considerably more through inquiries
instituted by himself, and at length arrived at the conclusion that if
old Barring-ton could be persuaded to limit his demands within moderate
bounds, and not insist upon the details of that personal reparation
which he assumed so essential to his son's honor, a very ample
recompense would not be refused him. It was to induce Barrington to take
this course Stapylton had consented to come down with Withering,--so, at
least, he said, and so Withering believed. Old lawyer that he was,
with a hundred instincts of distrust about him, he had conceived a real
liking for Stapylton, and a great confidence in his judgment. "We shall
have to divide our labors here, Major," said he, as they travelled along
together; "I will leave the ladies to your care. Barrington shall be
mine." A very brief acquaintance with Miss Dinah satisfied Stapylton
that she was one to require nice treatment, and what he called "a
very light hand." The two or three little baits he had thrown out
took nothing; the stray bits of sentimentality, or chance scraps of
high-toned principle he had addressed to her, had failed. It was
only when he had with some sharpness hit off some small meanness
in M'Cormick's nature that she had even vouchsafed him so much as
a half-smile of approval, and he saw that even then she watched him
closely.
"No," said he, half aloud to himself, "that old woman is not one easily
to be dealt with; and the younger one, too, would have a will of her own
if she had but the way to use it. If Polly had been in her place,--the
clever, quickwitted Polly,--she would have gone with me in my plans,
associated herself in all my projects, and assured their success. Oh for
a good colleague just to keep the boat's head straight when one is weary
of rowing!"
"Would I do?" said a low voice near. And, on looking up, he saw
Josephine standing over him, with an arch smile on her face as though
she had surprised him in a confession.
"How long have you been there?" asked he, hurriedly.
"A few seconds.''
"And what have you heard me say?"
"That you wanted a colleague, or a companion of some sort; and as I was
the only useless person here, I offered myself."
"In good faith?"
"In good faith!--why not? I am more likely to gain by the association
than you are; at least, if you can only be as pleasant of a morning as
you were yesterday at dinner."
"I 'll try," said he, springing to his feet; "and as a success in these
efforts is mainly owing to the amount of zeal that animates them, I am
hopeful."
"Which means a flattery at the outset," said she, smiling.
"Only as much as your friend Mr. Withering would throw out to dispose
the court in his favor; and now, which way shall we walk? Are you to be
the guide, or I?"
"You, by all means, since you know nothing of the locality."
"Agreed. Well, here is my plan. We cross the river in this boat, and
take that path yonder that leads up by the waterfall. I know, from the
dark shadow of the mountain, that there is a deep glen, very wild, very
romantic, and very solemn, through which I mean to conduct you."
"All this means a very long excursion, does it not?"
"You have just told me that you were free from all engagement."
"Yes; but not from all control. I must ask Aunt Dinah's leave before I
set out on this notable expedition."
"Do nothing of the kind. It would be to make a caprice seem a plan. Let
us go where you will,--here, along the river's side; anywhere, so that
we may affect to think that we are free agents, and not merely good
children sent out for a walk."
"What a rebel against authority you are for one so despotic yourself!"
"I despotic! Who ever called me so?"
"Your officers say as much."
"I know from what quarter that came," said he; and his bronzed face grew
a shade deeper. "That dilettante soldier, young Conyers, has given me
this character; but I 'd rather talk of you than myself. Tell me all
about your life. Is it as delightful as everything around would bespeak
it? Are these trees and flowers, this sunny bank, this perfumed sward,
true emblems of the existence they embellish, or is Paradise only a
cheat?"
"I don't think so. I think Paradise is very like what it looks, not but
I own that the garden is pleasanter with guests in it than when only
Adam and Eve were there. Mr. Withering is charming, and you can be very
agreeable."
"I would I knew how to be so," said he, seriously, "just at this moment;
for I am going away from Ireland, and I am very desirous of leaving a
good impression behind me."
"What could it signify to you how you were thought of in this lonely
spot?"
"More than you suspect,--more than you would, perhaps, credit," said he,
feelingly.
There was a little pause, during which they walked along side by side.
"What are you thinking of?" said she, at last
"I was thinking of a strange thing,--it was this: About a week ago there
was no effort I was not making to obtain the command of my regiment. I
wanted to be Lieutenant-Colonel; and so bent was I on gaining my object,
that if giving away three or four years of that life that I may hope for
would have done it, I 'd have closed the bargain; and now the ambition
is gone, and I am speculating whether I 'll not take the cottage of your
friend Major M'Cormick,--he offered it to me last night,--and become
your neighbor. What say you to the project?"
"For us the exchange will be all a gain."
"I want your opinion,--your own," said he, with a voice reduced to a
mere whisper.
"I'd like it of all things; although, if I were your sister or your
daughter, I'd not counsel it."
"And why not, if you were my sister?" said he, with a certain constraint
in his manner.
"I'd say it was inglorious to change from the noble activity of a
soldier's life to come and dream away existence here."
"But what if I have done enough for this same thing men call fame?
I have had my share of campaigning, and as the world looks there is
wondrous little prospect of any renewal of it. These peace achievements
suit your friend Conyers better than me."
"I think you are not just to him. If I read him aright, he is burning
for an occasion to distinguish himself."
A cold shrug of the shoulders was his only acknowledgment of this
speech, and again a silence fell between them.
"I would rather talk of you, if you would let me," said he, with much
significance of voice and manner. "Say would you like to have me for
your neighbor?"
"It would be a pleasant exchange for Major M'Cormick," said she,
laughing.
"I want you to be serious now. What I am asking you interests me too
deeply to jest over."
"First of all, is the project a serious one?"
"It is."
"Next, why ask advice from one as inexperienced as I am?"
"Because it is not counsel I ask,--it is something more. Don't look
surprised, and, above all, don't look angry, but listen to me. What I
have said now, and what more I would say, might more properly have been
uttered when we had known each other longer; but there are emergencies
in life which give no time for slow approaches, and there are men,
too, that they suit not. Imagine such now before you,--I mean, both the
moment and the man. Imagine one who has gone through a great deal in
life, seen, heard, and felt much, and yet never till now, never till
this very morning, understood what it was to know one whose least word
or passing look was more to him than ambition, higher than all the
rewards of glory."
"We never met till yesterday," said she, calmly.
"True; and if we part to-morrow, it will be forever. I feel too
painfully," added he, with more eagerness, "how I compromise all that I
value by an avowal abrupt and rash as this is; but I have had no choice.
I have been offered the command of a native force in India, and must
give my answer at once. With hope--the very faintest, so that it be
hope--I will refuse. Remember I want no pledge, no promise; all I
entreat is that you will regard me as one who seeks to win your favor.
Let time do the rest."
"I do not think I ought to do this--I do not know if you should ask it."
"May I speak to your grandfather--may I tell him what I have told
you--may I say, 'It is with Josephine's permission--'"
"I am called Miss Barrington, sir, by all but those of my own family."
"Forgive me, I entreat you," said he, with a deep humility in his tone.
"I had never so far forgotten myself if calm reason had not deserted me.
I will not transgress again."
"This is the shortest way back to the cottage," said she, turning into a
narrow path in the wood.
"It does not lead to my hope," said he, despondingly; and no more was
uttered between them for some paces.
"Do not walk so very fast, Miss Barrington," said he, in a tone which
trembled slightly. "In the few minutes--the seconds you could accord
me--I might build the whole fortune of my life. I have already
endangered my hopes by rashness; let me own that it is the fault I have
struggled against in vain. This scar"--and he showed the deep mark of a
sabre-wound on the temple--"was the price of one of my offendings; but
it was light in suffering to what I am now enduring."
"Can we not talk of what will exact no such sacrifice?" said she,
calmly.
"Not now, not now!" said he, with emotion; "if you pass that porch
without giving me an answer, life has no longer a tie for me. You
know that I ask for no pledge, no promise, merely time,--no more than
time,--a few more of those moments of which you now would seem eager to
deny me. Linger an instant here, I beseech you, and remember that what
to you may be a caprice may to me be a destiny."
"I will not hear more of this," said she, half angrily. "If it were not
for my own foolish trustfulness, you never would have dared to address
such words to one whom you met yesterday for the first time."
"It is true your generous frankness, the nature they told me you
inherited, gives me boldness, but it might teach you to have some pity
for a disposition akin to it. One word,--only one word more."
"Not one, sir! The lesson my frankness has taught me is, never to incur
this peril again."
"Do you part from me in anger?"
"Not with you; but I will not answer for myself if you press me
further."
"Even this much is better than despair," said he, mournfully; and
she passed into the cottage, while he stood in the porch and bowed
respectfully as she went by. "Better than I looked for, better than
I could have hoped," muttered he to himself, as he strolled away and
disappeared in the wood.
CHAPTER V. A CABINET COUNCIL
"What do you think of it, Dinah?" said Barrington, as they sat in
conclave the next morning in her own sitting-room.
She laid down a letter she had just finished reading on the table,
carefully folding it, like one trying to gain time before she spoke:
"He's a clever man, and writes well, Peter; there can be no second
opinion upon that."
"But his proposal, Dinah,--his proposal?"
"Pleases me less the more I think of it. There is great disparity of
age,--a wide discrepancy in character. A certain gravity of demeanor
would not be undesirable, perhaps, in a husband for Josephine, who has
her moments of capricious fancy; but if I mistake not, this man's nature
is stern and unbending."
"There will be time enough to consider all that, Dinah. It is, in fact,
to weigh well the chances of his fitness to secure her happiness that he
pleads; he asks permission to make himself known to her, rather than to
make his court."
"I used to fancy that they meant the same thing,--I know that they did
in my day, Peter," said she, bridling; "but come to the plain question
before us. So far as I understand him, his position is this: 'If I
satisfy you that my rank and fortune are satisfactory to you, have I
your permission to come back here as your granddaughter's suitor?'"
"Not precisely, Dinah,--not exactly this. Here are his words: 'I am well
aware that I am much older than Miss Barrington, and it is simply to
ascertain from herself if, in that disparity of years, there exists that
disparity of tastes and temper which would indispose her to regard me as
one to whom she would intrust her happiness. I hope to do this without
any offence to her delicacy, though not without peril to my own
self-love. Have I your leave for this experiment?'"
"Who is he? Who are his friends, connections, belongings? What is his
station independently of his military rank, and what are his means? Can
you answer these questions?"
"Not one of them. I never found myself till to-day in a position to
inquire after them."
"Let us begin, then, by that investigation, Peter. There is no such
test of a man as to make him talk of himself. With you alone the matter,
perhaps, would not present much difficulty to him, but I intend that Mr.
Withering's name and my own shall be on the committee; and, take my
word for it, we shall sift the evidence carefully."
"Bear in mind, sister Dinah, that this gentleman is, first of all, our
guest."
"The first of all that I mean to bear in mind is, that he desires to be
your grandson."
"Of course,--of course. I would only observe on the reserve that should
be maintained towards one who honors us with his presence."
"Peter Barrington, the Arabs, from whom you seem to borrow your notions
on hospitality, seldom scruple about cutting a guest's head off when he
passes the threshold; therefore I would advise you to adopt habits that
may be more suited to the land we live in."
"All I know is," said Barrington, rising and pacing the room, "that I
could no more put a gentleman under my roof to the question as to his
father and mother and his fortune, than I could rifle his writing-desk
and read his letters."
"Brother Peter, the weakness of your disposition has cost you one of
the finest estates in your country, and if it could be restored to you
to-morrow, the same imbecility would forfeit it again. I will, however,
take the matter into my own hands."
"With Withering, I suppose, to assist you?"
"Certainly not. I am perfectly competent to make any inquiry I deem
requisite without a legal adviser. Perhaps, were I to be so accompanied,
Major Stapylton would suppose that he, too, should appear with his
lawyer."
Barrington smiled faintly at the dry jest, but said nothing.
"I see," resumed she, "that you are very much afraid about my want of
tact and delicacy in this investigation. It is a somewhat common belief
amongst men that in all matters of business women err on the score of
hardness and persistence. I have listened to some edifying homilies from
your friend Withering on female incredulity and so forth,--reproaches
which will cease to apply when men shall condescend to treat us as
creatures accessible to reason, and not as mere dupes. See who is
knocking at the door, Peter," added she, sharply. "I declare it recalls
the old days of our innkeeping, and Darby asking for the bill of the
lame gentleman in No. 4."
"Upon my life, they were pleasant days, too," said Barrington, but in a
tone so low as to be unheard by his sister.
"May I come in?" said Withering, as he opened the door a few inches,
and peeped inside. "I want to show you a note I have just had from
Kinshela, in Kilkenny."
"Yes, yes; come in," said Miss Barrington. "I only wish you had arrived
a little earlier. What is your note about?"
"It's very short and very purpose-like. The first of it is all about
Brazier's costs, which it seems the taxing-officer thinks fair and
reasonable,--all excepting that charge for the additional affidavits.
But here is what I want to show you. 'Major M'Cormick, of M'Cormick's
Grove, has just been here; and although I am not entitled to say as much
officially on his part, I entertain no doubt whatever but that he is
ready to advance the money we require. I spoke of fifteen hundred, but
said twelve might possibly be taken, and twelve would be, I imagine, his
limit, since he held to this amount in all our conversation afterwards.
He appears to be a man of strange and eccentric habits, and these
will probably be deemed a sufficient excuse for the singular turn
our interview took towards its conclusion. I was speaking of Mr.
Barrington's wish for the insertion in the deed of a definite period for
redemption, and he stopped me hastily with, "What if we could strike out
another arrangement? What if he was to make a settlement of the place
on his granddaughter? I am not too old to marry, and I 'd give him
the money at five per cent." I have been careful to give you the very
expressions he employed, and of which I made a note when he left the
office; for although fully aware how improper it would be in me to
submit this proposal to Mr. Barrington, I have felt it my duty to put
you in possession of all that has passed between us.'"
"How can you laugh, Peter Barrington?--how is it possible you can laugh
at such an insult,--such an outrage as this? Go on, sir," said she,
turning to Withering; "let us hear it to the end, for nothing worse can
remain behind."
"There is no more; at least, there is not anything worth hearing.
Kinshela winds up with many apologies, and hopes that I will only use
his communication for my own guidance, and not permit it in any case to
prejudice him in your estimation." As he spoke, he crumpled up the note
in his hand in some confusion.
"Who thinks of Mr. Kinshela, or wants to think of him, in the matter?"
said she, angrily. "I wish, however, I were a man for a couple of hours,
to show Major M'Cormick the estimate I take of the honor he intends us."
"After all, Dinah, it is not that he holds us more cheaply, but rates
himself higher."
"Just so," broke in Withering; "and I know, for my own part, I have
never been able to shake off the flattery of being chosen by the most
nefarious rascal to defend him on his trial. Every man is a great
creature in his own eyes."
"Well, sir, be proud of your client," said she, trembling with anger.
"No, no,--he 's no client of mine, nor is this a case I would plead for
him. I read you Kinshela's note because I thought you were building too
confidently on M'Cormick's readiness to advance this money."
"I understood what that readiness meant, though my brother did not.
M'Cormick looked forward to the day--and not a very distant day did he
deem it--when he should step into possession of this place, and settle
down here as its owner."
Barrington's face grew pale, and a glassy film spread over his eyes,
as his sister's words sunk into his heart. "I declare, Dinah," said he,
falteringly, "that never did strike me before."
"'It never rains but it pours,' says the Irish adage," resumed she. "My
brother and I were just discussing another proposal of the same kind
when you knocked. Read that letter. It is from a more adroit courtier
than the other, and, at least, he does n't preface his intentions with a
bargain." And she handed Stapylton's letter to Withering.
"Ah!" said the lawyer, "this is another guess sort of man, and a very
different sort of proposal."
"I suspected that he was a favorite of yours," said Miss Dinah,
significantly.
"Well, I own to it. He is one of those men who have a great attraction
for me,--men who come out of the conflict of life and its interests
without any exaggerated notions of human perfectibility or the opposite,
who recognize plenty of good and no small share of bad in the world,
but, on the whole, are satisfied that, saving ill health, very few of
our calamities are not of our own providing."
"All of which is perfectly compatible with an odious egotism, sir," said
she, warmly; "but I feel proud to say such characters find few admirers
amongst women."
"From which I opine that he is not fortunate enough to number Miss Dinah
Barrington amongst his supporters?"
"You are right there, sir. The prejudice I had against him before we met
has been strengthened since I have seen him."
"It is candid of you, however, to call it a prejudice," said he, with a
smile.
"Be it so, Mr. Withering; but prejudice is only another word for an
instinct."
"I 'm afraid if we get into ethics we 'll forget all about the
proposal," said Barrington.
"What a sarcasm!" cried Withering, "that if we talk of morals we shall
ignore matrimony."
"I like the man, and I like his letter," said Barrington.
"I distrust both one and the other," said Miss Dinah.
"I almost fancy I could hold a brief on either side," interposed
Withering.
"Of course you could, sir; and if the choice were open to you, it would
be the defence of the guilty."
"My dear Miss Barrington," said Withering, calmly, "when a great legal
authority once said that he only needed three lines of any man's writing
'to hang him,' it ought to make us very lenient in our construction of a
letter. Now, so far as I can see in this one before us, he neither asks
nor protests too much. He begs simply for time, he entreats leave to
draw a bill on your affections, and he promises to meet it."
"No, sir, he wishes to draw at sight, though he has never shown us the
letter of credit."
"I vow to Heaven it is hopeless to expect anything practical when you
two stand up together for a sparring-match," cried Barrington.
"Be practical, then, brother Peter, and ask this gentleman to give you a
quarter of an hour in your study. Find out who he is; I don't expect you
to learn what he is, but what he has. With his fortune we shall get the
clew to himself."
"Yes," chimed in Withering, "all that is very businesslike and
reasonable."
"And it pledges us to nothing," added she. "We take soundings, but we
don't promise to anchor."
"If you go off again with your figures of speech, Dinah, there is an
end of me, for I have one of those unhappy memories that retain the
illustration and forget what it typified. Besides this, here is a man
who, out of pure good nature and respect for poor George's memory, has
been doing us most important services, written letters innumerable, and
taken the most active measures for our benefit. What sort of a figure
shall I present if I bring him to book about his rental and the state of
his bank account?"
"With the exercise of a little tact, Barrington,--a little management--"
"Ask a man with a club-foot to walk gingerly! I have no more notion of
getting at anything by address than I have of tying the femoral artery."
"The more blunt the better, Peter Barrington. You may tumble into the
truth, though you'd never pick your way into it. Meanwhile, leave me to
deal with Major M'Cor-mick."
"You'll do it courteously, Dinah; you'll bear in mind that he is a
neighbor of some twenty years' standing?" said Barrington, in a voice
of anxiety.
"I 'll do it in a manner that shall satisfy my conscience and his
presumption."
She seated herself at the table as she said this, and dashed off a few
hasty lines. Indeed, so hurried was the action, that it looked far more
like one of those instances of correspondence we see on the stage than
an event of real life.
"Will that do?" said she, showing the lines to Withering.
The old lawyer read them over to himself, a faint twitching of the mouth
being the only sign his face presented of any emotion. "I should say
admirably,--nothing better."
"May I see it, Dinah?" asked Peter.
"You shall hear it, brother," said she, taking the paper and reading,--
"'Miss Barrington informs Mr. Kinshela that if he does not at once
retract his epistle of this morning's date, she will place it in the
hands of her legal adviser, and proceed against it as a threatening
letter.'"
"Oh, sister, you will not send this?"
"As sure as my name is Dinah Barrington."
CHAPTER VI. AN EXPRESS
In the times before telegraphs,--and it is of such I am writing,--a
hurried express was a far more stirring event than in these our days
of incessant oracles. While, therefore, Barrington and his sister and
Withering sat in deep consultation on Josephine's fate and future, a
hasty summons arrived from Dublin, requiring the instantaneous departure
of Stapylton, whose regiment was urgently needed in the north of
England, at that time agitated by those disturbances called the Bread
Riots. They were very formidable troubles, and when we look back upon
them now, with the light which the great events of later years on the
Continent afford us, seem more terrible still. It was the fashion,
however, then, to treat them lightly, and talk of them contemptuously;
and as Stapylton was eating a hasty luncheon before departure, he
sneered at the rabble, and scoffed at the insolent pretension of their
demands. Neither Barrington nor Withering sympathized with the spirit
of the revolt, and yet each felt shocked at the tone of haughty contempt
Stapylton assumed towards the people. "You'll see," cried he, rising,
"how a couple of brisk charges from our fellows will do more to bring
these rascals to reason than all the fine pledges of your Parliament
folk; and I promise you, for my own part, if I chance upon one of their
leaders, I mean to lay my mark on him."
"I fear, sir, it is your instinctive dislike to the plebeian that moves
you here," said Miss Dinah. "You will not entertain the question whether
these people may not have some wrongs to complain of."
"Perhaps so, madam," said he; and his swarthy face grew darker as he
spoke. "I suppose this is the case where the blood of a gentleman boils
indignantly at the challenge of the canaille."
"I will not have a French word applied to our own people, sir," said
she, angrily.
"Well said," chimed in Withering. "It is wonderful how a phrase can seem
to carry an argument along with it."
And old Peter smiled, and nodded his concurrence with this speech.
"What a sad minority do I stand in!" said Stapylton, with an effort to
smile very far from successful. "Will not Miss Josephine Barrington have
generosity enough to aid the weaker side?"
"Not if it be the worst cause," interposed Dinah. "My niece needs not to
be told she must be just before she is generous."
"Then it is to your own generosity I will appeal," said Stapylton,
turning to her; "and I will ask you to ascribe some, at least, of my
bitterness to the sorrow I feel at being thus summoned away. Believe me
it is no light matter to leave this place and its company."
"But only for a season, and a very brief season too, I trust," said
Barrington. "You are going away in our debt, remember."
"It is a loser's privilege, all the world over, to withdraw when he has
lost enough," said Stapylton, with a sad smile towards Miss Dinah; and
though the speech was made in the hope it might elicit a contradiction,
none came, and a very awkward silence ensued.
"You will reach Dublin to-night, I suppose?" said Withering, to relieve
the painful pause in the conversation.
"It will be late,--after midnight, perhaps."
"And embark the next morning?"
"Two of our squadrons have sailed already; the others will, of course,
follow to-morrow."
"And young Conyers," broke in Miss Dinah,--"he will, I suppose,
accompany this--what shall I call it?--this raid?"
"Yes, madam. Am I to convey to him your compliments upon the first
opportunity to flesh his maiden sword?"
"You are to do nothing of the kind, sir; but tell him from me not to
forget that the angry passions of a starving multitude are not to be
confounded with the vindictive hate of our natural enemies."
"Natural enemies, my dear Miss Barrington! I hope you cannot mean that
there exists anything so monstrous in humanity as a natural enemy?"
"I do, sir; and I mean all those whose jealousy of us ripens into
hatred, and who would spill their heart's blood to see us humbled. When
there exists a people like this, and who at every fresh outbreak of a
war with us have carried into the new contest all the bitter animosities
of long past struggles as debts to be liquidated, I call these
natural enemies; and, if you prefer a shorter word for it, I call them
Frenchmen."
"Dinah, Dinah!"
"Peter, Peter! don't interrupt me. Major Stapylton has thought to tax me
with a blunder, but I accept it as a boast!"
"Madam, I am proud to be vanquished by you," said Stapylton, bowing low.
"And I trust, sir," said she, continuing her speech, and as if heedless
of his interruption, "that no similarity of name will make you behave at
Peterloo--if that be the name--as though you were at Waterloo."
"Upon my life!" cried he, with a saucy laugh, "I don't know how I am
to win your good opinion, except it be by tearing off my epaulettes, and
putting myself at the head of the mob."
"You know very little of my sister, Major Stapylton," said Barrington,
"or you would scarcely have selected that mode of cultivating her
favor."
"There is a popular belief that ladies always side with the winning
cause," said Stapylton, affecting a light and easy manner; "so I must
do my best to be successful. May I hope I carry your good wishes away
with me?" said he, in a lower tone to Josephine.
"I hope that nobody will hurt you, and you hurt nobody," said she,
laughingly.
"And this, I take it, is about as much sympathy as ever attends a man
on such a campaign. Mr. Barrington, will you grant me two minutes
of conversation in your own room?" And, with a bow of acquiescence,
Barrington led the way to his study.
"I ought to have anticipated your request, Major Stapyl-ton," said
Barrington, when they found themselves alone. "I owe you a reply to your
letter, but the simple fact is, I do not know what answer to give it;
for while most sensible of the honor you intend us, I feel still there
is much to be explained on both sides. We know scarcely anything of each
other, and though I am conscious of the generosity which prompts a
man with your prospects and in your position to ally himself with
persons in ours, yet I owe it to myself to say, it hangs upon a
contingency to restore us to wealth and station. Even a portion of what
I claim from the East India Company would make my granddaughter one of
the richest heiresses in England."
Stapylton gave a cold, a very cold smile, in reply to this speech. It
might mean that he was incredulous or indifferent, or it might imply
that the issue was one which need not have been introduced into the
case at all. Whatever its signification, Barrington felt hurt by it, and
hastily said,--
"Not that I have any need to trouble you with these details: it is
rather my province to ask for information regarding your circumstances
than to enter upon a discussion of ours."
"I am quite ready to give you the very fullest and clearest,--I mean
to yourself personally, or to your sister; for, except where the lawyer
intervenes of necessity and de droit, I own that I resent his
presence as an insult. I suppose few of us are devoid of certain
family circumstances which it would be more agreeable to deal with in
confidence; and though, perhaps, I am as fortunate as most men in this
respect, there are one or two small matters on which I would ask your
attention. These, however, are neither important nor pressing. My first
care is to know,--and I hope I am not peremptory in asking it,--have I
your consent to the proposition contained in my letter; am I at liberty
to address Miss Barrington?"
Barrington flushed deeply and fidgeted; he arose and sat down
again,--all his excitement only aggravated by the well-bred composure
of the other, who seemed utterly unconscious of the uneasiness he was
causing.
"Don't you think, Major, that this is a case for a little time to
reflect,--that in a matter so momentous as this, a few days at least are
requisite for consideration? We ought to ascertain something at least of
my granddaughter's own sentiments,--I mean, of course, in a general way.
It might be, too, that a day or two might give us some better insight
into her future prospects."
"Pardon my interrupting you; but, on the last point, I am perfectly
indifferent. Miss Barrington with half a province for her dower, would
be no more in my eyes than Miss Barrington as she sat at breakfast
this morning. Nor is there anything of high-flown sentiment in this
declaration, as my means are sufficiently ample for all that I want or
care."
"There, at least, is one difficulty disposed of. You are an eldest son?"
said he; and he blushed at his own boldness in making the inquiry.
"I am an only son."
"Easier again," said Barrington, trying to laugh off the awkward moment.
"No cutting down one's old timber to pay off the provisions for younger
brothers."
"In my case there is no need of this."
"And your father. Is he still living, Major Stapylton?"
"My father has been dead some years."
Barrington fidgeted again, fumbled with his watch-chain and his
eye-glass, and would have given more than he could afford for any
casualty that should cut short the interview. He wanted to say, "What is
the amount of your fortune? What is it? Where is it? Are you Wiltshire
or Staffordshire? Who are your uncles and aunts, and your good friends
that you pray for, and where do you pray for them?" A thousand questions
of this sort arose in his mind, one only more prying and impertinent
than another. He knew he ought to ask them; he knew Dinah would have
asked them. Ay, and would have the answers to them as plain and palpable
as the replies to a life assurance circular; but he could n't do it. No;
not if his life depended on it.
He had already gone further in his transgression of good manners than it
ever occurred to him before to do, and he felt something between a holy
inquisitor and a spy of the police.
Stapylton looked at his watch, and gave a slight start.
"Later than you thought, eh?" cried Peter, overjoyed at the diversion.
Stapylton smiled a cold assent, and put up his watch without a word. He
saw all the confusion and embarrassment of the other, and made no effort
to relieve him. At last, but not until after a considerable pause,
he said,--"I believe, Mr. Barrington,--I hope, at least,--I have
satisfactorily answered the questions which, with every right on your
part, you have deemed proper to put to me. I cannot but feel how painful
the task has been to you, and I regret it the more, since probably
it has set a limit to inquiries which you are perfectly justified in
making, but which closer relations between us may make a matter far less
formidable one of these days."
"Yes, yes,--just so; of course," said Barrington, hurriedly assenting to
he knew not what.
"And I trust I take my leave of you with the understanding that when
we meet again, it shall be as in the commencement of these pleasanter
relations. I own to you I am the more eager on this point, that
I perceive your sister, Miss Barrington, scarcely regards me very
favorably, and I stand the more in need of your alliance."
"I don't think it possible, Major Stapylton," said Barrington, boldly,
"that my sister and I could have two opinions upon anything or anybody."
"Then I only ask that she may partake of yours on this occasion," said
Stapylton, bowing. "But I must start; as it is, I shall be very late in
Dublin. Will you present my most respectful adieux to the ladies, and
say also a goodbye for me to Mr. Withering?"
"You'll come in for a moment to the drawing-room, won't you?" cried
Barrington.
"I think not. I opine it would be better not. There would be a certain
awkwardness about it,--that is, until you have informed Miss Dinah
Barrington of the extent to which you have accorded me your confidence,
and how completely I have opened every detail of my circumstances.
I believe it would be in better taste not to present myself. Tell
Withering that if he writes, Manchester will find me. I don't suspect
he need give himself any more trouble about establishing the proofs of
marriage. They will scarcely contest that point. The great question will
and must be, to ascertain if the Company will cease to oppose the claim
on being fully convinced that the letter to the Meer Busherat was a
forgery, and that no menace ever came from Colonel Barrington's hand as
to the consequences of opposing his rule. Get them to admit this,--let
the issue rest upon this,--and it will narrow the whole suit within
manageable limits."
"Would you not say this much to him before you go? It would come with so
much more force and clearness from yourself."
"I have done so till I was wearied. Like a true lawyer, he insists upon
proving each step as he goes, and will not condescend to a hypothetical
conclusion, though I have told him over and over again we want a
settlement, not a victory. Good-bye, good-bye! If I once launch out into
the cause, I cannot tear myself away again."
"Has your guest gone, Peter?" said Miss Dinah, as her brother re-entered
the drawing-room.
"Yes; it was a hurried departure, and he had no great heart for it,
either. By the way, Withering, while it is fresh in my head, let me tell
you the message he has sent you."
"Was there none for me, Peter?" said she, scofflngly.
"Ay, but there was, Dinah! He left with me I know not how many polite
and charming things to say for him."
"And am I alone forgotten in this wide dispensation of favors?" asked
Josephine, smiling.
"Of course not, dear," chimed in Miss Dinah. "Your grandpapa has been
charged with them all. You could not expect a gentleman so naturally
timid and bashful as our late guest to utter them by his own lips."
"I see," said Withering, laughing, "that you have not forgiven the
haughty aristocrat for his insolent estimate of the people!"
"He an aristocrat! Such bitter words as his never fell from any man who
had a grandfather!"
"Wrong for once, Dinah," broke in Barrington. "I can answer for it that
you are unjust to him."
"We shall see," said she. "Come, Josephine, I have a whole morning's
work before me in the flower-garden, and I want your help. Don't forget,
Peter, that Major M'Cormick's butler, or boatman, or bailiff, whichever
he be, has been up here with a present of seakale this morning. Give him
something as you pass the kitchen; and you, Mr. Withering, whose trade
it is to read and unravel mysteries, explain if you can the meaning of
this unwonted generosity."
"I suppose we can all guess it," said he, laughing. "It's a custom that
begins in the East and goes round the whole world till it reaches the
vast prairie in the Far West."
"And what can that custom be, Aunt Dinah?" asked Josephine, innocently.
"It's an ancient rite Mr. Withering speaks, of, child, pertaining to the
days when men offered sacrifices. Come along; I 'm going!"
CHAPTER VII. CROSS-EXAMININGS.
While Barrington and his lawyer sat in conclave over the details of the
great suit, Stapylton hurried along his road with all the speed he could
summon. The way, which for some miles led along the river-side, brought
into view M'Cormick's cottage, and the Major himself, as he stood
listlessly at his door.'
Halting his carriage for a moment, Stapylton jumped out and drew nigh
the little quickset hedge which flanked the road.
"What can I do for you in the neighborhood of Manchester, Major? We are
just ordered off there to ride down the Radicals."
"I wish it was nearer home you were going to do it," said he, crankily.
"Look here,"--and he pointed to some fresh-turned earth,--"they were
stealing my turnips last night."
"It would appear that these fellows in the North are growing dangerous,"
said Stapylton.
"'T is little matter to us," said M'Cormick, sulkily. "I'd care more
about a blight in the potatoes than for all the politics in Europe."
"A genuine philosopher! How snug you are here, to be sure! A man in a
pleasant nook like this can well afford to smile at the busy ambitions
of the outer world. I take it you are about the very happiest fellow I
know?"
"Maybe I am, maybe I'm not," said he, peevishly.
"This spot only wants what I hinted to you t'other evening, to be
perfection."
"Ay!" said the other, dryly.
"And you agree with me heartily, if you had the candor to say it. Come,
out with it, man, at once. I saw your gardener this morning with a great
basketful of greenery, and a large bouquet on the top of it,--are not
these significant signs of a projected campaign? You are wrong, Major,
upon my life you are wrong, not to be frank with me. I could, by a
strange hazard, as the newspapers say, 'tell you something to your
advantage.'"
"About what?"
"About the very matter you were thinking of as I drove up. Come, I will
be more generous than you deserve." And, laying his arm on M'Cormick's
shoulder, he halt whispered in his ear; "It is a good thing,--a deuced
good thing! and I promise you, if I were a marrying man, you 'd have a
competitor. I won't say she 'll have one of the great fortunes people
rave about, but it will be considerable,--very considerable."
"How do you know, or what do you know?"
"I 'll tell you in three words. How I know is, because I have been the
channel for certain inquiries they made in India. What I know is, the
Directors are sick of the case, they are sorely ashamed of it, and not a
little uneasy lest it should come before the public, perhaps before the
Parliament. Old Barrington has made all negotiation difficult by the
extravagant pretensions he puts forward about his son's honor, and so
forth. If, however, the girl were married, her husband would be
the person to treat with, and I am assured with him they would deal
handsomely, even generously."
"And why would n't all this make a marrying man of you, though you were
n't before?"
"There's a slight canonical objection, if you must know," said
Stapylton, with a smile.
"Oh, I perceive,--a wife already! In India, perhaps?"
"I have no time just now for a long story, M'Cormick," said he,
familiarly, "nor am I quite certain I 'd tell it if I had. However, you
know enough for all practical purposes, and I repeat to you this is a
stake I can't enter for,--you understand me?"
"There's another thing, now," said M'Cormick; "and as we are talking so
freely together, there's no harm in mentioning it. It 's only the other
day, as I may call it, that we met for the first time?"
"Very true: when I was down here at Cobham."
"And never heard of each other before?"
"Not to my knowledge, certainly."
"That being the case, I 'm curious to hear how you took this wonderful
interest in me. It wasn't anything in my appearance, I 'm sure, nor my
manner; and as to what you 'd hear about me among those blackguards down
here, there's nothing too bad to say of me."
"I'll be as frank as yourself," said Stapylton, boldly; "you ask for
candor, and you shall have it. I had n't talked ten minutes with you
till I saw that you were a thorough man of the world; the true old
soldier, who had seen enough of life to know that whatever one gets for
nothing in this world is just worth nothing, and so I said to myself,
'If it ever occurs to me to chance upon a good opportunity of which I
cannot from circumstances avail myself, there's my man. I'll go to him
and say, "M'Cormick, that's open to you, there's a safe thing!" And when
in return he 'd say, "Stapylton, what can I do for you?" my answer would
be, "Wait till you are satisfied that I have done you a good turn; be
perfectly assured that I have really served you." And then, if I
wanted a loan of a thousand or fifteen hundred to lodge for the
Lieutenant-Colonelcy, I 'd not be ashamed to say, "M'Cormick, let me
have so much."'"
"That's it, is it?" said M'Cormick, with a leer of intense cunning.
"Not a bad bargain for you, anyhow. It is not every day that a man can
sell what is n't his own."
"I might say, it's not every day that a man regards a possible loan as
a gift, but I 'm quite ready to reassure all your fears on that score;
I'll even pledge myself never to borrow a shilling from you."
"Oh, I don't mean that; you took me up so quick," said the old fellow,
reddening with a sense of shame he had not felt for many a year. "I may
be as stingy as they call me, but for all that I 'd stand to a man who
stands to me."
"Between gentlemen and men of the world these things are better left
to a sense of an honorable understanding than made matters of compact.
There is no need of another word on the matter. I shall be curious,
however, to know how your project speeds. Write to me,--you have plenty
of time,--and write often. I 'm not unlikely to learn something about
the Indian claim, and if I do, you shall hear of it."
"I'm not over good at pen and ink work; indeed, I haven't much practice,
but I'll do my best."
"Do, by all means. Tell me how you get on with Aunt Dinah, who, I
suspect, has no strong affection for either of us. Don't be precipitate;
hazard nothing by a rash step; secure your way by intimacy, mere
intimacy: avoid particular attentions strictly; be always there, and on
some pretext or other--But why do I say all this to an old soldier, who
has made such sieges scores of times?"
"Well, I think I see my way clear enough," said the old fellow, with a
grin. "I wish I was as sure I knew why you take such an interest in me."
"I believe I have told you already; I hope there is nothing so strange
in the assurance as to require corroboration. Come, I must say
good-bye; I meant to have said five words to you, and I have stayed here
five-and-twenty minutes."
"Would n't you take something?--could n't I offer you anything?" said
M'Cormick, hesitatingly.
"Nothing, thanks. I lunched before I started; and although old Dinah
made several assaults upon me while I ate, I managed to secure two
cutlets and part of a grouse-pie, and a rare glass of Madeira to wash
them down."
"That old woman is dreadful, and I'll take her down a peg yet, as sure
as my name is Dan."
"No, don't, Major; don't do anything of the kind. The people who tame
tigers are sure to get scratched at last, and nobody thanks them for
their pains. Regard her as the sailors do a fire-ship; give her a wide
berth, and steer away from her."
"Ay, but she sometimes gives chase."
"Strike your flag, then, if it must be; for, trust me, you 'll not
conquer her."
"We 'll see, we 'll see," muttered the old fellow, as he waved his
adieux, and then turned back into the house again.
As Stapylton lay back in his carriage, he could not help muttering
a malediction on the "dear friend" he had just parted with. When the
bourgeois gentilhomme objected to his adversary pushing him en
tierce while he attacked him en quarte, he was expressing a great
social want, applicable to those people who in conversation will persist
in saying many things which ought not to be uttered, and expressing
doubts and distrusts which, however it be reasonable to feel, are an
outrage to avow.
"The old fox," said Stapylton, aloud, "taunted me with selling what did
not belong to me; but he never suspects that I have bought something
without paying for it, and that something himself! Yes, the mock siege
he will lay to the fortress will occupy the garrison till it suits me
to open the real attack, and I will make use of him, besides, to learn
whatever goes on in my absence. How the old fellow swallowed the bait!
What self-esteem there must be in such a rugged nature, to make him
imagine he could be successful in a cause like this! He is, after all,
a clumsy agent to trust one's interest to. If the choice had been given
me, I'd far rather have had a woman to watch over them. Polly Dill, for
instance, the very girl to understand such a mission well. How adroitly
would she have played the game, and how clearly would her letters have
shown me the exact state of events!"
Such were the texts of his musings as he drove along, and deep as were
his thoughts, they never withdrew him, when the emergency called,
from attention to every detail of the journey, and he scrutinized the
post-horses as they were led out, and apportioned the rewards to the
postilions as though no heavier care lay on his heart than the road and
its belongings. While he rolled thus smoothly along, Peter Barrington
had been summoned to his sister's presence, to narrate in full all that
he had asked, and all that he had learned of Stapylton and his fortunes.
Miss Dinah was seated in a deep armchair, behind a formidable
embroidery-frame,--a thing so complex and mysterious in form as to
suggest an implement of torture. At a short distance off sat Withering,
with pen, ink, and paper before him, as if to set down any details of
unusual importance; and into this imposing presence poor Barrington
entered with a woful sense of misgiving and humiliation.
"We have got a quiet moment at last, Peter," said Miss Barrington. "I
have sent the girls over to Brown's Barn for the tulip-roots, and I have
told Darby that if any visitors came they were to be informed we were
particularly occupied by business, and could see no one."
"Just so," added Withering; "it is a case before the Judge in Chamber."
"But what have we got to hear?" asked Barrington, with an air of
innocence.
"We have got to hear your report, brother Peter; the narrative of your
late conversation with Major Stapylton; given, as nearly as your memory
will serve, in the exact words and in the precise order everything
occurred."
"October the twenty-third," said Withering, writing as he spoke; "minute
of interview between P. B. and Major S. Taken on the same morning it
occurred, with remarks and observations explanatory."
"Begin," said Dinah, imperiously, while she worked away without lifting
her head. "And avoid, so far as possible, anything beyond the precise
expression employed."
"But you don't suppose I took notes in shorthand of what we said to each
other, do you?"
"I certainly suppose you can have retained in your memory a conversation
that took place two hours ago," said Miss Dinah, sternly.
"And can relate it circumstantially and clearly," added Withering.
"Then I 'm very sorry to disappoint you, but I can do nothing of the
kind."
"Do you mean to say that you had no interview with Major Stapylton,
Peter?"
"Or that you have forgotten all about it?" said Withering.
"Or is it that you have taken a pledge of secrecy, brother Peter?"
"No, no, no! It is simply this, that though I retain a pretty fair
general impression of what I said myself, and what he said afterwards,
I could no more pretend to recount it accurately than I could say off by
heart a scene in 'Romeo and Juliet.'"
"Why don't you take the 'Comedy of Errors' for your illustration, Peter
Barrington? I ask you, Mr. Withering, have you in all your experience
met anything like this?"
"It would go hard with a man in the witness-box to make such a
declaration, I must say."
"What would a jury think of, what would a judge say to him?" said she,
using the most formidable of all penalties to her brother's imagination.
"Wouldn't the court tell him that he would be compelled to speak out?"
"They'd have it out on the cross-examination, at all events, if not on
the direct."
"In the name of confusion, what do you want with me?" exclaimed Peter,
in despair.
"We want everything,--everything that you heard about this man. Who he
is, what he is; what by the father's side, what by the mother's; what
are his means, and where; who knows him, who are his associates. Bear in
mind that to us, here, he has dropped out of the clouds."
"And gone back there too," added Withering.
"I wish to Heaven he had taken me with him!" sighed Peter, drearily.
"I think in this case, Miss Barrington," said Withering, with a
well-affected gravity, "we had better withdraw a juror, and accept a
nonsuit."
"I have done with it altogether," said she, gathering up her worsted and
her needles, and preparing to leave the room.
"My dear Dinah," said Barrington, entreatingly, "imagine a man as
wanting in tact as I am,--and as timid, too, about giving casual
offence,--conducting such an inquiry as you committed to my hands. Fancy
how, at every attempt to obtain information, his own boldness, I might
call it rudeness, stared him in the face, till at last, rather than
push his investigations, he grew puzzled how to apologize for his prying
curiosity."
"Brother, brother, this is too bad! It had been better to have thought
more of your granddaughter's fate and less of your own feelings." And
with this she flounced out of the room, upsetting a spider-table, and a
case of stuffed birds that stood on it, as she passed.
[Illustration: 410]
"I don't doubt but she 's right, Tom," said Peter, when the door closed.
"Did he not tell you who he was, and what his fortune? Did you really
learn nothing from him?"
"He told me everything; and if I had not been so cruelly badgered, I
could have repeated every word of it; but you never made a hound true to
the scent by flogging him, Tom,--is n't that a fact, eh?" And consoled
by an illustration that seemed so pat to his case, he took his hat and
strolled out into the garden.
[Illustration: 410]
CHAPTER VIII. GENERAL CONYERS
In a snug little room of the Old Ship Hotel, at Dover, a large, heavy
man, with snow-white hair, and moustaches,--the latter less common in
those days than the present,--sat at table with a younger one, so like
him that no doubt could have existed as to their being father and son.
They had dined, and were sitting over their wine, talking occasionally,
but oftener looking fondly and affectionately at each other; and once,
by an instinct of sudden love, grasping each other's hand, and sitting
thus several minutes without a word on either side.
"You did not expect me before to-morrow, Fred," said the old man, at
last.
"No, father," replied young Conyers. "I saw by the newspapers that you
were to dine at the Tuileries on Tuesday, and I thought you would not
quit Paris the same evening."
"Yes; I started the moment I took off my uniform. I wanted to be with
you, my boy; and the royal politeness that detained me was anything but
a favor. How you have grown, Fred,--almost my own height, I believe."
"The more like you the better," said the youth, as his eyes ran over,
and the old man turned away to hide his emotion.
After a moment he said: "How strange you should not have got my letters,
Fred; but, after all, it is just as well as it is. I wrote in a very
angry spirit, and was less just than a little cool reflection might have
made me. They made no charges against me, though I thought they had.
There were grumblings and discontents, and such-like. They called me a
Rajah, and raked up all the old stories they used to circulate once on a
time about a far better fellow--"
"You mean Colonel Barrington, don't you?" said Fred.
"Where or how did you hear of that name?" said the old man, almost
sternly.
"An accident made me the guest of his family, at a little cottage they
live in on an hish river. I passed weeks there, and, through the favor
of the name I bore, I received more kindness than I ever before met in
life."
"And they knew you to be a Conyers, and to be my son?"
"It was Colonel Barrington's aunt was my hostess, and she it was who,
on hearing my name, admitted me at once to all the privileges of old
friendship. She told me of the close companionship which once subsisted
between you and her nephew, and gave me rolls of his letters to read
wherein every line spoke of you."
"And Mr. Barrington, the father of George, how did he receive you?"
"At first with such coolness that I could n't bring myself to recross
his threshold. He had been away from home when I arrived, and the day
of his return I was unexpectedly presented to him by his sister, who
evidently was as unprepared as myself for the reception I met with."
"And what was that reception,--how was it? Tell me all as it happened."
"It was the affair of a moment. Miss Barrington introduced me, saying,
'This is the son of poor George's dearest friend,--this is a Conyers;'
and the old man faltered, and seemed like to faint, and after a moment
stammered out something about an honor he had never counted upon,--a
visit he scarcely could have hoped for; and, indeed, so overcome was he
that he staggered into the house only to take to his bed, where he lay
seriously ill for several days after."
"Poor fellow! It was hard to forgive,--very hard."
"Ay, but he has forgiven it--whatever it was--heartily, and wholly
forgiven it. We met afterwards by a chance in Germany, and while I was
hesitating how to avoid a repetition of the painful scene which marked
our first meeting, he came manfully towards me with his hand out, and
said, 'I have a forgiveness to beg of you; and if you only know how I
long to obtain it, you would scarce say me no.'"
"The worthy father of poor George! I think I hear him speak the very
words himself. Go on, Fred,--go on, and tell me further."
"There is no more to tell, sir, unless I speak of all the affectionate
kindness he has shown,--the trustfulness and honor with which he has
treated me. I have been in his house like his own son."
"Ah! if you had known that son! If you had seen what a type of a soldier
he was! The most intrepid, the boldest fellow that ever breathed; but
with a heart of childlike simplicity and gentleness. I could tell
you traits of him, of his forbearance, his forgiveness, his generous
devotion to friendship, that would seem to bespeak a nature that had no
room for other than soft and tender emotion; and yet, if ever there was
a lion's heart within a man's bosom it was his." For a moment or two
the old man seemed overcome by his recollections, and then, as if by an
effort, rallying himself, he went on: "You have often heard the adage,
Fred, that enjoins watching one's pennies and leaving the pounds to take
care of themselves; and yet, trust me, the maxim is truer as applied
to our morals than our money. It is by the smaller, finer, and least
important traits of a man that his fate in life is fashioned. The
caprices we take no pains to curb, the tempers we leave unchecked, the
petty indulgences we extend to our vanity and self-love,--these are the
great sands that wreck us far oftener than the more stern and formidable
features of our character. I ought to know this truth; I myself lost the
best and truest and the noblest friend that ever man had, just from the
exercise of a spirit of bantering and ridicule which amused those about
me, and gave me that pre-eminence which a sarcastic and witty spirit
is sure to assert. You know already how George Barrington and I lived
together like brothers. I do not believe two men ever existed more
thoroughly and sincerely attached to each other. All the contrarieties
of our dispositions served but to heighten the interest that linked us
together. As for myself, I was never wearied in exploring the strange
recesses of that great nature that seemed to unite all that could be
daring and dashing in man with the tenderness of a woman. I believe I
knew him far better than he knew himself. But to come to what I wanted
to tell you, and which is an agony to me to dwell on. Though for a long
while our close friendship was known in the regiment, and spoken of as a
thing incapable of change, a sort of rumor--no, not even a rumor, but an
impression--seemed to gain, that the ties between us were looser on my
side than his; that George looked up to me, and that I, with the pride
of a certain superiority, rather lorded it over him. This feeling
became painfully strengthened when it got about that Barrington had lent
me the greater part of the purchase-money for my troop,--a promotion, by
the way, which barred his own advancement,--and it was whispered, so
at least I heard, that Barrington was a mere child in my hands, whom I
rebuked or rewarded at pleasure. If I could have traced these rumors to
any direct source, I could have known how to deal with them. As it was,
they were vague, shadowy, and unreal; and their very unsubstantiality
maddened me the more. To have told George of them would have been rasher
still. The thought of a wrong done to me would have driven him beyond
all reason, and he would infallibly have compromised himself beyond
recall. It was the very first time in my life I had a secret from him,
and it eat into my heart like a virulent disease. The consciousness that
I was watched, the feeling that eyes were upon me marking all I did, and
tongues were commenting on all I said, exasperated me, and at one moment
I would parade my friendship for Barrington in a sort of spirit of
defiance, and at another, as though to give the lie to my slanderers,
treat him with indifference and carelessness, as it were, to show that I
was not bound to him by the weight of a direct obligation, and that our
relations involved nothing of dependence. It was when, by some cruel
mischance, I had been pursuing this spirit to its extreme, that the
conversation one night at mess turned upon sport and tiger-hunting.
Many stories were told, of course, and we had the usual narratives of
hairbreadth escapes and perils of the most appalling kind; till, at
length, some one--I forget exactly who it was--narrated a single-handed
encounter with a jaguar, which in horror exceeded anything we had heard
before. The details were alone not so terrible, but the circumstances so
marvellous, that one and all who listened cried out, 'Who did it?'
"'The man who told me the tale,' replied the narrator, 'and who will
probably be back to relate it here to you in a few days,--Colonel
Barrington.'
"I have told you the devilish spirit which had me in possession. I have
already said that I was in one of those moods of insolent mockery in
which nothing was sacred to me. No sooner, then, did I hear Barrington's
name than I burst into a hearty laugh, and said, 'Oh! if it was one of
George Barrington's tigers, you ought to have mentioned that fact at the
outset. You have been exciting our feelings unfairly.'
"'I assume that his statement was true,' said the other, gravely.
"'Doubtless; just as battle-pieces are true, that is, pic-torially
true. The tiger did nothing that a tiger ought not to do, nor did George
transgress any of those "unities" which such combats require. At the
same time, Barring-ton's stories have always a something about them that
stamps the authorship, and you recognize this trait just as you do a
white horse in a picture by Wouvermans.'
"In this strain I went on, heated by my own warmed imagination, and the
approving laughter of those around me. I recounted more than one feat
of Barrington's,--things which I knew he had done, some of them almost
incredible in boldness. These I told with many a humorous addition and
many an absurd commentary, convulsing the listeners with laughter, and
rendering my friend ridiculous.
"He came back from the hills within the week, and before he was two
hours in his quarters he had heard the whole story. We were at luncheon
in the mess-room when he entered, flushed and excited, but far more
moved by emotion than resentment.
"'Ormsby,' said he, 'you may laugh at me to your heart's content and
I'll never grumble at it; but there are some young officers here who,
not knowing the ties that attach us, may fancy that these quizzings
pass the limits of mere drollery, and even jeopardize something of my
truthfulness. You, I know, never meant this any more than I have felt
it, but others might, and might, besides, on leaving this and sitting at
other tables, repeat what they had heard here. Tell them that you spoke
of me as you have a free right to do, in jest, and that your ridicule
was the good-humored banter of a friend,--of a friend who never did,
never could, impugn my honor.'
"His eyes were swimming over, and his lips trembling, as he uttered the
last words. I see him now, as he stood there, his very cheek shaking
in agitation. That brave, bold fellow, who would have marched up to a
battery without quailing, shook like a sickly girl.
"'Am I to say that you never draw the long-bow, George?' asked I, half
insolently.
"'You are to say, sir, that I never told a lie,' cried he, dark with
passion.
"'Oh, this discussion will be better carried on elsewhere,' said I, as I
arose and left the room.
"As I was in the wrong, totally in the wrong, I was passionate and
headstrong. I sat down and wrote a most insolent letter to Barrington. I
turned all the self-hate that was consuming me against my friend, and
said I know not what of outrage and insult. I did worse; I took a copy
of my letter, and declared that I would read it to the officers in the
mess-room. He sent a friend to me to beg I would not take this course of
open insult. My answer was, 'Colonel Barrington knows his remedy.' When
I sent this message, I prepared for what I felt certain would follow. I
knew Barrington so well that I thought even the delay of an hour, then
two hours, strange. At length evening drew nigh, and, though I sat
waiting in my quarters, no one came from him,--not a letter nor a line
apprised me what course he meant to take.
"Not caring to meet the mess at such a moment, I ordered my horses and
drove up to a small station about twenty miles off, leaving word where
I was to be found. I passed three days there in a state of fevered
expectancy. Barrington made no sign, and, at length, racked and
distressed by the conflict with myself,--now summoning up an insolent
spirit of defiance to the whole world, now humbling myself in a
consciousness of the evil line I had adopted,--I returned one night to
my quarters. The first news that greeted me was that Barrington had left
us. He had accepted the offer of a Native command which had been made to
him some months before, and of which we had often canvassed together
all the advantages and disadvantages. I heard that he had written
two letters to me before he started, and torn them up after they were
sealed. I never heard from him, never saw him more, till I saw his dead
body carried into camp the morning he fell.
"I must get to the end of this quickly, Fred, and I will tell you all at
once, for it is a theme I will never go back on. I came to England with
despatches about two years after Barrington's death. It was a hurried
visit, for I was ordered to hold myself in readiness to return almost
as soon as I arrived. I was greatly occupied, going about from place
to place, and person to person, so many great people desired to have a
verbal account of what was doing in India, and to hear confidentially
what I thought of matters there. In the midst of the mass of letters
which the post brought me every morning, and through which, without the
aid of an officer on the staff, I could never have got through, there
came one whose singular address struck me. It was to 'Captain Ormsby
Conyers, 22d Light Dragoons,' a rank I had held fourteen years before
that time in that same regiment. I opined at once that my correspondent
must have been one who had known me at that time and not followed me
in the interval. I was right. It was from old Mr. Barrington,--George
Barrington's father. What version of my quarrel with his son could have
reached him, I cannot even guess, nor by what light he read my conduct
in the affair; but such a letter I never read in my life. It was a
challenge to meet him anywhere, and with any weapon, but couched in
language so insulting as to impugn my courage, and hint that I would
probably shelter myself behind the pretext of his advanced age. 'But
remember,' said he, 'if God has permitted me to be an old man, it is
you who have made me a childless one!'"
For a few seconds he paused, overcome by emotion, and then went on:
"I sat down and wrote him a letter of contrition, almost abject in its
terms. I entreated him to believe that for every wrong I had done his
noble-hearted son, my own conscience had repaid me in misery ten times
told; that if he deemed my self-condemnation insufficient, it was open
to him to add to it whatever he wished of obloquy or shame; that if he
proclaimed me a coward before the world, and degraded me in the eyes of
men, I would not offer one word in my defence. I cannot repeat all that
I said in my deep humiliation. His answer came at last, one single line,
re-enclosing my own letter to me: 'Lest I should be tempted to make use
of this letter, I send it back to you; there is no need of more between
us.'
"With this our intercourse ceased. When a correspondence was published
in the 'Barrington Inquiry,' as it was called, I half hoped he would
have noticed some letters of mine about George; but he never did, and in
his silence I thought I read his continued unforgiveness."
"I hope, father, that you never believed the charges that were made
against Captain Barrington?"
"Not one of them; disloyalty was no more his than cowardice. I never
knew the Englishman with such a pride of country as he had, nor could
you have held out a greater bribe to him, for any achievement of peril,
than to say, 'What a gain it would be for England!'"
"How was it that such a man should have had a host of enemies?"
"Nothing so natural. Barrington was the most diffident of men; his
bashfulness amounted to actual pain. With strangers, this made him
cold to very sternness, or, as is often seen in the effort to conquer
a natural defect, gave him a manner of over-easy confidence that looked
like impertinence. And thus the man who would not have wounded the
self-love of the meanest beggar, got the reputation of being haughty,
insolent, and oppressive. Besides this, when he was in the right, and
felt himself so, he took no pains to convince others of the fact. His
maxim was,--have I not heard it from his lips scores of times,--'The end
will show.'"
"And yet the end will not show, father; his fame has not been
vindicated, nor his character cleared."
"In some measure the fault of those who took up his cause. They seemed
less to insist on reparation than punishment. They did not say, 'Do
justice to this man's memory;' but, 'Come forward and own you wronged
him, and broke his heart.' Now, the accusation brought against George
Barrington of assuming sovereign power was not settled by his death;
his relatives forgot this, or merged it in their own charge against the
Company. They mismanaged everything."
"Is it too late to put them on the right track, father; or could you do
it?" asked the youth, eagerly.
"It is not too late, boy! There is time for it yet. There is, however,
one condition necessary, and I do not see how that is to be secured."
"And what is that?"
"I should see Mr. Barrington and confer with him alone; he must admit me
to his confidence, and I own to you, I scarcely deem that possible."
"May I try--may I attempt this?"
"I do not like to refuse you, Fred: but if I say Yes, it will be to
include you in my own defeated hopes. For many a year Mr. Barrington
has refused to give one sign of his forgiveness; for in his treatment of
you I only recognize the honorable feeling of exempting the son from
the penalty due to the father. But perhaps defeat is better than
self-reproach, and as I have a strong conviction I could serve him, I am
ready to risk a failure."
"I may make the attempt, then?" said Fred, eagerly. "I will write to
Miss Barrington to-day."
"And now of yourself. What of your career? How do you like soldiering,
boy?"
"Less than ever, sir; it is only within the last week or two that we
have seen anything beyond barrack or parade duty. Now, however, we have
been called to repress what are called risings in the northern shires;
and our task has been to ride at large unarmed mobs and charge down
masses, whose grape-shot are brickbats. Not a very glorious campaign!"
The old man smiled, but said nothing for a moment.
"Your colonel is on leave, is he not?" asked he.
"Yes. We are commanded by that Major Stapylton I told you of."
"A smart officer, but no friend of yours, Fred," said the General,
smiling.
"No, sir; certainly no friend of mine," said the young man, resolutely.
"To refuse me a week's leave to go and meet my father, whom I have not
seen for years, and, when pressed, to accord me four days, is to disgust
me with himself and the service together."
"Well, as you cannot be my guest, Fred, I will be yours. I 'll go back
with you to headquarters. Stapylton is a name I used to be familiar with
long ago. It may turn out that I know his family; but let us talk of
Barrington. I have been thinking it would be better not to link any
question of his own interests with my desire to meet him, but simply to
say I 'm in England, and wish to know if he would receive me."
"It shall be as you wish, sir. I will write to his sister by this post."
"And after one day in town, Fred, I am ready to accompany you anywhere."
CHAPTER IX. MAJOR M'CORMICK'S LETTER
As it was not often that Major M'Cormick performed the part of a
letter-writer, perhaps my reader will pardon me if I place him before
him on one of these rare occasions. If success would always respond to
labor, his would have been a real triumph; for the effort cost him many
days, two sleepless nights, a headache, and half a quire of paper.
Had not Stapylton retained him by an admirably selected hamper of good
things from a celebrated Italian warehouse in the Strand, I am
afraid that M'Cormick's zeal might have cooled down to the zero of
forgetfulness; but the reindeer hams and the Yarmouth bloaters, the
potted shrimps and the preserved guavas, were an appeal that addressed
themselves to that organ which with him paid the double debt of
digestion and emotion. He felt that such a correspondent was worth a
sacrifice, and he made it That my reader may appreciate the cost of the
achievement, I would have him imagine how a mason about to build a wall
should be obliged to examine each stone before he laid it, test its
constituent qualities, its shape and its size,--for it was thus that
almost every word occasioned the Major a reference to the dictionary,
spelling not having been cultivated in his youth, nor much practised in
his riper years. Graces of style, however, troubled him little; and,
to recur to my figure of the stone-mason, if he was embarrassed in
his search for the materials, he cared wonderfully little for the
architecture. His letter ran thus, and the reader will perceive that it
must have been written some weeks after the events recorded in the last
chapter:--
"Mac's Nest, October, Thursday.
"Dear S.,--A touch of my old Walcheren complaint has laid me up since
Tuesday, and if the shakes make me illegible now, that's the reason
why. Besides this the weather is dreadful; cold east winds and rains,
sometimes sleet, every day; and the turf so wet, it 's only smoke, not
fire. I believe it is the worst climate in Europe, and it gets wetter
every year.
"The hamper came to hand, but though it was marked 'Carriage paid, this
side up,' they upset it and broke two bottles, and charged seven and
fourpence-halfpenny for the bringing it, which is, I think, enormous; at
least, Tim Hacket got over a thrashing-machine from Scotland last spring
for twelve and four, and there 's no comparison between the two. Thanks
to you, however, all the same; but if you can get any of this charge
reduced, so much the better, not to speak of the bottles,--both mixed
pickles--which they ought to make good.
"I am glad to see you are touching up the Radicals in the North;
powder and ball will do more to bring them to reason than spouting
in Parliament. The papers say there was nine killed and twenty-three
wounded; and one fellow, the 'Stockport Bee,' says, that 'if the Butcher
that led the dragoons is n't turned out of the service with disgrace no
gentleman will degrade himself by entering the army.' Isn't the Butcher
yourself? Miss Barrington, always your friend, says it is; and that if
the account of another paper, called the 'gis,' be true, you 'll have
to go to a court-martial. I stood stoutly to you through it all, and
declared that when the niggers was up at Jamaica, we had n't time to
take the names of the prisoners, and we always cut one of their ears off
to know them again. Old Peter laughed till the tears ran down his face,
but Dinah said, 'If I did not suppose, sir, that you were inventing a
very graceless joke, I'd insist on your leaving this room and this house
on the instant.' It was ten o'clock at night, and raining hard; so you
may guess I gave in. Bad as she is, the young one is her equal, and
I gave up all thoughts of what you call 'prosecuting my suit' in that
quarter. She isn't even commonly civil to me, and when I ask her for,
maybe, the mustard at dinner, she turns away her head, and says, 'Darby,
give Major M'Cormick the salt.' That's French politeness, perhaps; but
I'll pay them all off yet, for they can't get sixpence on the mortgage,
and I 'm only drinking out that bin of old Madeira before I tell them
that I won't advance the money. Why should I? The women treat me worse
than a dog, and old B. is neither more nor less than a fool. Dill, the
doctor, however he got it, says it's all up about the suit with the
India Company; that there's no proof of the Colonel's marriage at all,
that the charges against him were never cleared up, and that nothing can
come out of it but more disgrace and more exposure.
"I wish you 'd send me the correct account of what took place between
you and one of your subalterns, for old Dinah keeps harping on it in a
sort of mysterious and mischievous way of her own, that provokes me. Was
it that he refused to obey orders, or that you, as she says, used
such language towards him that he wrote to report you? Give it to me
in black and white, and maybe I won't try her temper with it. At
all events, make out some sort of a case, for the old woman is now
intolerable. She said yesterday, 'Major Stapylton, to whom I write
by this post, will see that his visit here must be preceded by an
explanation.' There's her words for you, and I hope you like them!
"I think you are right to be in no hurry about purchasing, for many
say the whole system will be changed soon, and the money would be clean
thrown away. Besides this, I have been looking over my bauk-book, and
I find I could n't help you just now. Two bad harvests, and the smut in
the wheat last year, are running me mighty close. I won't finish this
till to-morrow, for I 'm going to dine at 'The Home' to-day. It is the
granddaughter's birthday, and there was a regular shindy about who was
going to be asked. Old Peter was for a grand celebration, and inviting
the Admiral, and the Gores, and God knows who besides; and Dinah was for
what she called a family party, consisting, I suppose, of herself and
Darby. I 'll be able, before I close this, to tell you how it was ended;
for I only know now that Dill and his daughter are to be there.
"Wednesday.--I sit down with a murdering headache to finish this letter.
Maybe it was the pickled lobster, or the ice punch, or the other drink
they called champagne-cup that did it. But I never passed such a night
since I was in the trenches, and I am shaking still, so that I can
scarce hold the pen. It was a grand dinner, to be sure, for ruined
people to give. Venison from Carrick Woods, and game of every kind, with
all kinds of wine; and my Lord Car-rickmore talking to Miss Dinah, and
the Admiral following up with the niece, and Tom Brabazon, and Dean of
Deanspark, and the devil knows who besides, bringing up the rear, with
Dill and your obedient servant. Every dish that came in, and every
bottle that was uncorked, I said to myself, 'There goes another strap on
the property;' and I felt as if we were eating the trees and the timber
and the meadows all the time at table.
"It 's little of the same sympathy troubled the others. My Lord was as
jolly as if he was dining with the King; and old Cobham called for more
of the Madeira, as if it was an inn; and Peter himself--the heartless
old fool--when he got up to thank the company for drinking his
granddaughter's health, said, 'May I trust that even at my advanced age
this may not be the last time I may have to speak my gratitude to you
all for the generous warmth with which you have pledged this toast; but
even should it be so, I shall carry away with me from this evening's
happiness a glow of pleasure that will animate me to the last. It
was only this morning I learned what I know you will all hear with
satisfaction, that there is every probability of a speedy arrangement of
my long-pending suit with the Company, and that my child here will
soon have her own again.' Grand applause and huzzas, with a noise that
drowned 'Bother!' from myself, and in the middle of the row up jumps the
Admiral, and cries out, 'Three cheers more for the Rajah's daughter!' I
thought the old roof would come down; and the blackguards in the kitchen
took up the cry and shouted like mad, and then we yelled again, and this
went on for maybe five minutes. 'What does it all mean,' says I, 'but
a cheer for the Court of Bankruptcy, and Hip, hip, hurray! for
the Marshalsea Prison!' After that, he had half an hour or more of
flatteries and compliments. My Lord was so happy, and Peter Barrington
so proud, and the Admiral so delighted, and the rest of us so much
honored, that I could n't stand it any longer, but stole away, and got
into the garden, to taste a little fresh air and quietness. I had n't
gone ten paces, when I came plump upon Miss Dinah, taking her coffee
under a tree. 'You are a deserter, I fear, sir,' said she, in her own
snappish way; so I thought I 'd pay her off, and I said, 'To tell you
the truth, Miss Barrington, at our time of life these sort of things are
more full of sadness than pleasure. We know how hollow they are, and how
little heart there is in the cheers of the people that are so jolly
over your wine, but would n't stop to talk to you when you came down to
water!'
"'The worse we think of the world, Major M'Cormick,' says she, 'the more
risk we run of making ourselves mean enough to suit it.'
"'I don't suspect, ma'am,' says I, 'that when people have known it so
long as you and I, that they are greatly in love with it.'
"'They may, however, be mannerly in their dealings with it, sir,' said
she, fiercely; and so we drew the game, and settled the men for another
battle.
"'Is there anything new, ma'am?' says I, after a while.
"'I believe not, sir. The bread riots still continue in the North, where
what would seem the needless severity of some of the military commanders
has only exasperated the people. You have heard, I suppose, of Major
Stapylton's business?'
"'Not a word, ma'am,' says I; 'for I never see a paper.'
"'I know very little of the matter myself,' says she. 'It was, it would
appear, at some night assemblage at a place called Lund's Common. A
young officer sent forward by Major Stapylton to disperse the people,
was so struck by the destitution and misery he witnessed, and the
respectful attitude they exhibited, that he hesitated about employing
force, and restricted himself to counsels of quietness and submission.
He did more,--not perhaps very prudently, as some would say,--he
actually emptied his pockets of all the money he had, giving even his
watch to aid the starving horde before him. What precise version of
his conduct reached his superior, I cannot say; but certainly Major
Stapylton commented on it in terms of the harshest severity, and he even
hinted at a reason for the forbearance too offensive for any soldier to
endure.'
"She did not seem exactly to know what followed after this, but some
sort of inquiry appeared to take place, and witnesses were examined as
to what really occurred at Lund's Common; and amongst others, a Lascar,
who was one of the factory hands,--having come to England a great many
years before with an officer from India. This fellow's evidence was
greatly in favor of young Conyers, and was subjected to a very severe
cross-examination from yourself, in the middle of which he said
something in Hindostanee that nobody in the court understood but you;
and after this he was soon dismissed and the case closed for that day.
"'What do you think, Major M'Cormick,' said she, 'but when the court of
inquiry opened the next morning, Lal-Adeen, the Lascar, was not to be
found high or low. The court have suspended their sittings to search for
him; but only one opinion prevails,--that Major Stapylton knows more of
this man's escape than he is likely to tell.' I have taken great pains
to give you her own very words in all this business, and I wrote them
down the moment I got home, for I thought to myself you 'd maybe write
about the matter to old Peter, and you ought to be prepared for the
way they look at it; the more because Miss Dinah has a liking for young
Conyers,--what she calls a motherly affection; but I don't believe in
the motherly part of it! But of course you care very little what the
people here say about you at all. At least, I know it would n't trouble
me much, if I was in your place. At all events, whatever you do,
do with a high hand, and the Horse Guards is sure to stand to you.
Moderation may be an elegant thing in civil life, but I never knew it
succeed in the army. There's the rain coming on again, and I just sent
out six cars to the bog for turf; so I must conclude, and remain, yours
sincerely,
"Daniel T. M'Cormick.
"I 'm thinking of foreclosing the small mortgage I hold on 'The Home,'
but as they pay the interest regularly, five per cent, I would n't do it
if I knew things were going on reasonably well with them; send me a line
about what is doing regarding the 'claim,' and it will guide me."
While Major M'Cormick awaited the answer to his postscript, which to
him--as to a lady--was the important part of his letter, a short note
arrived at 'The Home' from Mr. Withering, enclosing a letter he had just
received from Major Stapylton. Withering's communication was in answer
to one from Barrington, and ran thus:--
"Dear B.,--All things considered, I believe you are right in not
receiving General Conyers at this moment. It would probably, as you
suspect, enable calumnious people to say that you could make your
resentments play second when they came in the way of your interests.
If matters go on well, as I have every hope they will, you can make
the amende to him more satisfactorily and more gracefully hereafter.
Buxton has at length consented to bring the case before the House;
of course it will not go to a division, nor, if it did, could it be
carried; but the discussion will excite interest, the Press will take
it up, and after a few regretful and half-civil expressions from the
Ministry, the India Board will see the necessity of an arrangement.
"It is somewhat unfortunate and mal  propos that Stapylton should at
this moment have got into an angry collision with young Conyers. I have
not followed the case closely, but, as usual in such things, they seem
each of them in the wrong,--the young sub wanting to make his generous
sympathy supply the place of military obedience, and the old officer
enforcing discipline at the cost of very harsh language. I learn this
morning that Conyers has sold out, intending to demand a personal
satisfaction. You will see by S.'s letter that he scarcely alludes to
this part of the transaction at all. S. feels very painfully the attacks
of the Press, and sees, perhaps, more forcibly than I should in his
place, the necessity of an exchange. Read attentively the portion I have
underlined."
It is to this alone I have to direct my readers' attention, the first
two sides of the letter being entirely filled with details about the
"claim":--
"'The newspapers have kept me before you for some days back, much more,
I doubt not, to their readers' amusement than to my own gratification. I
could, if I pleased, have told these slanderers that I did not charge a
crowd of women and children,--that I did not cut down an elderly man
at his own door-sill,--that I did not use language "offensive and
unbecoming" to one of my officers, for his having remonstrated in the
name of humanity against the cruelty of my orders. In a word, I might
have shown the contemptible scribblers that I knew how to temper duty
with discretion, as I shall know how, when the occasion offers, to make
the punishment of a calumniator a terror to his colleagues. However,
there is a very absurd story going about of a fellow whose insolence I
certainly did reply to with the flat of my sabre, and whom I should
be but too happy to punish legally, if he could be apprehended. That he
made his escape after being captured, and that I connived at or assisted
in it,--I forget which,--you have probably heard. In fact, there is
nothing too incredible to say of me for the moment; and what is worse,
I begin to suspect that the Home Secretary, having rather burned his
fingers in the business, will not be very sorry to make an Admiral
Byng of a Major of Hussars. For each and all these reasons I mean to
exchange, and, if possible, into a regiment in India. This will, of
course, take some time; meanwhile, I have asked for and obtained some
months' leave. You will be surprised at my troubling you with so much
of purely personal matters, but they are the necessary preface to what
I now come. You are aware of the letter I wrote some time back to Mr.
Barrington, and the request it preferred. If the reply I received was
not discouraging, neither was it conclusive. The ordinary commonplaces
as to the shortness of our acquaintance, the want of sufficient
knowledge of each other's tastes, characters, &c, were duly dwelt upon;
but I could not at the end say, was I an accepted or a rejected suitor.
Now that the critical moment of my life draws nigh,--for such I feel
the present emergency,--an act of confidence in me would have more than
double value. Can you tell me that this is the sentiment felt towards
me, or am I to learn that the yells of a rabble have drowned the voices
of my friends? In plain words, will Miss Josephine Barrington accept
my offer? Will she intrust her happiness to my keeping, and change
the darkest shadow that ever lowered over my life into a gleam of
unspeakable brightness? You have given me too many proofs of a friendly
disposition towards me, not to make me feel that you are the best fitted
to bring this negotiation to a good issue. If I do not mistake you much,
you look with favor on my suit and wish it success. I am ashamed to say
how deeply my hopes have jeopardized my future happiness, but I tell you
frankly life has no such prize to my ambition, nor, in fact, any such
alternative of despair before me.'
"Now, my dear Barrington," continued Withering's letter, "there is a
great deal in this that I like, and something with which I am not so
much pleased. If, however, I am not the Major's advocate to the extent
he asks, or expects me, it is because I feel that to be unjustly dealt
with is a stronger claim on your heart than that of any other man I
ever met with, and the real danger here would be that you should
suffer that feeling to predominate over all others. Consult your
granddaughter's interests, if you can, independently of this; reflect
well if the plan be one likely to promise her happiness. Take your
sensible, clear-headed sister into your counsels; but, above all,
ascertain Josephine's own sentiments, and do nothing in direct
opposition to them."
"There, Dinah," said Barrington, placing the letter in her hands, "this
is as much to your address as to mine. Read it over carefully, and
you'll find me in the garden when you have done."
Miss Barrington laid down her great roll of worsted work, and began
her task without a word. She had not proceeded very far, however, when
Josephine entered in search of a book. "I beg pardon, aunt, if I derange
you."
"We say disturb, or inconvenience, in English, Miss Barrington. What is
it you are looking for?"
"The 'Legend of Montrose,' aunt. I am so much amused by that Major
Dalgetty that I can think of nothing but him."
"Umph!" muttered the old lady. "It was of a character not altogether
dissimilar I was thinking myself at that moment. Sit down here, child,
and let me talk to you. This letter that I hold here, Josephine,
concerns you."
"Me, aunt--concerns me? And who on earth could have written a letter
in which I am interested?"
"You shall hear it." She coughed only once or twice, and then went on:
"It's a proposal of marriage,--no less. That gallant soldier who left
us so lately has fallen in love with you,--so he says, and of course he
knows best. He seems fully aware that, being older than you, and graver
in temperament, his offer must come heralded with certain expressions
almost apologetic; but he deals with the matter skillfully, and tells
us that being well off as regards fortune, of good blood, and with fair
prospects before him, he does not wish to regard his suit as hopeless.
Your grandfather was minded to learn how you might feel disposed to
accept his addresses by observing your demeanor, by watching what
emotion mention of him might occasion, by seeing how far you felt
interested in his good or ill repute. I did not agree with him. I am
never for the long road when there is a short one, and therefore I mean
to let you hear his letter. This is what he writes." While Miss Dinah
read the extract which the reader has just seen, she never noticed, or,
if noticed, never attended to, the agitation in her niece's manner, or
seemed to remark that from a deep-crimson at first her cheeks grew pale
as death, and her lips-tremulous. "There, child," said Miss Dinah, as
she finished--"there are his own words; very ardent words, but withal
respectful. What do you think of them,--of them and of him?"
Josephine hung down her head, and with her hands firmly clasped
together, she sat for a few moments so motionless that she seemed
scarcely to breathe.
"Would you like to think over this before you speak of it, Josephine?
Would you like to take this letter to your room and ponder over it
alone?" No answer came but a low, half-subdued sigh.
"If you do not wish to make a confidante of me, Josephine, I am sorry
for it, but not offended."
"No, no, aunt, it is not that," burst she in; "it is to you and you
alone, I wish to speak, and I will be as candid as yourself. I am not
surprised at the contents of this letter. I mean, I was in a measure
prepared for them."
"That is to say, child, that he paid you certain attentions?"
She nodded assent.
"And how did you receive them? Did you let him understand that you were
not indifferent to him,--that his addresses were agreeable to you?"
Another, but shorter, nod replied to this question.
"I must confess," said the old lady, bridling up, "all this amazes me
greatly. Why, child, it is but the other day you met each other for the
first time. How, when, and where you found time for such relations as
you speak of, I cannot imagine. Do you mean to tell me, Josephine, that
you ever talked alone together?"
"Constantly, aunt!"
"Constantly!"
"Yes, aunt. We talked a great deal together."
"But how, child,--where?"
"Here, aunt, as we used to stroll together every morning through
the wood or in the garden; then as we went on the river or to the
waterfall."
"I can comprehend nothing of all this, Josephine. I know you mean to
deal openly with me; so say at once, how did this intimacy begin?"
"I can scarcely say how, aunt, because I believe we drifted into it. We
used to talk a great deal of ourselves, and at length we grew to talk of
each other,--of our likings and dislikings, our tastes and our tempers.
And these did not always agree!"
"Indeed!"
"No, aunt," said she, with a heavy sigh. "We quarrelled very often; and
once,--I shall not easily forget it,--once seriously."
"What was it about?"
"It was about India, aunt; and he was in the wrong, and had to own it
afterwards and ask pardon."
"He must know much more of that country than you, child. How came it
that you presumed to set up your opinion against his?"
"The presumption was his," said she, haughtily. "He spoke of his
father's position as something the same as my father's. He talked of
him as a Rajah!"
"I did not know that he spoke of his father," said Miss Dinah,
thoughtfully.
"Oh, he spoke much of him. He told me, amongst other things, how he had
been a dear friend of papa's; that as young men they lived together
like brothers, and never were separate till the fortune of life divided
them."
"What is all this I am listening to? Of whom are you telling me,
Josephine?"
"Of Fred, Aunt Dinah; of Fred, of course."
"Do you mean young Conyers, child?"
"Yes. How could I mean any other?"
"Ta, ta, ta!" said the old lady, drumming with her heel on the floor
and her fingers on the table. "It has all turned out as I said it would!
Peter, Peter, will you never be taught wisdom? Listen to me, child!"
said she, turning almost sternly towards Josephine. "We have been at
cross-purposes with each other all this time. This letter which I have
just read for you--" She stopped suddenly as she reached thus far,
and after a second's pause, said, "Wait for me here; I will be back
presently. I have a word to say to your grandfather."
Leaving poor Josephine in a state of trepidation and
bewilderment,--ashamed at the confession she had just made, and
trembling with a vague sense of some danger that impended over
her,--Miss Dinah hurried away to the garden.
"Here's a new sort of worm got into the celery, Dinah," said he, as
she came up, "and a most destructive fellow he is. He looks like a mere
ruffling of the leaf, and you 'd never suspect him."
"It is your peculiarity never to suspect anything, brother Peter, even
after you have had warning of peril. Do you remember my telling you,
when we were up the Rhine, what would come of that intimacy between
Conyers and Josephine?"
"I think I do," said he, making what seemed an effort of memory.
"And can you recall the indolent slipshod answer you made me about it?
But of course you cannot. It was an old-maid's apprehensions, and you
forgot the whole thing. Well, Peter, I was right and you were wrong."
"Not the first time that the double event has come off so!" said he,
smiling.
"You are too fond of that cloak of humility, Peter Barrington. The plea
of Guilty never saved any one from transportation!" Waiting a moment to
recover her breath after this burst of passion, she went on: "After I
had read that letter you gave me, I spoke to Josephine; I told her in a
few words how it referred to her, and frankly asked her what she thought
of it. She was very candid and very open, and, I must say, also very
collected and composed. Young ladies of the present day possess that
inestimable advantage over their predecessors. Their emotions do not
overpower them." This was the second time of "blowing off the steam,"
and she had to wait a moment to rally. "She told me, frankly, that she
was not unprepared for such an offer; that tender passages had already
been exchanged between them. The usual tomfoolery, I conclude,--that
supreme effort of selfishness people call love,--in a word, Peter, she
was in no wise disinclined to the proposal; the only misfortune was, she
believed it came from young Conyers."
Barrington would have laughed, and laughed heartily, if he dared. As it
was, the effort to restrain himself sent the blood to his head, and made
his eyes run over.
"You may well blush, Peter Barrington," said she, shaking her finger at
him. "It's all your own doing."
"And when you undeceived her, Dinah, what did she say?"
"I have not done so yet; but my impression is that so susceptible
a young lady should find no great difficulty in transferring her
affections. For the present I mean to limit myself to declaring that
this offer is not from Conyers; if she has curiosity to know the writer,
she shall learn it. I always had my doubts about these convents Bread
and water diet makes more epicures than abstinents!"
CHAPTER X. INTERCHANGED CONFESSIONS
Miss Barrington, with Josephine at one side and Polly Dill on the other,
sat at work in her little room that opened on the garden. Each was
engaged in some peculiar task, and each seemed bent upon her labor in
that preoccupied way which would imply that the cares of needlework make
no mean call upon human faculties. A close observer would, however, have
remarked that though Miss Barrington stitched vigorously away at the
background for a fierce tiger with measly spots over him, Polly seemed
oftener to contemplate than continue her handiwork; while Josephine's
looks strayed constantly from the delicate tracery she was following, to
the garden, where the roses blended with the jasmine, and the drooping
honeysuckles hung listlessly over the boughs of the apple-tree.
"If your work wearies you, Fifine," said Miss Dinah, "you had better
read for us."
"Oh no, not at all, aunt; I like it immensely. I was only wondering why
one should devise such impossible foliage, when we have the real thing
before us, in all its grace and beauty."
"Humph!" said the old lady; "the sight of a real tiger would not put me
out of countenance with my own."
"It certainly ought not, ma'am," said Polly; while she added, in a faint
whisper, "for there is assuredly no rivalry in the case."
"Perhaps Miss Dill is not too absorbed in her study of nature, as
applied to needlework, to read out the newspaper."
"I will do it with pleasure, ma'am. Where shall I begin?"
"Deaths and marriages first, of course, child. Then fashion and
varieties; take the accidents afterwards, and close with anything
remarkable in politics, or any disastrous occurrence in high life."
Polly obeyed to the letter; once only straying into an animated account
of a run with the Springfield fox-hounds, where three riders out of a
large field came in at the death; when Miss Dinah stopped her abruptly,
saying, "I don't care for the obituary of a fox, young lady. Go on with
something else."
"Will you have the recent tragedy at Ring's End, ma'am?"
"I know it by heart Is there nothing new in the fashions,--how are
bonnets worn? What's the latest sleeve? What's the color in vogue?"
"A delicate blue, ma'am; a little off the sky, and on the hyacinth."
"Very becoming to fair people," said Miss Dinah, with a shake of her
blond ringlets.
"'The Prince's Hussars!' Would you like to hear about them, ma'am?"
"By all means."
"It's a very short paragraph. 'The internal troubles of this unhappy
regiment would seem to be never ending. We last week informed our
readers that a young subaltern of the corps, the son of one of our most
distinguished generals, had thrown up his commission and repaired to
the Continent, to enable him to demand a personal satisfaction from
his commanding officer, and we now learn that the Major in question is
precluded from accepting the gage of battle by something stronger than
military etiquette.'"
"Read it again, child; that vile newspaper slang always puzzles me."
Polly recited the passage in a clear and distinct voice.
"What do you understand by it, Polly?"
"I take it to mean nothing, madam. One of those stirring pieces of
intelligence which excites curiosity, and are no more expected to be
explained than a bad riddle."
"It cannot surely be that he shelters himself under his position towards
us? That I conclude is hardly possible!"
Though Miss Barrington said this as a reflection, she addressed herself
almost directly to Josephine.
"As far as I am concerned, aunt," answered Josephine, promptly, "the
Major may fight the monster of the Drachenfels to-morrow, if he wishes
it."
"Oh, here is another mystery apparently on the same subject. 'The
Lascar, Lal-Adeen, whom our readers will remember as having figured in a
police-court a few days back, and was remanded till the condition of
his wound--a severe sabre-cut on the scalp--should permit his further
examination, and on the same night made his escape from the hospital,
has once again, and very unexpectedly, turned up at Boulogne-sur-Mer.
His arrival in this country--some say voluntarily, others under a
warrant issued for his apprehension--will probably take place to-day or
to-morrow, and, if report speak truly, be followed by some of the most
singular confessions which the public has heard for a long time back.'
'The Post' contradicts the statement, and declares 'no such person has
ever been examined before the magistrate, if he even have any existence
at all.'"
"And what interest has all this for us?" asked Miss Dinah, sharply.
"You do not forget, ma'am, that this is the same man Major Stapylton was
said to have wounded; and whose escape scandal hinted he had connived
at, and who now 'does not exist.'"
"I declare Miss Dill, I remember no such thing; but it appears to me
that Major Stapylton occupies a very considerable space in your own
thoughts."
"I fancy Polly likes him, aunt," said Josephine, with a slight smile.
"Well, I will own he interests me; there is about him a mysterious
something that says, 'I have more in my head and on my heart than you
think of, and more, perhaps, than you could carry if the burden were
yours.'"
"A galley-slave might say the same, Miss Dill."
"No doubt of it, ma'am; and if there be men who mix in the great world,
and dine at grand houses, with something of the galley-slave on their
conscience, they assuredly impress us with an amount of fear that is
half a homage. One dreads them as he does a tiger, but the terror is
mingled with admiration."
"This is nonsense, young lady, and baneful nonsense, too, begotten of
French novels and a sickly sentimentality. I hope Fifine despises it as
heartily as I do." The passionate wrath which she displayed extended to
the materials of her work-basket, and while rolls of worsted were
upset here, needles were thrown there; and at last, pushing her
embroidery-frame rudely away, she arose and left the room.
"Dearest Polly, how could you be so indiscreet! You know, far better
than I do, how little patience she has with a paradox."
"My sweet Fifine," said the other, in a low whisper, "I was dying to get
rid of her, and I knew there was only one way of effecting it. You
may remark that whenever she gets into a rage, she rushes out into the
flower-garden, and walks round and round till she's ready to drop. There
she is already; you may gauge her anger by the number of her revolutions
in a minute."
"But why did you wish her away, Polly?"
"I'll tell you why; that is, there is a charming French word for what
I mean, the verb 'agacer,' all untranslatable as it is. Now there
are moments when a person working in the same room--reading, writing,
looking out of the window--becomes an insupportable infliction. You
reason, and say, 'How absurd, how childish, how ungenerous,' and so
forth. It won't do; for as you look round he is there still, and by his
mere presence keeps up the ferment in your thoughts. You fancy, at last,
that he stands between you and your inner self, a witness that won't let
your own conscience whisper to you, and you come in the end to hate him.
Your dear aunt was on the high-road to this goal, when I bethought me of
my expedient! And now we are all alone, dearest, make me a confession."
"What is it?"
"You do not like Major Stapylton?"
"No."
"And you do like somebody else?"
"Perhaps," said she, slowly, and dividing the syllables as she spoke
them.
"That being the case, and seeing, as you do, that your aunt is entirely
of your own mind, at least as to the man you do not care for, why don't
you declare as much frankly to your grandfather, and break off the
negotiation at once?"
"Just because that dear old grandpapa asked me not to be precipitate,
not to be rash. He did not tell me that I must love Major Stapylton, or
must marry him; but he said, 'If you only knew, Fifine, what a change in
our fortune would come of a change in your feelings; if you could but
imagine, child, how the whole journey of life might be rendered easier,
all because you took the right-hand road instead of the left; if you
could guess these things, and what might follow them--'" She stopped.
"Well, go on."
"No. I have said all that he said; he kissed my cheek as he got thus
far, and hurried away from the room."
"And you, like a sweet, obedient child, hastened away to yours; wrote a
farewell, a heart-broken farewell, to Fred Conyers; and solemnly swore
to your own conscience you 'd marry a man you disliked. These are the
sort of sacrifices the world has a high admiration for; but do you know,
Fifine, the world limps a little in its morality sometimes, and is not
one-half the fine creature it thinks itself. For instance, in the midst
of all its enthusiasm for you, it has forgotten that in accepting for
your husband a man you do not love, you are doing a dishonesty; and
that, besides this, you really love another. It is what the French call
the aggravating circumstance."
"I mean to do nothing of the kind!" broke in Fifine, boldly. "Your
lecture does not address itself to me."
"Do not be angry, Fifine," said the other, calmly.
"It is rather too hard to be rebuked for the faults one might have, but
has not committed. It's like saying how wet you 'd have been had you
fallen into that pool!"
"Well, it also means, don't fall into the pool!"
"Do you know, Polly," said Josephine, archly, "I have a sort of
suspicion that you don't dislike this Major yourself! Am I right?"
"I'm not say you were altogether wrong; that is, he interests me, or,
rather, he puzzles me, and it piques my ingenuity to read him, just as
it would to make out a cipher to which I had only one-half the key."
"Such a feeling as that would never inspire a tender interest, at least,
with me."
"Nor did I say it was, Fifine. I have read in some book of my father's
how certain physicians inoculated themselves with plague, the better
to note the phenomena, and trace the course; and I own I can understand
their zeal, and I 'd risk something to decipher this man."
"This may be very nice in medicine, Polly, but very bad in morals! At
all events, don't catch the plague for the sake of saving me?"
"Oh! I assure you any step I take shall be done in the interests of
science solely; not but that I have a small debt to acquit towards the
gallant Major."
"You have! What can it possibly be?"
"Well, it was this wise," said she, with a half-sigh. "We met at
a country-house here, and he paid me certain attentions, made me
compliments on my riding, which I knew to be good, and my singing, which
was just tolerable; said the usual things which mean nothing, and a few
of those more serious ones which are supposed to be more significant;
and then he asked my father's leave to come and visit him, and actually
fixed a day and an hour. And we, poor people, all delighted with the
flattery of such high notice, and thinking of the effect upon our
neighbors so splendid a visitor would produce, made the most magnificent
preparations to receive him,--papa in a black satin waistcoat, mamma in
her lilac ribbons. I myself,--having put the roof on a pigeon-pie,
and given the last finishing touch to a pagoda of ruby jelly,--I, in a
charming figured muslin and a blush rose in my hair, awaited the hour of
attack! And, after all, he never came. No, Fifine, never came! He forgot
us, or he changed his mind, or something else turned up that he liked
better; or--which is just as likely as any of the three--he thought
it would be a charming piece of impertinence to pass off on such small
folk, who presumed to fancy themselves company for him. At all events,
Fifine, we saw him no more. He went his way somewhere, and we were left
lamenting."
"And you really liked him, Polly?"
"No, of the two, I disliked him; but I wished very much that he might
like me! I saw him very overbearing and very insolent to those
who were certainly his equals, assuming a most offensive superiority
everywhere and to any one, and I thought what an awful humiliation it
would be if so great a personage were to be snubbed by the doctor's
daughter. I wanted to give a lesson which could only be severe if it
came from one humble as myself; but he defeated me, Fifine, and I am
still his debtor! If I did not like him before, you may believe that
I hate him now; and I came off here this morning, in hot haste, for no
other purpose than to set you against him, and induce you to regard him
as I do."
"There was little need," said Fifine, calmly; "but here comes my aunt
back again. Make your submission quickly, Polly, or it will be too late
to expect mercy."
"I 'll do better," said Polly, rising. "I 'll let my trial go on in my
absence;" and with this she stepped out of the window as Miss Barrington
entered by the door.
CHAPTER XI. STAPYLTON'S VISIT AT "THE HOME"
So secretly had Barrington managed, that he negotiated the loan of five
hundred pounds on a mortgage of the cottage without ever letting his
sister hear of it; and when she heard on a particular day that her
brother expected Mr. Kinshela, the attorney, from Kilkenny, on business,
she made the occasion the pretext of a visit to Dr. Dill, taking
Josephine with her, to pass the day there.
Barrington was therefore free to receive his lawyer at his ease, and
confer with him alone. Not that he cared much for his company; he
felt towards the attorney pretty much as an ardent soldier feels to
a non-combatant, the commissary, or the paymaster. Had he been a
barrister, indeed, old Peter would have welcomed him with the zest of
true companionship; he would have ransacked his memory for anecdotes,
and prepared for the meeting as for an encounter of sharp wits. Now it
is no part of my task to present Mr. Kinshela more than passingly to
my reader, and I will merely say that he was a shrewd, commonplace
man, whose practice rarely introduced him to the higher classes of his
county, and who recognized Barrington, even in his decline, as a person
of some consideration.
They had dined well, and sat over their wine in the little dining-room
over the river, a favorite spot of Barrington's when he wished to be
confidential, for it was apart from the rest of the cottage, and removed
from all intrusion.
"So, you won't tell me, Kinshela, who lent us this money?" said the old
man, as he passed the decanter across the table.
"It is not that I won't, sir, but I can't. It was in answer to an
advertisement I inserted in the 'Times,' that I got an application from
Granger and Wood to supply particulars; and I must say there was
no unnecessary security on their part. It was as speedily settled a
transaction as I ever conducted, and I believe in my heart we might have
had a thousand pounds on it just as easily as five hundred."
"As well as it is, Kinshela. When the day of repayment comes round, I'll
perhaps find it heavy enough;" and he sighed deeply as he spoke.
"Who knows, sir? There never was a time that capital expended on land
was more remunerative than the present."
Now, Mr. Kinshela well knew that the destination of the money they
spoke of was not in this direction, and that it had as little to say to
subsoil drainage or top dressing as to the conversion of the heathen;
but he was angling for a confidence, and he did not see how to attain
it.
Barrington smiled before he answered,--one of those sad, melancholy
smiles which reveal a sorrow a man is not able to suppress,--and then he
said, "I 'm afraid, Kinshela, I 'll not test the problem this time."
"It will be better employed, perhaps, sir. You mean, probably, to take
your granddaughter up to the drawing-room at the Castle?"
"I never so much as thought of it, Joe Kinshela; the fact is, that money
is going where I have sent many a hundred before it,--in law! I have had
a long, wearisome, costly suit, that has well-nigh beggared me; and of
that sum you raised for me I don't expect to have a shilling by this day
week."
"I heard something about that, sir," said the other, cautiously.
"And what was it you heard?"
"Nothing, of course, worth repeating; nothing from any one that knew the
matter himself; just the gossip that goes about, and no more."
"Well, let us hear the gossip that goes about, and I'll promise to tell
you if it's true."
"Well, indeed," said Kinshela, drawing a long breath, "they say that
your claim is against the India Board."
Barring ton nodded.
"And that it is a matter little short of a million is in dispute."
He nodded again twice.
"And they say, too,--of course, on very insufficient knowledge,--that
if you would have abated your demands once on a time, you might readily
have got a hundred thousand pounds, or even more."
"That's not impossible," muttered Barrington.
"But that, now--" he stammered for an instant, and then stopped.
"But now? Go on."
"Sure, sir, they can know nothing about it; it's just idle talk, and no
more."
"Go on, and tell me what they say now," said Barrington, with a strong
force on the last word.
"They say you 'll be beaten, sir," said he, with an effort.
"And do they say why, Kinshela?"
"Yes, sir; they say you won't take advice; and no matter what Mr.
Withering counsels, or is settled in consultation, you go your own way
and won't mind them; and that you have been heard to declare you 'll
have all, or nothing."
"They give me more credit than I deserve, Kinshela. It is, perhaps, what
I ought to have said, for I have often thought it. But in return for
all the kind interest my neighbors take about me, let them know that
matters look better for us than they once did. Perhaps," added he, with
a laugh,--"perhaps I have overcome my obstinacy, or perhaps my opponents
have yielded to it. At all events, Joe, I believe I see land at last,
and it was a long 'lookout' and many a fog-bank I mistook for it."
"And what makes you think now you'll win?" said the other, growing
bolder by the confidence reposed in him.
Barrington half started at the presumption of the question; but
he suddenly remembered how it was he himself who had invited the
discussion, so he said calmly,--
"My hope is not without a foundation. I expect by the mail to-night a
friend who may be able to tell me that I have won, or as good as won."
Kinshela was dying to ask who the friend was, but even his curiosity had
its prudential limits; so he merely took out his watch, and, looking at
it, remarked that the mail would pass in about twenty minutes or so.
"By the way, I must n't forget to send a servant to wait on the
roadside;" and he rang the bell and said, "Let Darby go up to the road
and take Major Stapylton's luggage when he arrives."
"Is that the Major Stapylton is going to be broke for the doings at
Manchester, sir?" asked Kinshela.
"He is the same Major Stapylton that a rascally press is now libelling
and calumniating," said Barrington, hotly. "As to being broke, I
don't believe that we have come yet to that pass in England that
the discipline of our army is administered by every scribbler in a
newspaper."
"I humbly crave your pardon, sir, if I have said the slightest thing
to offend; but I only meant to ask, was he the officer they were making
such a fuss about?" "He is an officer of the highest distinction, and a
wellborn gentleman to boot,--two admirable reasons for the assaults of a
contemptible party. Look you, Kinshela; you and I are neither of us very
young or inexperienced men, but I would ask you, have we learned
any wiser lesson from our intercourse with life than to withhold our
judgment on the case of one who rejects the sentence of a mob, and
appeals to the verdict of his equals?"
"But if he cut the people down in cold blood,--if it be true that he
laid open that poor black fellow's cheek from the temple to the chin--"
"If he did no such thing," broke in Barrington; "that is to say, if
there is no evidence whatever that he did so, what will your legal mind
say then, Joe Kinshela?"
"Just this, sir. I'd say--what all the newspapers are saying--that he
got the man out of the way,--bribed and sent him off."
"Why not hint that he murdered him, and buried him within the precincts
of the jail? I declare I wonder at your moderation."
"I am sure, sir, that if I suspected he was an old friend of yours--"
"Nothing of the kind,--a friend of very short standing; but what has
that to say to it? Is he less entitled to fair play whether he knew me
or not?"
"All I know of the case is from the newspapers; and as I scarcely see
one word in his favor, I take it there is not much to be said in his
defence."
"Well, if my ears don't deceive me, that was the guard's horn I heard
then. The man himself will be here in five minutes or so. You shall
conduct the prosecution, Kinshela, and I 'll be judge between you."
"Heaven forbid, sir; on no account whatever!" said Kinshela, trembling
all over. "I'm sure, Mr. Barrington, you couldn't think of repeating
what I said to you in confidence--"
"No, no, Kinshela. You shall do it yourself; and it's only fair to tell
you that he is a right clever fellow, and fully equal to the task of
defending himself." Peter arose as he spoke, and walked out upon the
lawn, affectedly to meet his coming guest, but in reality to cover a
laugh that was half smothering him, so comical was the misery expressed
in the attorney's face, and so ludicrous was his look of terror.
Of course I need not say that it never occurred to Barrington to realize
his threat, which he merely uttered in the spirit of that quizzing habit
that was familiar to him. "Yes, Kinshela," cried he, "here he comes.
I recognize his voice already;" and Barrington now walked forward to
welcome his friend.
It was not till after some minutes of conversation, and when the light
fell strongly on Stapylton's features, that Barrington saw how changed
a few weeks of care had made him. He looked at the least ten years older
than before. His eyes had lost their bold and daring expression, too,
and were deep sunk, and almost furtive in their glance.
"You are tired, I fear," said Barrington, as the other moved his hand
across his forehead, and, with a slight sigh, sank down upon a sofa.
"Less tired than worried,--harassed," said he, faintly. "Just as at a
gaming-table a man may lose more in half an hour's high play than years
of hard labor could acquire, there are times of life when we dissipate
more strength and vigor than we ever regain. I have had rough usage
since I saw you last," said he, with a very sickly smile. "How are the
ladies,--well, I hope?"
"Perfectly well. They have gone to pass the day with a neighbor, and
will be home presently. By the way, I left a friend here a few moments
ago. What can have become of him?" and he rang the bell hastily.
"Where's Mr. Kinshela, Darby?"
"Gone to bed, sir. He said he 'd a murthering headache, and hoped your
honor would excuse him."
Though Barrington laughed heartily at this message, Stapylton never
asked the reason, but sat immersed in thought and unmindful of all
around him.
"I half suspect you ought to follow his good example, Major," said
Peter. "A mug of mulled claret for a nightcap, and a good sleep, will
set you all right."
"It will take more than that to do it," said the Major, sadly. Then
suddenly rising, and pacing the room with quick, impatient steps, he
said, "What could have induced you to let them bring your claim before
the House? They are going to do so, ain't they?"
"Yes. Tom Withering says that nothing will be so effectual, and I
thought you agreed with him."
"Never. Nothing of the kind. I said, threaten it; insist that if they
continue the opposition, that you will,--that you must do so; but I
never was the fool to imagine that it could really be a wise step. What
's the fate of all such motions? I ask you. There's a speech--sometimes
an able one--setting forth a long catalogue of unmerited injuries and
long suffering. There's a claim made out that none can find a flaw in,
and a story that, if Parliament was given to softness, might move men
almost to tears, and at the end of it up rises a Minister to say how
deeply he sympathizes with the calamity of the case, but that this
house is, after all, not the fitting locality for a discussion which is
essentially a question of law, and that, even if it were, and if all
the allegations were established,--a point to which he by no means gave
adhesion,--there was really no available fund at the disposal of the
Crown to make reparation for such losses. Have you not seen this,
or something like this, scores of times? Can you tell me of one that
succeeded?"
"A case of such wrong as this cannot go without reparation," said Peter,
with emotion. "The whole country will demand it."
"The country will do no such thing. If it were a question of penalty
or punishment,--yes! the country would demand it. Fine, imprison,
transport, hang him! are easy words to utter, and cheap ones; but
pay him, reinstate him, reward him! have a very different sound and
significance. They figure in the budget, and are formidable on the
hustings. Depend on it, Mr. Barrington, the step will be a false one."
"It has been my fate never to have got the same advice for two weeks
together since the day I entered on this weary suit," said Barrington,
with a peevishness not natural to him.
"I may as well tell you the whole truth at once," said Stapylton. "The
Board have gone back of all their good intentions towards us; some
recent arrivals from India, it is said, have kindled again the old
fire of opposition, and we are to be met by a resistance bold and
uncompromising. They are prepared to deny everything we assert; in fact,
they have resolved to sweep all the pieces off the board and begin the
whole game again, and all because you have taken this unfortunate course
of appeal to Parliament."
"Have you told Withering this?"
"Yes; I have talked the matter over for nearly four hours with him.
Like a lawyer, he was most eager to know from what source came the new
evidence so damaging to us. I could only guess at this."
"And your guess was--"
"I scarcely like to own to you that I take a less favorable view of
mankind than you do, who know it better; but in this case my suspicion
attaches to a man who was once your son's dearest friend, but grew to be
afterwards his deadliest enemy."
"I will not have this said, Major Stapylton. I know whom you mean, and I
don't believe a word of it."
Stapylton simply shrugged his shoulders, and continued to pace the room
without speaking, while Barrington went on muttering, half aloud: "No,
no, impossible; quite impossible. These things are not in nature. I
don't credit them."
"You like to think very well of the world, sir!" said the Major, with a
faint scorn, so faint as scarcely to color his words.
"Think very badly of it, and you 'll soon come down to the level you
assign it," said Peter, boldly.
"I 'm afraid I 'm not in the humor just now to give it my best
suffrages. You 've seen, I doubt not, something of the treatment I
have met with from the Press for the last few weeks; not very generous
usage,--not very just. Well! what will you say when I tell you that I
have been refused an inquiry into my conduct at Manchester; that the
Government is of opinion that such an investigation might at the
moment be prejudicial to the public peace, without any counterbalancing
advantage on the score of a personal vindication; that they do not deem
the time favorable for the calm and unbiassed judgment of the country;
in one short word, sir, they 'd rather ruin a Major of Hussars than risk
a Cabinet. I am to exchange into any corps or any service I can;
and they are to tide over these troubles on the assumption of having
degraded me."
"I hope you wrong them,--I do hope you wrong them!" cried Barrington,
passionately.
"You shall see if I do," said he, taking several letters from his
pocket, and searching for one in particular. "Yes, here it is. This is
from Aldridge, the private secretary of the Commander-in-chief. It is
very brief, and strictly secret:--
"'Dear S.,--The "Chief" does not like your scrape at all. You did rather
too much, or too little,--a fatal mistake dealing with a mob. You must
consent--there's no help for it--to be badly used, and an injured man.
If you don't like the half-pay list,--which would, in my mind, be the
best step,--there 's the Seventeenth ordered to Baroda, and Maidstone
refuses to go. This, or the Second West India, are the only things open.
Above all, don't show fight; don't rally a party round you, for there
is not a man in England whose influence is sufficiently great to stand
between you and the public. A conple of years' patience and a hot
climate will set all right, and reinstate you everywhere. Come over here
at once and I 'll do my best for you.
"'Yours ever,
"'St. George Aldridge.'
"This is a friend's letter," said Stapylton, with a sneer; "and he
has no better counsel to give me than to plead guilty, and ask for a
mitigated punishment."
Harrington was silenced; he would not by any expression of indignation
add to the great anger of the other, and he said nothing. At last he
said, "I wish from my heart--I wish I could be of any service to you."
"You are the only man living who can," was the prompt answer.
"How so--in what way? Let me hear."
"When I addressed a certain letter to you some time back, I was in a
position both of fortune and prospect to take at least something from
the presumption of my offer. Now, though my fortune remains, my future
is more than clouded, and if I ask you to look favorably on my cause
now, it is to your generosity I must appeal; I am, in fact, asking you
to stand by a fallen man."
This speech, uttered in a voice slightly shaken by agitation, went to
Barrington's heart. There was not a sentiment in his nature so certain
to respond to a call upon it as this one of sympathy with the beaten
man; the weaker side was always certain of his adherence. With a nice
tact Stapylton said no more, but, pushing open the window, walked out
upon the smooth sward, on which a faint moonlight flickered. He had shot
his bolt, and saw it as it quivered in his victim's flesh. Barrington
was after him in an instant, and, drawing an arm within his he said in
a low voice, "You may count upon me."
Stapylton wrung his hand warmly, without speaking. After walking for
a few moments, side by side, he said: "I must be frank with you, Mr.
Barrington. I have little time and no taste for circumlocution; I cannot
conceal from myself that I am no favorite with your sister. I was not
as eager as I ought to have been to cultivate her good opinion; I was
a little piqued at what I thought mere injustices on her part,--small
ones, to be sure, but they wounded me, and with a temper that always
revolted against a wrong, I resented them, and I fear me, in doing so,
I jeopardized her esteem. If she is as generous as her brother, she will
not remember these to me in my day of defeat. Women, however, have their
own ideas of mercy, as they have of everything, and she may not choose
to regard me as you have done."
"I suspect you are wrong about this," said Harrington, breaking in.
"Well, I wish I may be; at all events, I must put the feeling to
the test at once, for I have formed my plan, and mean to begin it
immediately."
"And what is it?"
"Very few words will tell it. I intend to go on half-pay, or sell out if
that be refused me; set out for India by the next mail, and, with what
energy remains to me, vindicate your son's claim. I have qualifications
that will make me better than a better man. I am well versed in
Hindostanee, and a fair Persian scholar; I have a wide acquaintance with
natives of every rank, and I know how and where to look for information.
It is not my disposition to feel over-sanguine, but I would stake all I
possess on my success, for I see exactly the flaws in the chain, and I
know where to go to repair them. You have witnessed with what ardor I
adopted the suit before; but you cannot estimate the zeal with which I
throw myself into it now--now that, like George Barring-ton himself,
I am a man wronged, outraged, and insulted." For a few seconds be seemed
overcome by passion and unable to continue; then he went on: "If your
granddaughter will accept me, it is my intention to settle on her all I
possess. Our marriage can be private, and she shall be free to accompany
me or to remain here, as she likes."
"But how can all this be done so hurriedly? You talk of starting at
once."
"I must, if I would save your son's cause. The India Board are sending
out their emissaries to Calcutta, and I must anticipate them--if I
cannot do more, by gaining them over to us on the voyage out. It is a
case for energy and activity, and I want to employ both."
"The time is very short for all this," said Barrington, again.
"So it is, sir, and so are the few seconds which may rescue a man from
drowning! It is in the crisis of my fate that I ask you to stand by me."
"But have you any reason to believe that my granddaughter will hear you
favorably? You are almost strangers to each other?"
"If she will not give me the legal right to make her my heir, I mean to
usurp the privilege. I have already been with a lawyer for that purpose.
My dear sir," added he, passionately, "I want to break with the past
forever! When the world sets up its howl against a man, the odds are too
great! To stand and defy it he must succumb or retreat. Now, I mean to
retire, but with the honors of war, mark you."
"My sister will never consent to it," muttered Barrington.
"Will you? Have I the assurance of your support?"
"I can scarcely venture to say 'yes,' and yet I can't bear to say 'no'
to you!"
"This is less than I looked for from you," said Stapylton, mournfully.
"I know Dinah so well. I know how hopeless it would be to ask her
concurrence to this plan."
"She may not take the generous view of it; but there is a worldly one
worth considering," said Stapylton, bitterly.
"Then, sir, if you count on that, I would not give a copper half-penny
for your chance of success!" cried Barrington, passionately.
"You have quite misconceived me; you have wronged me altogether," broke
in Stapylton, in a tone of apology; for he saw the mistake he had made,
and hastened to repair it. "My meaning was this--"
"So much the better. I'm glad I misunderstood you. But here come the
ladies. Let us go and meet them."
"One word,--only one word. Will you befriend me?"
"I will do all that I can,--that is, all that I ought," said Barrington,
as he led him away, and re-entered the cottage.
"I will not meet them to-night," said Stapylton, hurriedly. "I am
nervous and agitated. I will say good-night now."
This was the second time within a few days that Stapylton had shown an
unwillingness to confront Miss Barrington, and Peter thought over it
long and anxiously. "What can he mean by it?" said he, to himself. "Why
should he be so frank and outspoken with me, and so reserved with her?
What can Dinah know of him? What can she suspect, that is not known
to me? It is true they never did like each other,--never 'hit it off'
together; but that is scarcely his fault. My excellent sister throws
away little love on strangers, and opens every fresh acquaintance with
a very fortifying prejudice against the newly presented. However it
happens," muttered he, with a sigh, "she is not often wrong, and I
am very seldom right;" and, with this reflection, he turned once again
to resume his walk in the garden.
CHAPTER XII. A DOCTOR AND HIS PATIENT
Stapylton did not make his appearance at breakfast; he sent down a
message that he had passed a feverish night, and begged that Dr. Dill
might be sent for. Though Barrington made two attempts to see his
guest, the quietness of the room on each occasion implied that he was
asleep, and, fearing to disturb him, he went downstairs again on tiptoe.
"This is what the persecution has done, Dinah," said he. "They have
brought that stout-hearted fellow so low that he may be the victim of a
fever to-morrow."
"Nonsense, Peter. Men of courage don't fall sick because the newspapers
calumniate them. They have other things on their minds than such puny
attacks."
"So he may, likely enough, too. He is bent heart and soul on what I
told you last night, and I 'm not surprised if he never closed his eyes
thinking of it."
"Neither did I!" said she, curtly, and left the room.
The doctor was not long in arriving, and, after a word or two with
Barrington, hastened to the patient's room.
"Are we alone?" asked Stapylton, cutting short the bland speech with
which Dill was making his approaches. "Draw that curtain a bit, and take
a good look at me. Are my eyes bloodshot? Are the pupils dilated? I had
a bad sunstroke once; see if there be any signs of congestion about me."
"No, I see none. A little flushed; your pulse, too, is accelerated, and
the heart's action is labored--"
"Never mind the heart; if the head be well, it will take care of it.
Reach me that pocket-book; I want to acquit one debt to you before I
incur another. No humbug between us;" and he pressed some notes into the
other's palm as he spoke. "Let us understand each other fully, and at
once. I 'm not very ill; but I want you."
"And I am at your orders."
"Faithfully,--loyally?"
"Faithfully,--loyally!" repeated the other after him.
[Illustration: 454]
"You've read the papers lately,--you've seen these attacks on me?"
"Yes."
"Well, what do they say and think here--I mean in this house--about
them? How do they discuss them? Remember, I want candor and frankness;
no humbug. I'll not stand humbug."
"The women are against you."
"Both of them?"
"Both."
"How comes that?--on what grounds?"
"The papers accused you of cruelty; they affirmed that there was no
cause for the measures of severity you adopted; and they argued--"
"Don't bore me with all that balderdash. I asked you how was it that
these women assumed I was in the wrong?"
"And I was about to tell you, if you had not interrupted me."
"That is, they believed what they read in the newspapers?"
"Yes."
"And, of course, swallowed that fine story about the Hindoo fellow that
I first cut down, and afterwards bribed to make his escape from the
hospital?"
"I suspect they half believed it."
"Or rather, believed half of it, the cutting down part! Can you tell me
physiologically,--for I think it comes into that category,--why it is
that women not otherwise ill-natured, in nine cases out of ten take the
worst alternative as the credible one? But never mind that. They condemn
me. Is n't it so?"
"Yes; and while old Barrington insists--"
"Who cares what he insists? Such advocacy as his only provokes attack,
and invites persecution. I 'd rather have no such allies!"
"I believe you are right."
"I want fellows like yourself, doctor,--sly, cautious, subtle
fellows,--accustomed to stealing strong medicines into the system in
small doses; putting the patient, as you call it in your slang, 'under
the influence' of this, that, and t'other,--eh?"
Dill smiled blandly at the compliment to his art, and Stapylton went
on:--
"Not that I have time just now for this sort of chronic treatment. I
need a heroic remedy, doctor. I 'm in love."
"Indeed!" said Dill, with an accent nicely balanced between interest and
incredulity.
"Yes, and I want to marry!
"Miss Barrington?"
"The granddaughter. There is no need, I hope, to make the distinction,
for I don't wish to be thought insane. Now you have the case. What 's
your prescription?"
"Propose for her!"
"So I have, but they hesitate. The old man is not unfavorable; he is,
perhaps, more: he is, in a measure, friendly; but what avails such
advocacy? I want another guess sort of aid,--a clever man; or, what is
better still, a clever woman, to befriend me."
He waited some seconds for a reply, but Dill did not speak; so he went
on: "A clever woman, to take a woman's view of the case, balancing this
against that, never ignoring an obstacle, but inquiring what there may
be to compensate for it Do you know such a one, doctor?"
"Perhaps I may; but I have my doubts about securing her services."
"Even with a retainer?"
"Even with a retainer. You see, Major,"--here Dill dropped his voice to
a most confidential whisper,--"my daughter Polly,--for I know we both
have her in mind,--Polly is a strange sort of girl, and very hard to
understand; for while, if the case were her own, she 'd no more think
of romance than she would of giving ten guineas for a dress, if she was
advising another whose position and prospects were higher than hers,
it's the romantic part of it she'd lay all the stress on."
"From which I gather that my suit will not stand this test!" said
Stapylton, with a peculiar smile. "Eh, is n't that your meaning?"
"You are certainly some years older than the lady," said Dill, blandly.
"Not old enough to be, as the world would surely say, 'her father,' but
fully old enough to give license for sarcasm."
"Then, as she will be a great fortune--"
"Not a sixpence,--she'll not have sixpence, doctor. That bubble has
burst at last, and can never be blown again. The whole claim has been
rejected, refused, thrown out, and there 's an end of it. It amuses
the old man to sit on the wreck and fancy he can repair the shattered
timbers and make them seaworthy; and, for the time he is likely to
last, it is only kindness to leave him to his delusion; but he is
ruined,--ruined beyond recall, and as I have told you, the girl will
have nothing."
"Do they know this,--has Barrington heard it?"
"Yes, I broke it to him last night, but I don't think he fully realized
the tidings; he has certain reserves--certain little conceits of his
own--which are to supply him with a sort of hope; but let us talk of
something more practical. How can we secure Miss Dill's services?"
"A few days ago, the easiest way would have been to offer to befriend
her brother, but this morning brings us news that this is not
needed,--he is coming home."
"How so?"
"It is a great event in its way; at least, it may be for Tom. It seems
there was a collision at sea, somewhere near the Cape, between the ship
'St. Helen's,' that carried out General Hunter and his staff, and
the 'Regulus,' with the Forty-ninth on board. It was at night, and a
terrible sea on at the time. In the shock the 'St. Helen's' took fire;
and as the two ships were inextricably locked together, the danger was
common to each. While the boats were being lowered and manned,--for it
was soon seen the vessel could not be saved,--a cry was raised that the
fire was gaining on the fore-hold, and would soon reach the magazine.
The woful news spread at once, and many jumped overboard in their
terror. Just then Tom heard that there was a means of drowning the
powder by opening a certain sluice, and, without waiting for more, he
clambered across into the sinking vessel, made his way through smoke and
fire, gained the spot, and succeeded, just as the very ladder itself
had caught the flames. How he got back he cannot tell, for the vessel
foundered in a few minutes, and he was so burned--face, cheek, and
one shoulder--that he was unconscious of everything; and even when the
account came, was still in bed, and not able to see."
"He was a wild sort of lad, was he not,--a scamp, in short?"
"No, not exactly that; idle--careless--kept bad company at times."
"These are the fellows who do this kind of thing once in their
lives,--mark you, never twice. They never have more than one shot in
their locker, but it will suffice in this case."
Though the worthy doctor was very far from enthusiastic about his son's
gallantry, there was a degree of coolness in the Major's estimate of
it that almost shocked him; and he sat staring steadily at the stern
bronzed face, and the hard lineaments of the man, and wondering of what
strange stuff such natures were fashioned.
"It's quite clear, then, that for Master Tom we can do nothing half
so good as chance has done for him," said Stapylton, after a short
interval.
"Chance and himself too," added the doctor.
Stapylton made no answer, but, covering his eyes with his hand, lay deep
in thought.
"If you only had the Attorney-General, Mr. Withering, on your side,"
said Dill. "There is no man has the same influence over this family."
"It is not what you call influence I want, my good sir. It is a far
more subtle and more delicate agent. I require the sort of aid, in fact,
which your daughter could supply, if she would. An appointment awaits
me in India, but I must occupy it at once. I have no time for a long
courtship. I 'm just as hurried as that boy of yours was when he swamped
the powder-magazine. It's a skirmish where I can't wait for the heavy
artillery, but must do my best with the light field-guns,--do you
understand me?"
Dill nodded, and Stapylton resumed: "The thing can be done just by the
very road that you have pronounced impossible,--that is, by the romantic
side of it,--making it a case of violent love at first sight, the
passion of a man past the heyday of youth, but yet young enough to
feel a most ardent affection. I am, besides," said he, laughing with a
strange blending of levity and sarcasm, "a sort of Brummagem hero; have
been wounded, led assaults, and that kind of thing, to a degree that
puffery can take the benefit of. And, last of all, doctor, I am rich
enough to satisfy greater ambitions than ought to live under such a roof
as this. Do you see the part your daughter can take in this drama?"
"Perhaps I do."
"And could you induce her to accept it?"
"I'm not very certain,--I'd be slow to pledge myself to it."
"Certainly," said Stapylton, mockingly; "the passing glimpses we
bachelors obtain of the working of that vaunted institution, The Family,
fail to impress us with all its imputed excellence; you are, it seems to
me, just as powerless within your own doors as I am regarding what goes
on in a neighbor's house. I take it, however, that it can't be helped.
Children, like colonies, are only governable when helpless."
"I suspect you are wrong, sir; at least, I fancy I have as much of the
sort of influence you speak of as others; but still, I think, here, in
this particular case, you would yourself be your best ambassador, if you
were strong enough to come down with me in the boat to-day."
"Of course I am!" cried Stapylton, starting up to a sitting posture;
"and what then?"
"You would be better in my house than this," said Dill, mysteriously.
"Speak out, and speak clearly, doctor; I have very little the matter
with me, and am in no want of change of air. What I need is the
assistance of one dexterous enough to advocate my plans with persons
and in places to which I have no access. Your daughter is just such a
one,--will she do it?"
"We can ask her."
"Well, how will you explain my absence to these people here? What will
you say for my not appearing at breakfast, and yet being able to take an
airing with you?"
"I will put it on hygienic grounds," said Dill, smiling acutely. "My
profession has a number of sanctuaries the profane vulgar can never
enter. I 'll just step down now and ask Barrington to lend me his boat,
and I 'll throw out a dark hint that I 'd like to manage a consultation
on your case without alarming you, for which purpose I 'd ask Dr. Tobin
to be at my house, when we arrive there, by mere accident, so that a
conference would follow as a matter of course."
"Very wily,--very subtle all this, doctor. Do you know, I 'm half
frightened at the thought of trusting myself to such a master of
intrigue and mystification."
"Have no fears; I reserve all my craft for my clients." And with this he
left the room, but only for a few minutes; for he met Barrington on the
stairs, and speedily obtained permission to take his boat to Inistioge,
having first pledged himself to come back with Stapylton to dinner.
"We shall see, we shall see," muttered Stapylton to himself. "Your
daughter must decide where I am to dine today."
By the way--that is, as they glided along the bright river--Dill tried
to prepare Stapylton for the task before him, by sundry hints as to
Polly's temper and disposition, with warnings against this, and cautions
about that. "Above all," said he, "don't try to overreach her."
"Perfect frankness--candor itself--is my device. Won't that do?"
"You must first see will she believe it," said the doctor, slyly; and
for the remainder of the way there was a silence between them.
CHAPTER XIII. CROSS-PURPOSES
"Where 's Miss Polly?" said Dill, hastily, as he passed his threshold.
"She's making the confusion of roses in the kitchen, sir," said the
maid, whose chemistry had been a neglected study.
"Tell her that I have come back, and that there is a gentleman along
with me," said he, imperiously, as he led the way into his study. "I
have brought you into this den of mine, Major, because I would just say
one word more by way of caution before you see Polly. You may imagine,
from the small range of her intercourse with the world, and her village
life, that her acuteness will not go very far; don't be too sure of
that,--don't reckon too much on her want of experience."
"I suppose I have encountered as sharp wits as hers before this time
o' day," replied he, half peevishly; and then, with an air of better
temper, added, "I have no secrets to hide, no mystery to cloak. If
I want her alliance, she shall herself dictate the terms that shall
requite it."
The doctor shook his head dubiously, but was silent.
"I half suspect, my good doctor," said Stapylton, laughing, "that your
charming daughter is a little, a very little, of a domestic despot; you
are all afraid of her; never very sure of what she will say or do or
think on any given circumstances, and nervously alive to the risk of her
displeasure."
"There is something in what you say," remarked Dill, with a sigh; "but
it was always my mistake to bring up my children with too much liberty
of action. From the time they were so high"--and he held his hand out
about a yard above the floor--"they were their own masters."
Just as the words had fallen from him, a little chubby, shock-headed
fellow, about five years old, burst into the room, which he believed
unoccupied, and then, suddenly seeing his papa, set up a howl of terror
that made the house ring.
"What is it, Jimmy,--what is it, my poor man?" said Polly, rushing with
tucked-up sleeves to the spot; and, catching him up in her arms, she
kissed him affectionately.
"Will you take him away?--will you take him out of that?" hissed out
Dill between his teeth. "Don't you see Major Stapylton here?"
"Oh, Major Stapylton will excuse a toilette that was never intended for
his presence."
"I will certainly say there could not be a more becoming one, nor a more
charming tableau to display it in!"
"There, Jimmy," said she, laughing; "you must have some bread and jam
for getting me such a nice compliment."
And she bore away the still sobbing urchin, who, burying his head in her
bosom, could never summon courage to meet his father's eye.
"What a spacious garden you appear to have here!" said Stapylton, who
saw all the importance of a diversion to the conversation.
"It is a very much neglected one," said Dill, pathetically. "My poor
dear boy Tom used to take care of it when he was here; he had a perfect
passion for flowers."
Whether that Tom was associated in the Major's mind with some other very
different tastes or not, Stapylton smiled slightly, and after a moment
said, "If you permit me, I 'll take a stroll through your garden, and
think over what we have been talking of."
"Make yourself at home in every respect," said Dill. "I have a few
professional calls to make in the village, but we 'll meet at luncheon."
"He's in the garden, Polly," said Dill, as he passed his daughter on the
stairs; "he came over here this morning to have a talk with you."
"Indeed, sir!"
"Yes; he has got it into his head that you can be of service to him."
"It is not impossible, sir; I think I might."
"I'm glad to bear it, Polly; I'm delighted to see you take a good
sensible view of things. I need not tell you he's a knowing one."
"No, sir. But, as I have heard you card-players say, 'he shows his
hand.'"
"So he does, Polly; but I have known fellows do that just to mislead the
adversary."
"Sorry adversaries that could be taken in so easily." And with a saucy
toss of her head she passed on, scarcely noticing the warning gesture of
her father's finger as she went.
When she had found her work-basket and supplied herself with the means
of occupying her fingers for an hour or so, she repaired to the garden
and took her seat under a large elm, around whose massive trunk a mossy
bench ran, divided by rustic-work into a series of separate places.
"What a churlish idea it was to erect these barricades, Miss Dill!" said
Stapylton as he seated himself at her side; "how unpicturesque and how
prudish!"
"It was a simple notion of my brother Tom's," said she, smiling, "who
thought people would not be less agreeable by being reminded that
they had a place of their own, and ought not to invade that of their
neighbor."
"What an unsocial thought!"
"Poor Tom! A strange reproach to make against you," said she, laughing
out.
"By the way, has n't he turned out a hero,--saved a ship and all she
carried from the flames,--and all at the hazard of his own life?"
"He has done a very gallant thing; and, what's more, I 'll venture to
say there is not a man who saw it thinks so little of it as himself."
"I suppose that every brave man has more or less of that feeling."
"I'm glad to learn this fact from such good authority," said she, with a
slight bend of the head.
"A prettily turned compliment, Miss Dill. Are you habitually given to
flattery?"
"No? I rather think not. I believe the world is pleased to call me more
candid than courteous."
"Will you let me take you at the world's estimate,--that is, will you
do me the inestimable favor to bestow a little of this same candor upon
me?"
"Willingly. What is to be the subject of it?"
"The subject is a very humble one,--myself!"
"How can I possibly adjudicate on such a theme?"
"Better than you think for, perhaps!" And for a moment he appeared
awkward and ill at ease. "Miss Dill," said he, after a pause, "fortune
has been using me roughly of late; and, like all men who deem themselves
hardly treated, I fly at once to any quarter where I fancy I have found
a more kindly disposition towards me. Am I indulging a self-delusion in
believing that such sentiments are yours?"
Polly Dill, with her own keen tact, had guessed what was the real object
of Stapylton's visit. She had even read in her father's manner how he
himself was a shareholder in the scheme, and she had made up her mind
for a great frankness on each side; but now, seeing the diplomatic
mys-teriousness with which the Major opened his attack, that love of
mischievous drollery which entered into her nature suggested a very
different line. She determined, in fact, to seem to accept the Major's
speech as the preliminary to an offer of his hand. She therefore merely
turned her head slightly, and in a low voice said, "Continue!"
"I have not deceived myself, then," said he, with more warmth of manner.
"I have secured one kind heart in my interest?"
"You must own," said she, with a half-coquettish look of pique, "that
you scarcely deserve it."
"How,--in what way?" asked he, in astonishment.
"What a very short memory you are blessed with! Must I, then, remind you
of a certain evening at Cobham? Must I recall what I thought at the time
very particular, as they certainly were very pleasant, attentions on
your part? Must I, also, bring to mind a certain promised visit from
you, the day and hour all named by yourself,--a visit which never came
off? And after all this, Major, are you not really a bold man to come
down and take up your negotiation where you dropped it? Is there not
in this a strong conviction of the greatness of Major Stapylton and the
littleness of the doctor's daughter?"
Stapylton was struck dumb. When a general sees that what he meant as
a feint has been converted into a real attack, the situation is often
imminent; but what comparison in difficulty is there between that
mistake and that of him who assails what he never desired to conquer?
How he inwardly cursed the stupidity with which he had opened his
negotiation!
"I perceive," said she, triumphing over his confusion, "that your calmer
judgment does not reassure you. You feel that there is a certain levity
in this conduct not quite excusable! Own it frankly, and at once!"
"I will own, if you like, that I was never in a situation of greater
embarrassment!"
"Shall I tell you why?"
"You couldn't; it would be totally impossible."
"I will try, however, if you permit me. You do! Then here goes. You no
more intended anything to come of your little flirtation at Cobham than
you now do of a more serious blunder. You never came here this morning
to make your court to me, You are much pained at the awkwardness of
a situation so naturally wounding to me, and for the life of you, you
cannot imagine what escape there is out of such a difficulty."
"You are wonderfully clever, Miss Dill," said he; and there was an
honest admiration in his look that gave the words a full significance.
"No," said she, "but I am wonderfully good-natured. I forgive you what
is the hardest thing in the world to forgive!"
"Oh! if you would but be my friend," cried he, warmly.
"What a want of tact there was in that speech, Major Stapylton!" said
she, with a laugh; "but perhaps you wanted to reverse the line of our
dear little poet, who tells of some one 'that came but for Friendship,
and took away Love'!"
"How cruel you are in all this mockery of me!"
"Does not the charge of cruelty come rather ill from you?--you, who
can afford to sport with the affections of poor village maidens. From
the time of that 'Major bold of Halifax' the song tells of, I never
heard your equal."
"Could you prevail upon yourself to be serious for a few minutes?" said
he, gravely.
"I think not,--at least not just now; but why should I make the
attempt?"
"Because I would wish your aid in a serious contingency,--a matter in
which I am deeply interested, and which involves probably my future
happiness."
"Ah, Major! is it possible that you are going to trifle with my feelings
once more?"
"My dear Miss Dill, must I plead once more for a little mercy?"
"No, don't do any such thing; it would seem ungenerous to refuse, and
yet I could not accord it."
"Fairly beaten," said he, with a sigh; "there is no help for it. You are
the victor!"
"How did you leave our friends at 'The Home'?" said she, with an easy
indifference in her tone.
"All well, perfectly well; that is to say, I believe so, for I only saw
my host himself."
"What a pleasant house; how well they understand receiving their
friends!"
"It is so peaceful and so quiet!" said he, with an effort to seem at
ease.
"And the garden is charming!"
"And all this is perfectly intolerable," said he, rising, and speaking
in a voice thick with suppressed anger. "I never came here to play a
part in a vaudeville! Your father led me to believe, Miss Dill, that you
might not be indisposed to lend me your favoring aid in a suit which
I am interested in. He told me I should at least find you frank and
outspoken; that if you felt inclined to assist me, you'd never enhance
the service by a seeming doubt or hesitation--"
"And if I should not feel so inclined, what did he then give you to
expect?"
"That you'd say so!"
"So I do, then, clearly and distinctly tell you, if my counsels offer a
bar to your wishes, they are all enlisted against you."
"This is the acme of candor. You can only equal it by saying how I could
have incurred your disfavor."
"There is nothing of disfavor in the matter. I think you charming. You
are a hero,--very clever, very fascinating, very accomplished; but
I believe it would be a great mistake for Fifine to marry you. Your
tempers have that sort of resemblance that leave no reliefs in their
mutual play. You are each of you hot and hasty, and a little imperious;
and if she were not very much in love, and consequently disposed to
think a great deal of you and very little of herself, these traits that
I speak of would work ill. But if every one of them were otherwise,
there would still be one obstacle worse than all!"
"And that is--"
"Can you not guess what I mean, Major Stapylton? You do not, surely,
want confidences from me that are more than candor!"
"Do I understand you aright?" said he, growing red and pale by turns, as
passion worked within him; "do I apprehend you correctly? These people
here are credulous enough to be influenced by the shadowy slanders of
the newspapers, and they listen to the half-muttered accusations of a
hireling press?"
"They do say very awkward things in the daily press, certainly," said
she, dryly; "and your friends marvel at the silence with which you treat
them."
"Then I have divined your meaning," said he. "It is by these cowardly
assailants I am supposed to be vanquished. I suspect, however, that
Colonel Barrington himself was, once on a time, indulged with the same
sort of flattery. They said that he had usurped a sovereignty, falsified
documents, purloined jewels of immense value. I don't know what they did
not charge him with. And what do they say of me? That I exhibited great
severity--cruelty, if you will--towards a mob in a state of rebellion;
that I reprimanded a very silly subaltern for a misplaced act of
humanity. That I have been cashiered, too, they assert, in face of the
'Gazette,' which announces my appointment to an unattached majority. In
a word, the enormity of the falsehood has never stayed their hand, and
they write of me whatever their unthinking malevolence can suggest to
them. You have, perhaps, seen some of these paragraphs?"
"Like every one else, I have read them occasionally; not very
attentively, indeed. But, in truth, I'm not a reader of newspapers.
Here, for instance, is this morning's as it came from Dublin, still
unopened;" and she handed it as she spoke.
"Let us see if I be still honored with their notice," said he, unfolding
the paper, and running his eyes hastily over it. "Debate on the Sugar
Bill--Prison Reforms--China--Reinforcements for Canada--Mail Service to
the Colonies--Bankruptcy Court. Oh, here we have it--here it is!" and he
crushed the paper while he folded down one part of it. "Shall I read it
for you? The heading is very tempting: 'Late Military Scandal.--A very
curious report is now going through our West-end Clubs, and especially
such as are the resort of military officers. It is to the purport that a
certain Field-officer of Cavalry--whose conduct has been the subject of
severe strictures from the Press--will speedily be called to answer for
a much graver offence than the transgression of regimental discipline.
The story which has reached us is a very strange one, and we should call
it incredible, if we were not informed, on author-ity, that one of our
most distinguished Indian generals has declared himself fully satisfied
of its truth in every particular.' Can you fancy anything worse than
that, Miss Dill? An unknown somebody is alleged to be convinced of an
unknown something that attaches to me; for, of course, I am designated
as the 'Field-officer of Cavalry,' and the public is graciously pleased
to hold me in abhorrence till I have found out my calumniator and
refuted him!"
"It seems very hard. Who do you suspect is the Indian General alluded
to?"
"Tell me, first of all,--does he exist?" "And this, too, you will not
reply to, nor notice?" "Not, certainly, through such a channel as it
reaches me. If the slanderer will stand forth and avow himself, I may
know how to deal with him. But what has led us into this digression? I
am sure it is as little to your taste as to mine. I have failed in my
mission, and if I were able to justify every act of my life, what would
it avail me? You have pronounced against me; at least, you will not take
my brief."
"What if I were retained by the other side?" said she, smiling.
"I never suspected that there was another side," said he, with an air of
extreme indifference. "Who is my formidable rival?"
"I might have told you if I saw you were really anxious on the subject."
"It would be but hypocrisy in me to pretend it. If, for example, Major
McCormick--"
"Oh, that is too bad!" cried Polly, interrupting. "This would mean an
impertinence to Miss Barrington."
"How pleasant we must have been! Almost five o'clock, and I scarcely
thought it could be three!" said he, with an affected languor.
"'Time's foot is not heard when he treads upon flowers,'" said she,
smiling.
"Where shall I find your father, Miss Dill? I want to tell him what a
charming creature his daughter is, and how wretched I feel at not being
able to win her favor."
"Pray don't; or he might fall into my own mistake, and imagine that you
wanted a lease of it for life."
"Still cruel, still inexorable!" said he, with a mockery of affliction
in his tone. "Will you say all the proper things--the regrets, and
such like--I feel at not meeting him again; and if he has asked me to
dinner--which I really forget--will you make the fitting apology?"
"And what is it, in the present case?"
"I 'm not exactly sure whether I am engaged to dine elsewhere, or too
ill to dine at all."
"Why not say it is the despair at being rejected renders you unequal to
the effort? I mean, of course, by myself, Major Stapylton."
"I have no objection; say so, if you like," said he, with an insulting
indifference. "Good-day, Miss Dill. This is the way to the road, I
believe;" and, with a low bow, very deferential but very distant, he
turned away to leave the garden. He had not, however, gone many
paces, when he stopped and seemed to ponder. He looked up at the sky,
singularly clear and cloudless as it was, without a breath of wind in
the air; he gazed around him on every side, as if in search of an object
he wanted; and then, taking out his purse, he drew forth a shilling and
examined it. "Yes," muttered he, "Chance has been my only counsellor for
many a year, and the only one that never takes a bribe! And yet, is it
not taking to the raft before the ship has foundered? True; but shall
I be sure of the raft if I wait for the shipwreck? She is intensely
crafty. She has that sort of head that loves a hard knot to unravel!
Here goes! Let Destiny take all the consequences!" and as he flung up
the piece of money in the air, he cried, "Head!" It was some minutes
ere he could discover where it had fallen, amongst the close leaves of a
border of strawberries. He bent down to look, and exclaimed, "Head! she
has won!" Just as he arose from his stooping attitude he perceived that
Polly was engaged in the adjoining walk, making a bouquet of roses. He
sprang across the space, and stood beside her.
"I thought you had been a mile off by this time, at least," said she,
calmly.
"So I meant, and so I intended; but just as I parted from you, a thought
struck me--one of those thoughts which come from no process of reasoning
or reflection, but seem impelled by a force out of our own natures--that
I would come back and tell you something that was passing in my mind.
Can you guess it?"
"No; except it be that you are sorry for having trifled so unfeelingly
with my hopes, and have come back to make the best reparation in your
power, asking me to forgive and accept you."
"You have guessed aright; it was for that I returned."
"What a clever guess I made! Confess I am very ready-witted!"
"You are; and it is to engage those ready wits in my behalf that I am
now before you."
"'At my feet,' sir, is the appropriate expression. I wonder how a
gentleman so suited to be the hero of a story could forget the language
of the novel."
"I want you to be serious," said he, almost sternly.
"And why should that provoke seriousness from me which only costs
you levity?"
"Levity!--where is the levity?"
"Is it not this instant that you flung a shilling in the air, and cried
out, as you looked on it, 'She has won'? Is it not that you asked Chance
to decide for you what most men are led to by their affections, or at
least their interests; and if so, is levity not the name for this?"
"True in part, but not in whole; for I felt it was I who had won when
'head' came uppermost."
"And yet you have lost."
"How so! You refuse me?"
"I forgive your astonishment. It is really strange, but I do refuse
you."
"But why? Are you piqued with me for anything that occurred this
morning? Have I offended you by anything that dropped from me in that
conversation? Tell me frankly, that I may, if in my power, rectify it."
"No; I rather felt flattered at the notion of being consulted. I thought
it a great tribute to my clear-headedness and my tact."
"Then tell me what it was."
"You really wish it?"
"I do."
"Insist upon it?"
"I insist upon it."
"Well, it was this. Seeing that you were intrusting your future fortune
to chance, I thought that I would do the same, and so I tossed up
whether, opportunity serving, I should accept you or a certain other,
and the other won!"
"May I ask for the name of my fortunate rival?"
"I don't think it is very fair, perhaps not altogether delicate of you;
and the more since he has not proposed, nor possibly ever may. But no
matter, you shall hear his name. It was Major McCormick."
"McCormick! You mean this for an insult to me, Miss Dill?"
[Illustration: 472]
"Well, it certainly is open to that objection," said she, with a very
slight closure of her eyes, and a look of steady, resolute defiance.
"And in this way," continued he, "to throw ridicule over the offer I
have made you?"
"Scarcely that; the proposition was in itself too ridiculous to require
any such aid from me."
For a moment Stapylton lost his self-possession, and he turned on her
with a look of savage malignity.
"An insult, and an intentional insult!" said he; "a bold thing to avow."
"I don't think so, Major Stapylton. We have been playing a very rough
game with each other, and it is not very wonderful if each of us should
have to complain of hard treatment."
"Could not so very clever a person as Miss Dill perceive that I was only
jesting?" said he, with a cutting insolence in his tone.
"I assure you that I did not," said she, calmly; "had I known or even
suspected it was a jest, I never should have been angry. That the
distinguished Major Stapylton should mock and quiz--or whatever be the
name for it--the doctor's daughter, however questionable the good taste,
was, after all, only a passing slight. The thought of asking her to
marry him was different,--that was an outrage!"
"You shall pay for this one day, perhaps," said he, biting his lip.
"No, Major Stapylton," said she, laughing; "this is not a debt of honor;
you can afford to ignore it."
"I tell you again, you shall pay for it."
"Till then, sir!" said she, with a courtesy; and without giving him
time for another word, she turned and re-entered the house.
Scarcely had Stapylton gained the road when he was joined by McCormick.
"Faith, you didn't get the best of that brush, anyhow," said he, with a
grin.
"What do you mean, sir?" replied Stapylton, savagely.
"I mean that I heard every word that passed between you, and I would n't
have been standing in your shoes for a fifty-pound note."
"How is your rheumatism this morning?" asked Stapylton, blandly.
"Pretty much as it always is," croaked out the other.
"Be thankful to it, then; for if you were not a cripple, I 'd throw you
into that river as sure as I stand here to say it."
Major McCormick did not wait for a less merciful moment, but hobbled
away from the spot with all the speed he could muster.
CHAPTER XIV. STORMS
When Stapylton stepped out of his boat and landed at "The Home," the
first person he saw was certainly the last in his wishes. It was Miss
Dinah who stood at the jetty, as though awaiting him. Scarcely deigning
to notice, beyond a faint smile of acquiescence, the somewhat bungling
explanation he gave of his absence, she asked if he had met her brother.
"No," said he. "I left the village a couple of hours ago; rather
loitering, as I came along, to enjoy the river scenery."
"He took the road, and in this way missed you," said she, dryly.
"How unfortunate!--for me, I mean, of course. I own to you, Miss
Barrington, wide as the difference between our ages, I never yet met any
one so thoroughly companionable to me as your brother. To meet a man
so consummately acquainted with the world, and yet not soured by his
knowledge; to see the ripe wisdom of age blended with the generous
warmth of youth; to find one whose experiences only make him more
patient, more forgiving, more trustful--"
"Too trustful, Major Stapylton, far too trustful." And her bold gray
eyes were turned upon him as she spoke, with a significance that could
not be mistaken.
"It is a noble feeling, madam," said he, haughtily.
"It is a great misfortune to its possessor, sir."
"Can we deem that misfortune, Miss Barrington, which enlarges the
charity of our natures, and teaches us to be slow to think ill?"
Not paying the slightest attention to his question, she said,--
"My brother went in search of you, sir, to place in your hands some
very urgent letters from the Horse Guards, and which a special messenger
brought here this morning."
"Truly kind of him. They relate, I have no doubt, to my Indian
appointment. They told me I should have news by to-day or to-morrow."
"He received a letter also for himself, sir, which he desired to show
you."
"About his lawsuit, of course? It is alike a pleasure and a duty to me
to serve him in that affair."
"It more nearly concerns yourself, sir," said she, in the same cold,
stern tone; "though it has certainly its bearing on the case you speak
of."
"More nearly concerns myself!" said he, repeating her words slowly. "I
am about the worst guesser of a riddle in the world, Miss Barrington.
Would you kindly relieve my curiosity? Is this letter a continuation of
those cowardly attacks which, in the want of a worthier theme, the Press
have amused themselves by making upon me? Is it possible that some enemy
has had the malice to attack me through my friends?"
"The writer of the letter in question is a sufficient guarantee for its
honor, Mr. Withering."
"Mr. Withering!" repeated he, with a start, and then, as suddenly
assuming an easy smile, added: "I am perfectly tranquil to find myself
in such hands as Mr. Withering's. And what, pray, does he say of me?"
"Will you excuse me, Major Stapylton, if I do not enter upon a subject
on which I am not merely very imperfectly informed, but on which so
humble a judgment as mine would be valueless? My brother showed me the
letter very hurriedly; I had but time to see to what it referred, and to
be aware that it was his duty to let you see it at once,--if possible,
indeed, before you were again under his roof."
"What a grave significance your words have, Miss Barrington!" said he,
with a cold smile. "They actually set me to think over all my faults and
failings, and wonder for which of them I am now arraigned."
"We do not profess to judge you, sir."
By this time they had sauntered up to the little garden in front of
the cottage, within the paling of which Josephine was busily engaged
in training a japonica. She arose as she heard the voices, and in her
accustomed tone wished Stapylton good-evening. "She, at least, has
heard nothing of all this," muttered he to himself, as he saluted
her. He then opened the little wicket; and Miss Barrington passed
in, acknowledging his attention by a short nod, as she walked hastily
forward and entered the cottage. Instead of following her, Stapylton
closed the wicket again, remaining on the outside, and leaning his arm
on the upper rail.
"Why do you perform sentry? Are you not free to enter the fortress?"
said Fifine.
"I half suspect not," said he, in a low tone, and to hear which she was
obliged to draw nigher to where he stood.
"What do you mean? I don't understand you!"
"No great wonder, for I don't understand myself. Your aunt has, however,
in her own most mysterious way, given me to believe that somebody has
written something about me to somebody else, and until I clear up what
in all probability I shall never hear, that I had better keep to what
the Scotch call the 'back o' the gate.'"
"This is quite unintelligible."
"I hope it is, for it is almost unendurable. I am sorely afraid," added
he, after a minute, "that I am not so patient as I ought to be under
Miss Barrington's strictures. I am so much more in the habit of command
than of obedience, that I may forget myself now and then. To you,
however, I am ready to submit all my past life and conduct. By you I am
willing to be judged. If these cruel calumnies which are going the round
of the papers on me have lowered me in your estimation, my case is a
lost one; but if, as I love to think, your woman's heart resents an
injustice,--if, taking counsel of your courage and your generosity,
you feel it is not the time to withdraw esteem when the dark hour of
adversity looms over a man,--then, I care no more for these slanders
than for the veriest trifles which cross one's every-day life. In one
word,--your verdict is life or death to me."
"In that case," said she, with an effort to dispel the seriousness of
his manner, "I must have time to consider my sentence."
"But that is exactly what you cannot have, Josephine," said he; and
there was a certain earnestness in his voice and look, which made her
hear him call her by her name without any sense of being off ended.
"First relieve the suffering; there will be ample leisure to question
the sufferer afterwards. The Good Samaritan wasted few words, and asked
for no time. The noblest services are those of which the cost is never
calculated. Your own heart can tell you: can you befriend me, and will
you?"
"I do not know what it is you ask of me," said she, with a frank
boldness which actually disconcerted him. "Tell me distinctly, what is
it?"
"I will tell you," said he, taking her hand, but so gently, so
respectfully withal, that she did not at first withdraw it,--"I will
tell you. It is that you will share that fate on which fortune is now
frowning; that you will add your own high-couraged heart to that of one
who never knew a fear till now; that you will accept my lot in this the
day of my reverse, and enable me to turn upon my pursuers and scatter
them. To-morrow or next day will be too late. It is now, at this hour,
that friends hold back, that one more than friend is needed. Can you be
that, Josephine?"
"No!" said she, firmly. "If I read your meaning aright, I cannot."
"You cannot love me, Josephine," said he, in a voice of intense emotion;
and though he waited some time for her to speak, she was silent. "It
is true, then," said he, passionately, "the slanderers have done their
work!"
"I know nothing of these calumnies. When my grandfather told me that
they accused you falsely, and condemned you unfairly, I believed him.
I am as ready as ever to say so. I do not understand your cause; but I
believe you to be a true and gallant gentleman!"
"But yet, not one to love!" whispered he, faintly.
Again she was silent, and for some time he did not speak.
"A true and gallant gentleman!" said he, slowly repeating her own words;
"and if so, is it an unsafe keeping to which to intrust your happiness?
It is no graceful task to have oneself for a theme; but I cannot help
it. I have no witnesses to call to character; a few brief lines in an
army list, and some scars--old reminders of French sabres--are poor
certificates, and yet I have no others."
There was something which touched her in the sadness of his tone as he
said these words, and if she knew how, she would have spoken to him in
kindliness. He mistook the struggle for a change of purpose, and with
greater eagerness continued: "After all I am scarcely more alone in the
world than you are! The dear friends who now surround you cannot be long
spared, and what isolation will be your fate then! Think of this, and
think, too, how, in assuring your own future, you rescue mine."
Very differently from his former speech did the present affect her;
and her cheeks glowed and her eyes flashed as she said, "I have never
intrusted my fate to your keeping, sir; and you may spare yourself all
anxiety about it."
"You mistake me. You wrong me, Josephine--"
"You wrong yourself when you call me by my Christian name; and you arm
me with distrust of one who would presume upon an interest he has not
created."
"You refuse me, then?" said he, slowly and calmly.
"Once, and forever!"
"It may be that you are mistaken, Miss Barrington. It may be that this
other affection, which you prefer to mine, is but the sickly sentiment
of a foolish boy, whose life up to this has not given one single
guarantee, nor shown one single trait of those which make 'true and
gallant gentlemen.' But you have made your choice."
"I have," said she, with a low but firm voice.
"You acknowledge, then, that I was right," cried he, suddenly; "there is
a prior attachment? Your heart is not your own to give?"
"And by what right do you presume to question me? Who are you, that
dares to do this?"
"Who am I?" cried he, and for once his voice rose to the discordant ring
of passion.
"Yes, that was my question," repeated she, firmly.
"So, then, you have had your lesson, young lady," said he; and the words
came from him with a hissing sound, that indicated intense anger. "Who
am I? You want my birth, my parentage, my bringing up! Had you no friend
who could have asked this in your stead? Or were all those around you
so bereft of courage that they deputed to a young girl what should have
been the office of a man?"
Though the savage earnestness of his manner startled, it did not
affright her; and it was with a cold quietness she said, "If you had
known my father, Major Stapylton, I suspect you would not have accused
his daughter of cowardice!"
"Was he so very terrible?" said he, with a smile that was half a sneer.
"He would have been, to a man like you."
"To a man like me,--a man like me! Do you know, young lady, that either
your words are very idle words or very offensive ones?"
"And yet I have no wish to recall them, sir."
"It would be better you could find some one to sustain them.
Unfortunately, however, you cannot ask that gallant gentleman we were
just talking of; for it is only the other day, and after passing over
to Calais to meet me, his friends pretend that there is some obstacle
to our meeting. I owe my tailor or my bootmaker something; or I have
not paid my subscription to a club; or I have left an unsettled bill ar
Baden. I really forget the precise pretext; but it was one which to them
seemed quite sufficient to balk me of a redress, and at the same time to
shelter their friend."
"I will not believe one word of it, sir!"
"Well, we have at least arrived at a perfect frankness in our
intercourse. May I ask you, young lady, which of your relatives has
suggested your present course! Is it to your aunt or to your grandfather
I must go for an explanation?"
"I suspect it is to me, Major Stapylton," said Barrington, as he came
from behind Josephine. "It is to me you must address yourself. Fifine,
my dear, your aunt is looking for you; go and tell her, too, that I am
quite ready for tea, and you will find me here when it is ready. Major
Stapylton and I will take a stroll along the river-side." Now this last
was less an invitation than a sort of significant hint to Stapylton that
his host had no intention to ask him to cross his threshold, at least
for the present; and, indeed, as Barrington passed out and closed the
wicket after him, he seemed as though closing the entrance forever.
With a manner far more assured thau his wont, Barrington said: "I have
been in pursuit of you, Major Stapylton, since four o'clock. I missed
you by having taken the road instead of the river; and am much grieved
that the communication I have to make you should not take place anywhere
rather than near my roof or within my own gates."
"I am to suppose from your words, sir, that what you are about to say
can scarcely be said to a friend; and if so, cannot you hit upon a more
convenient mode of making your communication?"
"I think not. I believe that I shall be dealing more fairly with you by
saying what I have to say in person."
"Go on," said Stapylton, calmly, as the other paused.
"You are aware," continued Barrington, "that the chief obstacle to a
settlement of the claims I have long preferred against the India Company
has been a certain document which they possess, declaring that a
large portion of the territory held by the Rajah of Luckerabad was not
amenable to the laws that regulate succession, being what is called
'Lurkar-teea,'--conquered country,--over which, under no circumstances,
could the Rajah exercise prospective rights. To this deed, for their
better protection, the Company obtained the signature and seal of the
Rajah himself, by means which, of course, we could never discover; but
they held it, and always declared that no portion of my son's claim
could extend to these lands. Now, as they denied that he could
succeed to what are called the 'Turban lands,' meaning the right of
sovereignty--being a British subject--on the one hand, and rejected
his claim to these conquered countries on the other,--they excluded him
altogether."
"My dear sir," said Stapylton, mildly, "I'm shocked to interrupt you,
but I am forced to ask, what is the intimate bearing of all this upon
me, or on your position towards me?"
"Have a little patience, sir, and suffer me to proceed. If it should
turn out that this document--I mean that which bears the signature and
seal of the Rajah--should be a forgery; if, I say, it could be shown
that what the India Board have long relied on to sustain their case and
corroborate their own view could be proved false, a great point would be
gained towards the establishment of our claim."
"Doubtless," said Stapylton, with the half-peevish indifference of one
listening against his will.
"Well, there is a good prospect of this," said Barring-ton, boldly.
"Nay, more, it is a certainty."
"Mr. Barrington," said Stapylton, drawing himself haughtily up, "a few
hours ago this history would have had a very great interest for me. My
hopes pointed to a very close relationship with your family; the last
hour has sufficed to dispel those hopes. Your granddaughter has rejected
me so decidedly that I cannot presume to suppose a change in her opinion
possible. Let me not then, obtain any share in your confidence to which
I have no right whatever."
"What I am about to say will have more interest for you, sir," continued
Barrington. "I am about to mention a name that you will recognize,--the
Moonshee, Ali Gohur."
Stapylton started, and dropped the cigar he was smoking. To take out
another and light it, however, sufficed to employ him, as he murmured
between his teeth, "Go on."
"This man says--" continued Barrington.
"Said, perhaps, if you like," broke in Stapylton, "for he died some
months ago."
"No; he is alive at this hour. He was on board the Indiaman that was run
down by the transport. He was saved and carried on board the 'Regulus'
by the intrepidity of young Dill. He is now recovering rapidly from the
injuries he received, and at the date of the letter which I hold here,
was able to be in daily communication with Colonel Hunter, who is the
writer of this."
"I wish the gallant Colonel honester company. Are you aware, Mr.
Barrington, that you are speaking of one of the greatest rascals of a
country not famed for its integrity?"
"He lays no claim to such for the past; but he would seem desirous to
make some reparation for a long course of iniquity."
"Charmed for his sake, and that of his well-wishers, if he have any.
But, once again, sir, and at all the risk of appearing very impatient,
what concern has all this for me?"
"A great deal, sir. The Moonshee declares that he has been for years
back in close correspondence with a man we long since believed dead,
and that this man was known to have communicated constantly with the
law advisers of the India Board in a manner adverse to us, he being
none other than the son of the notorious Sam Edwardes, whom he always
addressed under cover to Captain Horace Stapylton, Prince's Hussars."
"This is--strange enough, when one thinks of the quarter it comes
from--perfectly true. I came to know Edwardes when on my voyage home,
invalided. He took immense trouble about me, nursed and tended me,
and, in return, asked as a favor to have some letters he was expecting
addressed to my care. I neither knew who he was, nor cared. He got
his letters, and I suppose read them; but of their contents, I, it is
needless to say, know nothing. I am speaking of a dozen years ago, or,
at least, eight or ten, for since that time I have never heard of either
Edwardes or his friend."
"He tells a different story. He asserts that to his letters, forwarded
to the same address up to the period of last March, he regularly
received replies; but at last finding that the writer was disposed to
get rid of him, he obtained means to circulate a report of his death,
and sailed for Europe to prefer his claims, whatever they be, in
person."
"And if every word of this were true, Mr. Barrington, which I don't
suspect it is, how, in the name of common sense, does it concern me? I
don't suppose I ever took my own letters at a post-office twice in my
life. My servant, who has lived with me fourteen years, may, for aught I
know, have been bribed to abstract these letters on their arrival; they
would be easily recognized by the very superscription. This is one way
the thing might have been done. There may have been fifty more, for
aught I know or care."
"But you don't deny that you knew Edwardes, and had a close intimacy
with him?--a circumstance which you never revealed to Withering or
myself."
"It is not at all improbable I may have known half a dozen of that name.
It is by no means an uncommon one, not to say that I have a singularly
infelicitous memory for people's names. But for the last time, sir, I
must protest against this conversation going any further. You have taken
upon you, I would hope without intending it, the tone of a French Juge
d'Instruction in the interrogation of a prisoner. You have questioned
and cross-questioned me, asking how I can account for this, or explain
that. Now, I am ready to concede a great deal to your position as my
host, and to your years, but really I must entreat of you not to push my
deference for these beyond the limits of the respect I owe myself. You
very properly warned me at the opening of this conversation that it
ought not to have the sanction of your roof-tree. I have only to beg
that if it is to go any further, that it be conducted in such a shape
as is usual between gentlemen who have an explanation to ask, or a
satisfaction to demand."
There was consummate craft in giving the discussion this turn. Stapylton
well knew the nature of the man he was addressing, and that after the
passing allusion to his character as a host, he only needed to hint at
the possibility of a meeting to recall him to a degree of respect only
short of deference for his opponent.
"I defer to you at once, Major Stapylton," said the old man, with a
bland courtesy, as he uncovered and bowed. "There was a time when I
should scarcely have required the admonition you have given me."
"I am glad to perceive that you understand me so readily," said
Stapylton, who could scarcely repress the joy he felt at the success of
his diversion; "and that nothing may mar our future understanding, this
is my address in London, where I shall wait your orders for a week."
Though the stroke was shrewdly intended, and meant to throw upon
Barrington all the onus of the provocation, the Major little suspected
that it was the one solitary subject of which his opponent was a master.
On the "duello" Barrington was an authority beyond appeal, and no
subtlety, however well contrived, could embarrass or involve him.
"I have no satisfaction to claim at your hands, Major Stapylton," said
he, calmly. "My friend, Mr. Withering, when he sent me these letters,
knew you were my guest, and he said, 'Read them to Major Stapylton. Let
him know what is said of him, and who says it.'"
"And, perhaps, you ought to add, sir, who gives it the sanction of his
belief," broke in Stapylton, angrily. "You never took the trouble to
recite these charges till they obtained your credence."
"You have said nothing to disprove them," said the old man, quickly.
"That is enough,--quite enough, sir; we understand each other perfectly.
You allege certain things against me as injuries done you, and you wait
for me to resent the imputation. I 'll not balk you, be assured of it.
The address I have given you in London will enable you to communicate
with me when you arrive there; for I presume this matter had better be
settled in France or Holland."
"I think so," said Barrington, with the air of a man thoroughly at his
ease.
"I need not say, Mr. Barrington, the regret it gives me that it was not
one of my detractors himself, and not their dupe, that should occupy
this place."
"The dupe, sir, is very much at your service."
"Till we meet again," said Stapylton, raising his hat as he turned away.
In his haste and the confusion of the moment, he took the path that
led towards the cottage; nor did he discover his mistake till he heard
Barrington's voice calling out to Darby,--
"Get the boat ready to take Major Stapylton to Inistioge."
"You forget none of the precepts of hospitality," said Stapylton,
wheeling hastily around, and directing his steps towards the river.
Barrington looked after him as he went, and probably in his long and
varied life, crossed with many a care and many troubles, he had never
felt the pain of such severe self-reproach as in that moment. To see his
guest, the man who had sat at his board and eaten his salt, going out
into the dreary night without one hospitable effort to detain him,
without a pledge to his health, without a warm shake of his hand, or one
hearty wish for his return.
"Dear, dear!" muttered he, to himself, "what is the world come to! I
thought I had no more experiences to learn of suffering; but here is
a new one. Who would have thought to see the day that Peter Barrington
would treat his guest this fashion?"
"Are you coming in to tea, grandpapa?" cried Josephine, from the garden.
"Here I am, my dear!"
"And your guest, Peter, what has become of him?" said Dinah.
"He had some very urgent business at Kilkenny; something that could not
admit of delay, I opine."
"But you have not let him go without his letters, surely. Here are all
these formidable-looking despatches, on his Majesty's service, on the
chimney-piece."
"How forgetful of me!" cried he, as, snatching them up, he hastened down
to the river-side. The boat, however, had just gone; and although he
shouted and called at the top of his voice, no answer came, and he
turned back at last, vexed and disappointed.
"I shall have to start for Dublin to-morrow, Dinah," said he, as he
walked thoughtfully up and down the room. "I must have Withering's
advice on these letters. There are very pressing matters to be thought
of here, and I can take Major Stapylton's despatches with me. I am
certain to hear of him somewhere."
Miss Barrington turned her eyes full upon him, and watched him narrowly.
She was a keen detector of motives, and she scanned her brother's
face with no common keenness, and yet she could see nothing beyond the
preoccupation she had often seen. There was no impatience, no anxiety. A
shade more thoughtful, perhaps, and even that passed off, as he sat down
to his tea, and asked Fifine what commissions she had for the capital.
"You will leave by the evening mail, I suppose?" said Miss Barrington.
"No, Dinah, night travelling wearies me. I will take the coach as it
passes the gate to-morrow at five; this will bring me in time to catch
Withering at his late dinner, and a pleasanter way to finish a day's
travel no man need ask for."
Nothing could be more easily spoken than these words, and Miss Dinah
felt reassured by them, and left the room to give some orders about his
journey.
"Fifine, darling," said Barrington, after a pause, "do you like your
life here?"
"Of course I do, grandpapa. How could I wish for one more happy?"
"But it is somewhat dull for one so young,--somewhat solitary for a
fair, bright creature, who might reasonably enough care for pleasure and
the world."
"To me it is a round of gayety, grandpapa; so that I almost felt
inclined yesterday to wish for some quiet davs with aunt and
yourself,--some of those dreamy days like what we had in Germany."
"I fear me much, darling, that I contribute but little to the pleasure.
My head is so full of one care or another, I am but sorry company,
Fifine."
"If you only knew how dull we are without you! How heavily the day drags
on even with the occupations you take no share in; how we miss your
steps on the stairs and your voice in the garden, and that merry laugh
that sets ourselves a-laughing just by its own ring."
"And you would miss me, then?" said he, as he pushed the hair from her
temples, and stared steadfastly at her face,--"you would miss me?"
"It would only be half life without you," cried she, passionately.
"So much the worse,--so much the worse!" muttered he; and he turned
away, and drew his hand across his eyes. "This life of ours, Fifine, is
a huge battle-field; and though the comrades fall fast around him, the
brave soldier will fight on to the last."
"You don't want a dress-coat, brother Peter, to dine with Withering,
so I have just put up what will serve you for three days, or four, at
furthest," said Dinah, entering. "What will be the extent of your stay?"
"Let me have a black coat, Dinah; there 's no saying what great man may
not ask for my company; and it might be a week before I get back again."
"There's no necessity it should be anything of the kind, Peter; and with
your habits an hotel life is scarcely an economy. Come, Fifine, get to
bed, child. You'll have to be up at daybreak. Your grandpapa won't think
his coffee drinkable, if it is not made by your hands."
And with this remark, beautifully balanced between a reproof and
a flattery, she proceeded to blow out the candles, which was her
accustomed mode of sending her company to their rooms.
CHAPTER XV. THE OLD LEAVEN
Withering arrived at his own door just as Barrington drove up to it. "I
knew my letter would bring you up to town, Barrington," said he; "and I
was so sure of it that I ordered a saddle of mutton for your dinner, and
refused an invitation to the Chancellor's."
"And quite right too. Iam far better company, Tom. Are we to be all
alone?"
"All alone."
"That was exactly what I wanted. Now, as I need a long evening with you,
the sooner they serve the soup the better; and be sure you give your
orders that nobody be admitted."
If Mr. Withering's venerable butler, an official long versed in the
mysteries of his office, were to have been questioned on the subject,
it is not improbable he would have declared that he never assisted at a
pleasanter tte- tte than that day's dinner. They enjoyed their good
dinner and their good wine like men who bring to the enjoyment a ripe
experience of such pleasures, and they talked with the rare zest of good
talkers and old friends.
"We are in favor with Nicholas," said Withering, as the butler withdrew,
and left them alone, "or he would never have given us that bottle of
port. Do you mark, Barrington, it's the green seal that John Bushe
begged so hard for one night, and all unsuccessfully."
"It is rare stuff!" said Barrington, looking at it between him and the
light.
"And it was that story of yours of the Kerry election that won it. The
old fellow had to rush out of the room to have his laugh out."
"Do you know, Tom," said Barrington, as he sipped his wine, "I believe,
in another generation, nobody will laugh at all. Since you and I were
boys, the world has taken a very serious turn. Not that it is much
wiser, or better, or more moral, or more cultivated, but it is graver.
The old jollity would be now set down simply for vulgarity, and with
many people a joke is only short of an insult."
"Shall I tell you why, Peter? We got our reputation for wit, just as we
made our name for manufacture, and there sprung up a mass of impostors
in consequence,--fellows who made poor jokes and rotten calicoes, that
so disgusted the world that people have gone to France for their fun,
and to Germany for their furniture. That is, to my taking, the reason of
all this social reaction."
"Perhaps you are right, Tom. Old Joe Millers are not unlike cloth made
out of devil's dust. One can't expect much wear out of either."
"We must secure another bottle from that bin before Nicholas changes his
mind," said Withering, rising to ring the bell.
"No, Tom, not for me. I want all the calm and all the judgment I can
muster, and don't ask me to take more wine. I have much to say to you."
"Of course you have. I knew well that packet of letters would bring you
up to town; but you have had scarcely time to read them."
"Very hurriedly, I confess. They reached me yesterday afternoon; and
when I had run my eyes hastily over them, I said, 'Stapylton must see
this at once.' The man was my guest,--he was under my roof,--there could
not be a question about how to deal with him. He was out, however, when
the packet reached my hands; and while the pony was being harnessed, I
took another look over that letter from Colonel Hunter. It shocked
me, Tom, I confess; because there flashed upon me quite suddenly the
recollection of the promptitude with which the India Board at home here
were provided with an answer to each demand we made. It was not merely
that when we advanced a step they met us; but we could scarcely meditate
a move that they were not in activity to repel it."
"I saw that, too, and was struck by it," said Withering.
"True enough, Tom. I remember a remark of yours one day. 'These people,'
said you, 'have our range so accurately, one would suspect they
had stepped the ground.'" The lawyer smiled at the compliment to
his acuteness, and the other went on: "As I read further, I thought
Stapylton had been betrayed,--his correspondent in India had shown
his letters. 'Our enemies,' said I, 'have seen our despatches, and are
playing with our cards on the table.' No thought of distrust,--not a
suspicion against his loyalty had ever crossed me till I met him. I came
unexpectedly upon him, however, before the door, and there was a ring
and resonance in his voice as I came up that startled me! Passion
forgets to shut the door sometimes, and one can see in an angry mind
what you never suspected in the calm one. I took him up at once, without
suffering him to recover his composure, and read him a part of Hunter's
letter. He was ready enough with his reply; he knew the Moonshee by
reputation as a man of the worst character, but had suffered him to
address certain letters under cover to him, as a convenience to the
person they were meant for, and who was no other than the son of the
notorious Sam Edwardes. 'Whom you have known all this while,' said I,
'without ever acknowledging to us?'
"'Whom I did know some years back,' replied he, 'but never thought of
connecting with the name of Colonel Barrington's enemy.' All this was
possible enough, Tom; besides, his manner was frank and open in
the extreme. It was only at last, as I dwelt, what he deemed too
pertinaciously, on this point, that he suddenly lost control of
himself, and said, 'I will have no more of this'--or, 'This must go no
further'--or some words to that effect."
"Ha! the probe had touched the sore spot, eh?" cried Withering. "Go on!"
"'And if you desire further explanations from me, you must ask for them
at the price men pay for inflicting unmerited insult.'"
"Cleverly turned, cleverly done," said Withering; "but you were not to
be deceived and drawn off by that feint, eh?"
"Feint or not, it succeeded, Tom. He made me feel that I had injured
him; and as he would not accept of my excuses,--as, in fact, he did not
give me time to make them--"
"He got you into a quarrel, is n't that the truth?" asked Withering,
hotly.
"Come, come, Tom, be reasonable; he had perfect right on his side. There
was what he felt as a very grave imputation upon him; that is, I had
made a charge, and his explanation had not satisfied me,--or, at all
events, I had not said I was satisfied,--and we each of us, I take it,
were somewhat warmer than we need have been."
"And you are going to meet him,--going to fight a duel?"
"Well, if I am, it will not be the first time."
"And can you tell for what? Will you be able to make any man of common
intelligence understand for what you are going out?"
"I hope so. I have the man in my eye. No, no, don't make a wry face,
Tom. It's another old friend I was thinking of to help me through this
affair, and I sincerely trust he will not be so hard to instruct as you
imagine."
"How old are you, Barrington?"
"Dinah says eighty-one; but I suspect she cheats me. I think I am
eighty-three."
"And is it at eighty-three that men fight duels?"
"' Not if they can help it, Tom, certainly. I have never been out since
I shot Tom Connelly in the knee, which was a matter of forty years ago,
and I had good hopes it was to be my last exploit of this kind. But what
is to be done if a man tells you that your age is your protection; that
if it had not been for your white hairs and your shaking ankles, that
he 'd have resented your conduct or your words to him? Faith, I think it
puts a fellow on his mettle to show that his heart is all right, though
his hand may tremble."
"I 'll not take any share in such a folly. I tell you, Barrington, the
world for whom you are doing this will be the very first to scout its
absurdity. Just remember for a moment we are not living in the old days
before the Union, and we have not the right, if we had the power, to
throw our age back into the barbarism it has escaped from."
"Barbarism! The days of poor Yelverton, and Ponsonby, and Harry Grattan,
and Parsons, and Ned Lysaght, barbarism! Ah! my dear Tom, I wish we had
a few of such barbarians here now, and I 'd ask for another bottle or
two of that port."
"I'll not give it a milder word; and what's more, I'll not suffer you to
tarnish a time-honored name by a folly which even a boy would be blamed
for. My dear old friend, just grant me a little patience."
"This is cool, certainly," said Barrington, laughing. "You have said all
manner of outrageous things to me for half an hour unopposed, and now
you cry have patience."
"Give me your honor now that this shall not go further."
"I cannot, Tom,--I assure you, I cannot."
"What do you mean by 'you cannot'?" cried Withering, angrily.
"I mean just what I said. If you had accepted a man's brief, Tom
Withering, there is a professional etiquette which would prevent your
giving it up and abandoning him; and so there are situations between
men of the world which claim exactly as rigid an observance. I told
Stapylton I would be at his orders, and I mean to keep my word."
"Not if you had no right to pledge it; not if I can prove to you that
this quarrel was a mere got-up altercation to turn you from an inquiry
which this man dare not face."
"This is too subtle for me, Withering,--far too subtle."
"No such thing, Barrington; but I will make it plainer. How if the man
you are going to meet had no right to the name he bears?"
"What do I care for his name?"
"Don't you care for the falsehood by which he has assumed one that is
not his own?"
"I may be sorry that he is not more clean-handed; but I tell you again,
Tom, they never indulged such punctilios in our young days, and I 'm too
old to go to school again!"
"I declare, Barrington, you provoke me," said the lawyer, rising, and
pacing the room with hasty strides. "After years and years of weary
toil, almost disheartened by defeat and failure, we at last see the
outline of land; a few more days--or it may be hours--of perseverance
may accomplish our task. Since I arose this morning I have learned more
of our case, seen my way more clearly through matters which have long
puzzled me, than the cost of years has taught me. I have passed four
hours with one who would give his life to serve you, but whose name
I was not at liberty to divulge, save in the last necessity, and the
reasons for which reserve I heartily concur in; and now, by a rash and
foolish altercation, you would jeopardy everything. Do you wonder if I
lose temper?"
"You have got me into such a state of bewilderment, Tom, that I don't
know what I am asked to agree to. But who is your friend,--is n't it a
woman?"
"It is not a woman."
"I'd have bet five pounds it was! When as sharp a fellow as you takes
the wrong line of country, it's generally a woman is leading the way
over the fences."
"This time your clever theory is at fault."
"Well, who is it? Out with him, Tom. I have not so many stanch friends
in the world that I can afford to ignore them."
"I will tell you his name on one condition."
"I agree. What is the condition?"
"It is this: that when you hear it you will dismiss from your
mind--though it be only for a brief space--all the prejudices that years
may have heaped against him, and suffer me to show you that you, with
all your belief in your own fairness, are not just; and with a firm
conviction in your own generosity, might be more generous. There 's my
condition!"
"Well, it must be owned I am going to pay pretty smartly for my
information," said Barrington, laughing. "And if you are about to
preach to me, it will not be a 'charity' sermon; but, as I said before,
I agree to everything."
Withering stopped his walk and resumed it again. It was evident he had
not satisfied himself how he should proceed, and he looked agitated and
undecided. "Barrington," said he, at last, "you have had about as many
reverses in life as most men, and must have met with fully your share of
ingratitude and its treatment. Do you feel, now, in looking back, that
there are certain fellows you cannot forgive?"
"One or two, perhaps, push me harder than the rest; but if I have no
gout flying about me, I don't think I bear them any malice."
"Well, you have no gouty symptoms now, I take it?"
"Never felt better for the last twenty years."
"That is as it should be; for I want to talk to you of a man who, in all
our friendship, you have never mentioned to me, but whose name I know
will open an old wound,--Ormsby Conyers."
Barrington laid down the glass he was lifting to his lips, and covered
his face with both his hands, nor for some moments did he speak a word.
"Withering," said he, and his voice trembled as he spoke, "even your
friendship has scarcely the right to go this far. The injury the man you
speak of did me meets me every morning as I open my eyes, and my first
prayer each day is that I may forgive him, for every now and then, as my
lone lot in life comes strongly before me, I have need to pray for this;
but I have succeeded at last,--I have forgiven him from my heart; but,
dear friend, let us not talk of what tears open wounds that bleed afresh
at a touch. I beseech you, let all that be a bygone."
"That is more than I can do, Barrington; for it is not to me you must
acknowledge you have forgiven this man,--you must tell it to himself."
"That is not needed, Tom. Thousands of long miles separate us, and will
in all likelihood separate us to the last. What does he want with my
forgiveness, which is less a question between him and me than between me
and my own heart?"
"And yet it is what he most desires on earth; he told me so within an
hour!"
"Told you so,--and within an hour?"
"Yes, Barrington, he is here. Not in the house," added he, hastily,
for the suddenness of the announcement had startled the old man, and
agitated him greatly. "Be calm, my dear friend," said Withering, laying
a hand on the other's shoulder. "He who is now come to claim your
forgiveness has never injured you to the extent you believe. He asks it
as the last tribute to one he loved only less than you loved him. He has
told me everything; never sparing himself, nor seeking by any subtlety
to excuse a particle of his conduct. Let me tell you that story as I
heard it. It will be some solace to you to know that your noble-hearted
son inspired a friendship which, after the long lapse of years, extracts
such an atonement as one act of disloyalty to it could demand. This
was Ormsby Conyers's one and only treason to the love that bound them.
Listen to it!"
Barrington tried to speak, but could not; so he nodded an assent, and
Withering continued. His story was that which the reader has already
heard from the lips of Conyers himself, and the old lawyer told it well.
If he did not attempt to extenuate the offence and wrong of Conyers, he
showed the power and strength of an affection which could make one of
the haughtiest of men come forward to accuse himself, and at every cost
of humiliation vindicate the noble nature of his friend.
"And why not have avowed all this before?--why not have spared himself
years of self-accusing, and me years of aggravated misery?" cried
Barrington.
"He did make the attempt. He came to England about eighteen years ago,
and his first care was to write to you. He asked to be allowed to see
you, and sent you at the same time an admission that he had injured you,
and was come to seek your forgiveness."
"That's true, Tom; all strictly true. I remember all about it. His
letter was such a one as an enemy might have used to crush him. My own
temper at the time was not to be trusted too far; sorrow was making
me cruel, and might make me vindictive; so I sent it back to him, and
hinted it was safer in his hands than mine."
"And he has never forgotten your generosity. He said, 'It was what well
became the father of George Barrington. '"
"If he is here in this city, now, let me see him. Remember, Withering,
when a man comes to my age his time is short. Cannot we go to him at
once?"
"Not feeling certain of your coming up to town to-day, I had arranged
with Conyers to start for 'The Home' tomorrow; we were to await the post
hour, and, if no letter came from you, to leave at ten o'clock. I was
to take him up at Elvidge's Hotel. What say you if I drive him down to
Reynolds's? You stop there, I know."
"With all my heart, Tom. I am fully as impatient as he can be to sign
and seal our reconciliation. Indeed, I feel myself already less sinned
against than sinning; and an act of forgiveness is only an exchange of
prisoners between us. If you knew how young I feel again at all this,
Withering," said he, grasping his friend's hand. "What a happiness to
know that poor George's memory is so revered that one who has failed
towards him in fidelity should come to expiate the wrong thus openly! My
fine noble-hearted boy deserved this tribute! And he told you how they
loved each other; in what a brotherhood they lived; and what a glorious
fellow George was? Did he tell you of his gentleness?--womanly softness
it was, Tom. A careless observer might have said there was no stuff in
him to make a soldier, and yet where was there his equal? You heard what
he did at Naghapoor and Meerutan, where he held a mountain-pass with
three squadrons against a whole army corps, and never owned to being
wounded till he fell fainting from his horse on the retreat. Oh, let me
not speak of these things, or my heart will burst I must leave you, old
friend; this agitation will unfit me for much that is before me; let me
go, I beseech you, and when you see me to-morrow, you 'll find I am all
myself again."
It was in silence they grasped each other's hand, and parted.
CHAPTER XVI. A HAPPY MEETING
Barrington scarcely closed his eyes that night after he had parted with
Withering, so full was he of thinking over all he had heard. "It was,"
as he repeated to himself over and over again, "'such glorious news' to
hear that it was no long-laid plot, no dark treachery, had brought poor
George to his grave, and that the trusted friend had not turned out a
secret enemy. How prone we are," thought he, "to suffer our suspicions
to grow into convictions, just by the mere force of time. Conyers was
neither better nor worse than scores of young fellows entering on life,
undisciplined in self-restraint, and untutored by converse with the
world; and in his sorrow and repentance he is far and away above most
men. It was fine of him to come thus, and become his own accuser, rather
than suffer a shade of reproach to rest upon the fame of his friend. And
this reparation he would have made years ago, but for my impatience. It
was I that would not listen,--would not admit it.
"I believe in my heart, then, this confession has a higher value for
me than would the gain of our great suit. It is such a testimony to my
brave boy as but one man living could offer. It is a declaration to the
world that says, 'Here am I, high in station, covered with dignities
and rich in rewards; yet there was a man whose fate has never interested
you, over whose fall you never sorrowed; hundreds of times my superior.'
What a reward is this for all my life of toil and struggle,--what a
glorious victory, when the battle looked so doubtful! People will see at
last it is not an old man's phantasy; it is not the headlong affection
of a father for his son has made me pursue this reparation for him here.
There is a witness 'come to judgment,' who will tell them what George
Barrington was; how noble as a man, how glorious as a soldier."
While the old man revelled in the happiness of these thoughts, so
absorbed was he by them that he utterly forgot the immediate object
which had occasioned his journey,--forgot Stapylton and the meeting, and
all that had led to it. Thus passed the hours of the night; and as the
day broke, he arose, impatient to actual feverishness for the coming
interview. He tried by some occupation to fill up the time. He sat down
to write to his sister an account of all Withering had told him, leaving
the rest to be added after the meeting; but he found, as he read it
over, that after the mention of George's name, nothing dropped from
his pen but praises of him. It was all about his generosity, his
open-heartedness, and his bravery. "This would seem downright
extravagant," said he, as he crushed the paper in his hand, "till she
hears it from the lips of Conyers himself." He began another letter, but
somehow again he glided into the self-same channel.
"This will never do," said he; "there's nothing for it but a brisk
walk." So saying he sallied out into the deserted streets, for few
were about at that early hour. Barrington turned his steps towards the
country, and soon gained one of those shady alleys which lead towards
Finglas. It was a neighborhood he had once known well, and a favorite
resort of those pleasant fellows who thought they compensated for a hard
night at Daly's by sipping syllabub of a morning on a dewy meadow. He
once had rented a little cottage there; a fancy of poor George's it
was, that there were some trout in the stream beside it; and Barrington
strolled along till he came to a little mound, from which he could see
the place, sadly changed and dilapidated since he knew it. Instead of
the rustic bridge that crossed the river, a single plank now spanned the
stream, and in the disorder and neglect of all around, it was easy to
see it had fallen to the lot of a peasant to live in it. As
Barrington was about to turn away, he saw an old man--unmistakably a
gentleman--ascending the hill, with a short telescope in his hand.
As the path was a narrow one, he waited, therefore, for the other's
arrival, before he began to descend himself. With a politeness which in
his younger days Irish gentlemen derived from intercourse with France,
Barring-ton touched his hat as he passed the stranger, and the other, as
if encouraged by the show of courtesy, smiled as he returned the salute,
and said,--
"Might I take the liberty to ask you if you are acquainted with this
locality?"
"Few know it better, or, at least, knew it once," said Barrington.
"It was the classic ground of Ireland in days past," said the stranger.
"I have heard that Swift lived here."
"Yes; but you cannot see his house from this. It was nearer to Santry,
where you see that wood yonder. There was, however, a celebrity once
inhabited that small cottage before us. It was the home of Parnell."
"Is that Parnell's cottage?" asked the stranger, with eagerness; "that
ruined spot, yonder?"
"Yes. It was there he wrote some of his best poems. I knew the room well
he lived in."
"How I would like to see it!" cried the other.
"You are an admirer of Parnell, then?" said Barrington, with a smile of
courteous meaning.
"I will own to you, sir, it was less of Parnell I was thinking than of
a dear friend who once talked to me of that cottage. He had lived there,
and cherished the memory of that life when far away from it; and so
well had he described every walk and path around it, each winding of the
river, and every shady nook, that I had hoped to recognize it without a
guide."
"Ah, it is sadly changed of late. Your friend had not probably seen it
for some years?"
"Let me see. It was in a memorable year he told me he lived there,--when
some great demonstration was made by the Irish volunteers, with the
Bishop of Down at their head. The Bishop dined there on that day."
"The Earl of Bristol dined that day with me, there," said Barrington,
pointing to the cottage.
"May I ask with whom I have the honor to speak, sir?" said the stranger,
bowing.
"Was it George Barrington told you this?" said the old man, trembling
with eagerness: "was it he who lived here? I may ask, sir, for I am his
father!"
"And I am Ormsby Conyers," said the other; and his face became pale, and
his knees trembled as he said it.
"Give me your hand, Conyers," cried Barrington,--"the hand that my dear
boy has so often pressed in friendship. I know all that you were to each
other, all that you would be to his memory."
"Can you forgive me?" said Conyers.
"I have, for many a year. I forgave you when I thought you had been his
enemy. I now know you had only been your own to sacrifice such love,
such affection as he bore you."
"I never loved him more than I have hated myself for my conduct towards
him."
"Let us talk of George,--he loved us both," said Barrington, who still
held Conyers by the hand. "It is a theme none but yourself can rival me
in interest for."
It was not easy for Conyers to attain that calm which could enable him
to answer the other's questions; but by degrees he grew to talk freely,
assisted a good deal by the likeness of the old man to his son,--a
resemblance in manner even as much as look,--and thus, before they
reached town again, they had become like familiar friends.
Barrington could never hear enough of George; even of the incidents he
had heard of by letter, he liked to listen to the details again, and to
mark how all the traits of that dear boy had been appreciated by others.
"I must keep you my prisoner," said Barrington, as they gained the door
of his hotel. "The thirst I have is not easily slaked; remember that for
more than thirty years I have had none to talk to me of my boy! I know
all about your appointment with Withering; he was to have brought you
here this morning to see me, and my old friend will rejoice when he
comes and finds us here together."
"He was certain you would come up to town," said Conyers, "when you got
his letters. You would see at once that there were matters which should
be promptly dealt with; and he said, 'Barrington will be my guest at
dinner to-morrow.'"
"Eh?--how?--what was it all about? George has driven all else out of my
head, and I declare to you that I have not the very vaguest recollection
of what Wither-ing's letters contained. Wait a moment; a light is
breaking on me. I do remember something of it all now. To be sure! What
a head I have! It was all about Stapylton. By the way, General, how you
would have laughed had you heard the dressing Withering gave me last
night, when I told him I was going to give Stapylton a meeting."
"A hostile meeting?"
"Well, if you like to give it that new-fangled name, General, which I
assure you was not in vogue when I was a young man. Withering rated me
soundly for the notion, reminded me of my white hairs and such other
disqualifications, and asked me indignantly, 'What the world would say
when they came to hear of it?' 'What would the world say if they heard
I declined it, Tom?' was my answer. Would they not exclaim, 'Here is one
of that fire-eating school who are always rebuking us for our laxity in
matters of honor; look at him and say, are these the principles of his
sect?'"
Conyers shook his head dissentingly, and smiled.
"No, no!" said Barrington, replying to the other's look, "you are
just of my own mind! A man who believes you to have injured him claims
reparation as a matter of right. I could not say to Stapylton, 'I will
not meet you!'"
"I did say so, and that within a fortnight."
"You said so, and under what provocation?"
"He grossly insulted my son, who was his subaltern; he outraged him by
offensive language, and he dared even to impugn his personal courage. It
was in one of those late riots where the military were called out; and
my boy, intrusted with the duty of dispersing an assemblage, stopped
to remonstrate where he might have charged, and actually relieved
the misery he had his orders to have trampled under the feet of
his squadron. Major Stapylton could have reprimanded, he might have
court-martialled him; he had no right to attempt to dishonor him. My son
left the service,--I made him leave on the spot,--and we went over to
France to meet this man. I sent for Proctor to be my boy's friend, and
my letter found him at Sir Gilbert Stapylton's, at Hollowcliffe. To
explain his hurried departure, Proctor told what called him away. 'And
will you suffer your friend to meet that adventurer,' said Sir Gilbert,
'who stole my nephew's name if he did not steal more?' To be brief, he
told that this fellow had lived with Colonel Howard Stapylton, British
Resident at Ghurtnapore, as a sort of humble private secretary. 'In
the cholera that swept the district Howard died, and although his will,
deposited at Calcutta, contained several legacies, the effects to redeem
them were not to be discovered. Meanwhile this young fellow assumed the
name of Stapylton, gave himself out for his heir, and even threatened
to litigate some landed property in England with Howard's brother. An
intimation that if he dared to put his menace in action a full inquiry
into his conduct should be made, stopped him, and we heard no more of
him,--at least, for a great many years. When an old Madras friend of
Howard's who came down to spend his Christmas, said, "Who do you think
I saw in town last week, but that young scamp Howard used to call his
Kitmagar, and who goes by the name of Stapylton?" we were so indignant
at first that we resolved on all manner of exposures; but learning that
he had the reputation of a good officer, and had actually distinguished
himself at Waterloo, we relented. Since that, other things have come to
our knowledge to make us repent our lenity. In fact, he is an adventurer
in its very worst sense, and has traded upon a certain amount of
personal courage to cover a character of downright ignominy.' Proctor,
on hearing all this, recalled me to England; and declared that he had
traced enough to this man's charge to show he was one whom no gentleman
could meet. It would appear that some recent discoveries had been made
about him at the Horse Guards also; for when Proctor asked for a certain
piece of information from one of his friends in office there, he heard,
for answer, 'We hope to know that, and more, in a day or two.'"
"Do you know that I 'm sorry for it,--heartily sorry?" said Barrington.
"The fellow had that stamp of manliness about him that would seem the
pledge of a bold, straightforward nature."
"I have a high value for courage, but it won't do everything."
"More 's the pity, for it renders all that it aids of tenfold more
worth."
"And on the back of all this discovery comes Hunter's letter, which
Withering has sent you, to show that this Stapylton has for years
back been supplying the Indian Directors with materials to oppose your
claims."
"Nothing ever puzzled us so much as the way every weak point of our
case was at once seized upon, and every doubt we ourselves entertained
exaggerated into an impassable barrier. Withering long suspected that
some secret enemy was at work within our own lines, and repeatedly said
that we were sold. The difficulty is, why this man should once have been
our enemy, and now should strive so eagerly to be not alone our friend,
but one of us. You have heard he proposed for my granddaughter?"
"Fred suspected his intentions in that quarter, but we were not certain
of them."
"And it is time I should ask after your noble-hearted boy. How is he,
and where?"
"He is here, at my hotel, impatiently waiting your permission to go down
to 'The Home.' He has a question to ask there, whose answer will be his
destiny."
"Has Josephine turned another head then?" said Barring-ton, laughing.
"She has won a very honest heart; as true and as honorable a nature as
ever lived," said Conyers, with emotion. "Your granddaughter does not
know, nor needs ever to know, the wrong I have done her father; and if
you have forgiven me, you will not remember it against my boy."
"But what do you yourself say to all this? You have never seen the
girl?"
"Fred has."
"You know nothing about her tastes, her temper, her bringing up."
"Fred does."
"Nor are you aware that the claim we have so long relied on is almost
certain to be disallowed. I have scarcely a hope now remaining with
regard to it."
"I have more than I need; and if Fred will let me have a bungalow in his
garden, I'll make it all over to him tomorrow."
"It is then with your entire consent he would make this offer?"
"With my whole heart in it! I shall never feel I have repaired the
injury I have done George Barrington till I have called his daughter my
own."
Old Barrington arose, and walked up and down with slow and measured
steps. At last he halted directly in front of General Conyers, and
said,--
"If you will do me one kindness, I will agree to everything. What am I
saying? I agree already; and I would not make a bargain of my consent;
but you will not refuse me a favor?"
"Ask me anything, and I promise it on the faith of a gentleman."
"It is this, then; that you will stand by me in this affair of
Stapylton's. I have gone too far for subtleties or niceties. It is no
question of who was his father, or what was his own bringing up. I have
told him I should be at his orders, and don't let me break my word."
"If you choose me for your friend, Barrington, you must not dictate how
I am to act for you."
"That is quite true; you are perfectly correct there," said the other,
in some confusion.
"On that condition, then, that I am free to do for you what I would
agree to in my own case, I accept the charge."
"And there is to be no humbug of consideration for my age and my white
hairs; none of that nonsense about a fellow with one leg in the grave.
Mark you, Conyers, I will stand none of these; I have never taken a writ
of ease not to serve on a jury, nor will I hear of one that exempts me
from the rights of a gentleman."
"I have got your full powers to treat, and you must trust me. Where are
we to find Stapylton's friend?"
"He gave me an address which I never looked at. Here it is!" and he drew
a card from his pocket.
"Captain Duff Brown, late Fifth Fusiliers, Holt's Hotel, Charing Cross."
"Do you know him?" asked Barrington, as the other stood silently
re-reading the address.
"Yes, thoroughly," said he, with a dry significance. "The man who
selects Duff Brown to act for him in an affair of honor must be in a
sore strait. It is a sorry indorsement to character. He had to leave the
service from the imputation of foul play in a duel himself; and I took
an active part against him."
"Will this make your position unpleasant to you,--would you rather not
act for me?"
"Quite the reverse. It is more than ever necessary you should have some
one who not only knows the men he is to deal with, but is known himself
to them. It is a preliminary will save a world of trouble."
"When can we set out?"
"To-night by the eight-o'clock packet, we can sail for Liverpool; but
let us first of all despatch Fred to 'The Home.' The poor boy will be
half dead with anxiety till he knows I have your permission."
"I 'll accredit him with a letter to my sister; not that he needs
it, for he is one of her prime favorites. And now for another point.
Withering must be made believe that we are all off together for the
country this evening. He is so opposed to this affair with Stapylton,
that he is in a mood to do anything to prevent it."
"Well thought of; and here comes the man himself in search of us."
"I have been half over the town after you this morning, General," said
Withering, as he entered; "and your son, too, could make nothing of your
absence. He is in the carriage at the door now, not knowing whether he
ought to come up."
"I 'll soon reassure him on that score," said Barrington, as he left the
room, and hastened downstairs with the step of one that defied the march
of time.
CHAPTER XVII. MEET COMPANIONSHIP
In a very modest chamber of a house in one of the streets which lead
from the Strand to the Thames, two persons sat at supper. It is no time
for lengthened introductions, and I must present Captain Duff Brown very
hurriedly to my reader, as he confronted his friend Stapylton at table.
The Captain was a jovial-looking, full-whiskered, somewhat corpulent
man, with a ready reply, a ready laugh, and a hand readier than either,
whether the weapon wielded was a billiard-cue or a pistol.
The board before them was covered with oysters and oyster-shells, porter
in its pewter, a square-shaped decanter of gin, and a bundle of cigars.
The cloth was dirty, the knives unclean, and the candles ill-matched and
of tallow; but the guests did not seem to have bestowed much attention
to these demerits, but ate and drank like men who enjoyed their fare.
"The best country in Europe,--the best in the world,--I call England
for a fellow who knows life," cried the Captain. "There is nothing you
cannot do; nothing you cannot have in it."
"With eight thousand a year, perhaps," said Stapylton, sarcastically.
"No need of anything like it. Does any man want a better supper than
we have had to-night? What better could he have? And the whole cost not
over five, or at most six shillings for the pair of us."
"You may talk till you are hoarse, Duff, but I'll not stay in it When
once I have settled these two or three matters I have told you of, I'll
start for--I don't much care whither. I'll go to Persia, or perhaps to
the Yankees."
"I always keep America for the finish!" said the other. "It is to
the rest of the world what the copper hell is to Crockford's,--the last
refuge when one walks in broken boots and in low company. But tell me,
what have you done to-day; where did you go after we parted?"
"I went to the Horse Guards, and saw Blanchard,--pompous old humbug
that he is. I told him that I had made up my mind to sell out; that I
intended to take service in a foreign army,--he hates foreigners,--and
begged he would expedite my affairs with his Royal Highness, as my
arrangements could not admit of delay."
"And he told you that there was an official routine, out of which no
officer need presume to expect his business could travel?"
"He told me no such thing. He flatly said, 'Your case is already before
the Commander-in-Chief, Major Stapylton, and you may rely on it there
will be no needless delay in dealing with it."
"That was a threat, I take it."
"Of course it was a threat; and I only said, 'It will be the first
instance of the kind, then, in the department,' and left him."
"Where to, after that?"
"I next went to Gregory's, the magistrate of police. I wanted to see the
informations the black fellow swore to; and as I knew a son of Gregory's
in the Carbiniers, I thought I could manage it; but bad luck would have
it that the old fellow should have in his hands some unsettled bills
with my indorsements on them,--fact; Gregory and I used to do a little
that way once,--and he almost got a fit when he heard my name."
"Tried back after that, eh?"
"Went on to Renshaw's and won fifty pounds at hazard, took Blake's odds
on Diadem, and booked myself for a berth in the Boulogne steamer, which
leaves at two this morning."
"You secured a passport for me, did n't you?"
"No. You'll have to come as my servant. The Embassy fellows were all
strangers to me, and said they would not give a separate passport
without seeing the bearer."
"All right. I don't dislike the second cabin, nor the ladies'-maids.
What about the pistols?"
[Illustration: 508]
"They are yonder under the great-coat. Renshaw lent them. They are not
very good, he says, and one of them hangs a little in the fire."
"They 'll be better than the old Irishman's, that's certain. You may
swear that his tools were in use early in the last century."
"And himself, too; that's the worst of it all. I wish it was not a
fellow that might be my grandfather."
"I don't know. I rather suspect, if I was given to compunctions, I'd
have less of them for shaking down the rotten ripe fruit than the
blossom."
"And he 's a fine old fellow, too," said Stapylton, half sadly.
"Why didn't you tell him to drop in this evening and have a little
cart?"
For a while Stapylton leaned his head on his hand moodily, and said
nothing.
"Cheer up, man! Taste that Hollands. I never mixed better," said Brown.
"I begin to regret now, Duff, that I did n't take your advice."
"And run away with her?"
"Yes, it would have been the right course, after all!"
"I knew it. I always said it. I told you over and over again what would
happen if you went to work in orderly fashion. They 'd at once say, 'Who
are your people,--where are they,--what have they?' Now, let a man be as
inventive as Daniel Defoe himself, there will always slip out some flaw
or other about a name, or a date,--dates are the very devil! But when
you have once carried her off, what can they do but compromise?"
"She would never have consented."
"I 'd not have asked her. I 'd have given her the benefit of the
customs of the land she lived in, and made it a regular abduction. Paddy
somebody and Terence something else are always ready to risk their necks
for a pint of whiskey and a breach of the laws."
"I don't think I could have brought myself to it."
"I could, I promise you."
"And there 's an end of a man after such a thing."
"Yes, if he fails. If he's overtaken and thrashed, I grant you he not
only loses the game, but gets the cards in his face, besides. But why
fail? Nobody fails when he wants to win,--when he determines to win.
When I shot De Courcy at Asterabad--"
"Don't bring up that affair, at least, as one of precedent, Duff. I
neither desire to be tried for a capital felony, nor to have committed
one."
"Capital fiddlesticks! As if men did not fight duels every day of the
week; the difference between guilt and innocence being that one fellow's
hand shook, and the other's was steady. De Courcy would have 'dropped'
me, if I'd have Jet him."
"And so you would have carried her off, Master Duff?" said Stapylton,
slowly.
"Yes; if she had the pot of money you speak of, and no Lord Chancellor
for a guardian. I 'd have made the thing sure at once."
"The money she will and must have; so much is certain."
"Then I 'd have made the remainder just as certain."
"It is a vulgar crime, Duff; it would be very hard to stoop to it."
"Fifty things are harder,--no cash, no credit are harder. The Fleet is
harder. But what is that noise? Don't you hear a knock at the door? Yes,
there's some one without who hasn't much patience." So saying, he arose
and walked to the door. As he opened it, he started back a little with
surprise, for it was a police constable stood before him.
"Not you, Captain, not you, sir! it's another gentleman I want. I
see him at the table there,--Major Stapylton." By this time the man
had entered the room and stood in front of the fire. "I have a warrant
against you, Major," said he, quietly. "Informations have been sworn
before Mr. Colt that you intend to fight a duel, and you must appear at
the office to-morrow, to enter into your bond, and to give securities to
keep the peace."
"Who swore the informations?" cried Brown.
"What have we to do with that?" said Stapylton, impatiently. "Isn't the
world full of meddling old women? Who wants to know the names?"
"I 'll lay the odds it was old Conyers; the greatest humbug in that land
of humbugs,--Bengal. It was he that insisted on my leaving the Fifth.
Come, Sergeant, out with it. This was General Conyers's doing?"
"I'm sorry to be obliged to declare you in custody, Major," said
the policeman; "but if you like to come over to Mr. Colt's private
residence, I 'm sure he 'd settle the matter this evening."
"He'll do no such thing, by George!" cried Brown. "The sneaking dogs
who have taken this shabby course shall be exposed in open court. We
'll have the names in full, and in every newspaper in England. Don't
compromise the case, Stapylton; make them eat the mess they have cooked,
to the last mouthful. We 'll show the world what the fighting Irishman
and his gallant friend are made of. Major Stapylton is your prisoner,
Sergeant?"
The man smiled slightly at the passionate energy of the speaker, and
turned to Stapylton. "There 's no objection to your going to your
lodgings, Major. You 'll be at the chief office by ten to-morrow."
Stapylton nodded assent, and the other retired and closed the door.
"What do you say now?" cried Brown, triumphantly. "Did n't I tell you
this? Did n't I say that when old Con-yers heard my name, he 'd say,
'Oh, there 'll be no squaring this business'?"
"It's just as likely that he said, 'I 'll not confer with that man; he
had to leave the service.'"
"More fool you, then, not to have had a more respectable friend. Had you
there, Stapylton,--eh?"
"I acknowledge that. All I can say in extenuation is, that I hoped old
Barrington, living so long out of the world, would have selected another
old mummy like himself, who had never heard of Captain Duff Brown, nor
his famous trial at Calcutta."
"There's not a man in the kingdom has not heard of me. I 'm as well
known as the first Duke in the land."
"Don't boast of it, Duff; even notoriety is not always a cheap luxury."
"Who knows but you may divide it with me to-morrow or next day?"
"What do you mean, sir?--what do you mean?" cried Stapylton, slapping
the table with his clenched hand.
"Only what I said,--that Major Stapylton may furnish the town with a
nine-days wonder, vice Captain Duff Brown, forgotten."
Evidently ashamed of his wrath, Stapylton tried to laugh off the
occasion of it, and said, "I suppose neither of us would take the matter
much to heart."
"I 'll not go to the office with you to-morrow, Stapylton," added
he, after a pause; "that old Sepoy General would certainly seize the
opportunity to open some old scores that I'd as soon leave undisturbed."
"All right, I think you are prudent there."
"But I 'll be of use in another way. I 'll lay in wait for that fellow
who reports for the 'Chronicle,' the only paper that cares for these
things, and I 'll have him deep in the discussion of some devilled
kidneys when your case is called on."
"I fancy it does not matter what publicity it obtains."
"Ah, I don't know that. Old Braddell, our major, used to say,
'Reputation, after forty, is like an old wall. If you begin to break a
hole in it, you never know how much will come away.'"
"I tell you again, Duff, I'm past scandalizing; but have your way, if
you will 'muzzle the ox,' and let us get away from this as soon as may
be. I want a little rest after this excitement."
"Well, I 'm pretty much in the same boot myself, though I don't
exactly know where to go. France is dangerous. In Prussia there are two
sentences recorded against me. I 'm condemned to eight years' hard
labor in Wurtemberg, and pronounced dead in Austria for my share in that
Venetian disturbance."
"Don't tell me of these rascalities. Bad enough when a man is driven to
them, but downright infamy to be proud of."
"Have you never thought of going into the Church? I 've a notion you 'd
be a stunning preacher."
"Give up this bantering, Duff, and tell me how I shall get hold of
young Conyers. I 'd rather put a ball in that fellow than be a
Lieutenant-General. He has ever been my rock ahead. That silly coxcomb
has done more to mar my destiny than scores of real enemies. To shoot
him would be to throw a shell in the very midst of them."
"I 'd rather loot him, if I had the choice; the old General has lots of
money. Stapylton, scuttle the ship, if you like, but first let me land
the cargo. Of all the vengeances a man can wreak on another the weakest
is to kill him. For my part, I 'd cherish the fellow that injured me.
I 'd set myself to study his tastes and learn his ambitions. I 'd
watch over him and follow him, being, as it were, his dearest of all
friends,--read backwards!"
"This is tiresome scoundrelism. I'll to bed," said Stapylton, taking a
candle from the table.
"Well, if you must shoot this fellow, wait till he's married; wait for
the honeymoon."
"There's some sense in that. I 'll go and sleep over it."
CHAPTER XVIII. AUNT DOROTHEA.
"You must come down with me for one day, Tom, to see an old aunt of mine
at Bournemouth," said Hunter to young Dill. "I never omitted going to
see her the first thing whenever I landed in England, and she 'll not
forgive me if I were to do so now."
"But why should I go, sir? My presence would only trouble the comfort of
a family meeting."
"Quite the reverse. She 'll be delighted to see you. It will be such a
triumph to her, amongst all her neighbors, to have had a visit from the
hero of the day,--the fellow that all the print-shops are full of. Why,
man, you are worth five hundred pounds to me. I 'm not sure I might not
say double as much."
"In that case, sir, I 'm perfectly at your orders."
And down they went, and arrived late on the day after this conversation
at an old-fashioned manor-house, where Miss Dorothy Hunter had passed
some sixty-odd years of her life. Though to Tom she seemed to bear
a great resemblance to old Miss Barrington, there was really little
likeness between them, beyond an inordinate pride of birth, and an
intense estimation for the claims of family. Miss Hunter's essential
characteristic was a passion for celebrities; a taste somewhat difficult
to cultivate in a very remote and little visited locality. The result
was that she consoled herself by portraits, or private letters, or
autographs of her heroes, who ranged over every imaginable career in
life, and of whom, by mere dint of iteration, she had grown to believe
herself the intimate friend or correspondent.
No sooner had she learned that her nephew was to be accompanied by the
gallant young soldier whose name was in every newspaper than she made
what she deemed the most suitable preparations for his reception. Her
bedroom was hung round with portraits of naval heroes, or pictures of
sea-fights. Grim old admirals, telescope in hand, or with streaming
hair, shouting out orders to board the enemy, were on every side; while,
in the place of honor, over the fireplace, hung a vacant frame, destined
one day to contain the hero of the hour, Tom Dill himself.
Never was a poor fellow in this world less suited to adulation of this
sort. He was either overwhelmed with the flattery, or oppressed by a
terror of what some sensible spectator--if such there were--would think
of the absurd position in which he was forced to stand. And when
he found himself obliged to inscribe his name in a long column of
illustrious autographs, the sight of his own scarce legible characters
filled up the measure of his shame.
"He writes like the great Turenne," said Miss Dorothy; "he always wrote
from above downwards, so that no other name than his own could figure on
the page."
"I got many a thrashing for it at school, ma'am," said Tom, apologizing,
"and so I gave up writing altogether."
"Ah, yes! the men of action soon learn to despise the pen; they prefer
to make history rather than record it."
It was not easy for Hunter to steer his bashful friend through all the
shoals and quicksands of such flattery; but, on the plea of his broken
health and strength, he hurried him early to his bed, and returned to
the fireside, where his aunt awaited him.
"He's charming, if he were only not so diffident. Why will he not be more
confiding, more at his ease with me,--like Mungo Park, or Sir Sidney
Smith?"
"After a while, so he will, aunt. You 'll see what a change there will
be in him at our next visit All these flatteries he meets with are too
much for him; but when we come down again, you 'll see him without these
distracting influences. Then bear in mind his anxieties,--he has not yet
seen his family; he is eager to be at home again. I carried him off here
positively in spite of himself, and on the strict pledge of only for one
day."
"One day! And do you mean that you are to go tomorrow?"
"No help for it, aunt. Tom is to be at Windsor on Saturday. But for
that, he would already have been on his way to Ireland."
"Then there's no time to be lost. What can we do for him? He'snot rich?"
"Hasn't a shilling; but would reject the very shadow of such
assistance."
"Not if a step were purchased for him; without his knowledge, I mean."
"It would be impossible that he should not know it."
"But surely there is some way of doing it A handsome sum to commemorate
his achievement might be subscribed. I would begin it with a thousand
pounds."
"He'd not accept it. I know him thoroughly. There's only one road to him
through which he would not deem a favor a burden."
"And what of that?"
"A kindness to his sister. I wish you saw her, aunt!"
"Is she like him?"
"Like him? Yes; but very much better-looking. She's singularly handsome,
and such a girl! so straightforward and so downright It is a positive
luxury to meet her after all the tiresome conventionalities of the
every-day young lady."
"Shall I ask her here?"
"Oh, if you would, aunt!--if you only would!"
"That you may fall in love with her, I suppose?"
"No, aunt, that is done already."
"I think, sir, I might have been apprised of this attachment!" said she,
bridling.
"I didn't know it myself, aunt, till I was close to the Cape. I thought
it a mere fancy as we dropped down Channel; grew more thoughtful over it
in the Bay of Biscay; began to believe it as we discovered St. Helena;
and came back to England resolved to tell you the whole truth, and ask
you, at least, to see her and know her."
"So I will, then. I 'll write and invite her here."
"You 're the best and kindest aunt in Christendom!" said he, rushing
over and kissing her.
"I'm not going to let you read it, sir," said she, with a smile. "If she
show it to you, she may. Otherwise it is a matter between ourselves."
"Be it entirely as you wish, aunt."
"And if all this goes hopefully on," said she, after a pause, "is Aunt
Dorothea to be utterly forgotten? No more visits here,--no happy summer
evenings,--no more merry Christmases?"
"Nay, aunt, I mean to be your neighbor. That cottage you have often
offered me, near the rocks, I 'll not refuse it again,--that is, if you
tempt me once more."
"It is yours, and the farm along with it. Go to bed now, and leave me to
write my note, which will require-some thought and reflection."
"I know you 'll do it well. I know none who could equal you in such a
task."
"I 'll try and acquit myself with credit," said she, as she sat down to
the writing-desk.
"And what is all this about,--a letter from Miss Dorothea to Polly,"
said Tom, as they drove along the road back to town. "Surely they never
met?"
"Never; but my aunt intends that they shall. She writes to ask your
sister to come on a visit here."
"But why not have told her the thing was impossible? You know us. You
have seen the humble way we live,--how many a care it costs to keep up
that little show of respectability that gets us sufferance in the world,
and how one little attempt beyond this is quite out of our reach. Why
not have told her frankly, sir, 'These people are not in our station'?"
"Just because I acknowledge no such distinction as you want to draw,
my good fellow. If my aunt has asked your sister to come three hundred
miles to see her, she has thought over her request with more foresight
than you or I could have given it, take my word for it. When she means
kindly, she plans thoughtfully. And now I will tell you what I never
meant to have spoken of, that it was only last night she asked me how
could she be of use to you?"
"To me!" said he, blushing, "and why to me?"
"Can you never be brought to see that you are a hero, Tom,--that all the
world is talking of you just now, and people feel a pride in being even
passingly mixed up with your name?"
"If they only knew how much I have to be ashamed of before I can
begin to feel vain, they 'd not be so ready with their praise or their
flattery."
"I 'll talk over all that with your sister Polly," said Hunter, gayly;
for he saw the serious spirit that was gaining over the poor fellow.
"Do so, sir; and you'll soon see, if there's anything good or hopeful
about me, where it comes from and who gave it."
CHAPTER XIX. FROM GENERAL CONYERS TO HIS SON
Beddwys, N. Wales.
My dear Fred,--How happy I am that you are enjoying yourself; short of
being with you, nothing could have given me greater pleasure than your
letter. I like your portrait of the old lady, whose eccentricities
are never inconsistent with some charming traits of disposition, and
a nature eminently high-minded and honorable; but why not more about
Josephine? She is surely oftener in your thoughts than your one brief
paragraph would bespeak, and has her due share in making the cottage the
delightful home you describe it to be. I entreat you to be more open and
more explicit on this theme, for it may yet be many days before I can
explore the matter for myself; since, instead of the brief absence
I calculated on, we may, for aught I know, be detained here for some
weeks.
It is clear to me, from your last, a note of mine from Liverpool to you
must have miscarried. You ask me where you are to address me next, and
what is the nature of the business which has called me away so suddenly?
I gave you in that letter all the information that I was myself
possessed of, and which, in three words, amounted to this: Old
Barrington, having involved himself in a serious personal quarrel with
Stapylton, felt, or believed, that he ought to give him a meeting.
Seeing how useless all attempt at dissuasion proved, and greatly
fearing what hands he might fall into, I agreed to be his friend on
the occasion; trusting, besides, that by a little exercise of tact and
temper, extreme measures might be avoided, and the affair arranged. You
may well believe, without my insisting further upon it, that I felt
very painfully how we should both figure before the world,--a man of
eighty-three or four, accompanied to the ground by another of sixty-odd!
I know well how, in the changed temper of the age, such acts are
criticised, and acquiesce, besides, in the wiser spirit that now
prevails. However, as I said before, if Barrington must go on, it were
better he should do so under the guidance of a sincere friend than of
one casually elevated to act as such, in a moment of emergency.
We left Dublin, by the mail-packet, on Wednesday; and after a rough
passage of twenty-three hours, reached Liverpool too late to catch the
evening coach. Thus detained, we only arrived here on Sunday night late.
At my club I found a note from Stapylton, stating that he had daily
called there to learn if we had come, but the boisterous state of the
weather sufficiently explained our delay, and giving an address where he
might be found, as well as that of "his friend." Now, it so chanced that
this friend was a very notorious person well known to me in India, where
he had been tried for an unfair duel, and narrowly escaped--I should say
unjustly escaped--being hanged. Though I had fully made up my mind not
to be placed in any relations with such a man, I thought it would be
as well that Barrington should know the character of his antagonist's
friend from other sources, and so I invited an old Bengal companion of
mine to dine with us the day after we arrived. Stamer was a judge of the
criminal court, and tried Duff Brown, the man I speak of. As we sat over
our wine together, we got upon this case, and Stamer declared that it
was the only criminal cause in his whole life wherein he regretted the
escape of the guilty party. "The fellow," said he, "defended himself in
a three hours' speech, ably and powerfully; but enunciated at times--as
it were unconsciously--sentiments so abominable and so atrocious as
to destroy the sympathy a part of his discourse excited. But somehow
boldness has its fascination, and he was acquitted."
Barrington's old-fashioned notions were not, however, to be shocked
even by this narrative, and he whispered to me, "Unpleasant for you,
Conyers. Wish it might have been otherwise, but it can't be helped." We
next turned to discuss Duff Brown's friend, and Stamer exclaimed, "Why,
that's the man they have been making all this fuss about in India. He
was, or he said he was, the adopted son of Howard Stapylton; but the
family never believed the adoption, nor consented to receive him, and at
this moment a Moonshee, who acted as Persian secretary to old Stapylton,
has turned up with some curious disclosures, which, if true, would
show that this young fellow held a very humble position in Stapylton's
household, and never was in his confidence. This Moonshee was at Malta a
few weeks ago, and may be, for aught I know, in England now."
I asked and obtained Barrington's permission to tell how we were
ourselves involved with this Major Stapylton, and he quickly declared
that, while the man stood thus accused, there could be no thought of
according him a satisfaction. The opinion was not the less stringent
that Stamer was himself an Irishman and of a fighting family.
I am not very sure that we made Barrington a convert to our opinions,
but we at least, as we separated for the night, left him doubtful and
hesitating. I had not been in bed above an hour, when Mr. Withering
awoke me. He had followed us from Dublin as soon as he learned our
departure, and, going straight to a magistrate, swore informations
against both Barrington and Stapylton. "My old friend will never forgive
me, I know," said he; "but if I had not done this, I should never have
forgiven myself." It was arranged between us that I was to mention the
fact of such informations having been sworn, without stating by whom, to
Barrington, and then persuade him to get privately away from town before
a warrant could be served. I leave you to imagine that my task was not
without its difficulties, but, before the day broke, I succeeded in
inducing him to leave, and travelling by post without halt, we arrived
at this quiet spot yesterday evening. Barrington, with all his good
temper, is marvellously put out and irritable, saying, "This is not the
way such things were done once;" and peevishly muttered, "I wonder what
poor Harry Beamish or Guy Hutchinson would say to it all?" One thing
is quite clear, we had got into a wasps' nest; Stapylton and his friend
were both fellows that no honorable man would like to deal with, and
we must wait with a little patience to find some safe road out of this
troublesome affair.
A letter came to B. from the India House the evening before we left
town, but he handed it to me before he finished reading it, merely
remarking, "The old story, 'Yours of the ninth or nineteenth has duly
been received,' &c." But I found that it contained a distinct admission
that his claim was not ill-founded, and that some arrangement ought to
be come to.
I now close my very lengthy epistle, promising, however, that as soon
as I hear from town, either from Withering or Stamer, you shall have
my news. We are, of course, close prisoners here for the present,
for though the warrant would not extend to Ireland, Barrington's
apprehensions of being "served" with such a writ at all would induce him
to hide for six months to come.
I scarcely ask you to write to me here, not knowing our probable stay;
but to-morrow may, perhaps, tell us something on this head. Till when,
believe me,
Yours affectionately,
Ormsby Conters.
My most cordial greeting to Miss Barrington, and my love to her niece.
FROM PETER BARRINGTON TO HIS SISTER MISS DINAH BARRINGTON.
Long's Hotel, Bond Street.
My dear Dinah,--I hardly know how to tell you what has happened, or what
is happening around me. I came over here to meet Major Stapylton, but
find that there is no such person,--the man who calls himself so being a
mere adventurer, who had taken the name, and, I believe, no small share
of the goods, of its owner, got into the Bengal army, thence into our
own service, and though not undistinguished for gallantry, seems to have
led a life of ceaseless roguery and intrigue. He knew all about poor
George's business, and was in correspondence with those we believe to be
our friends in India, but who now turn out to be our inveterate enemies.
This we have got at by the confession of one of those Oriental fellows
they call Moonshees, who has revealed all their intercourse for years
back, and even shown a document setting forth the number of rupees
he was to receive when Stapylton had been married to Josephine. The
Moonshee is very ill, and his examination can only be conducted at
intervals; but he insists on a point of much importance to us, which is,
that Stapylton induced him to tear out of the Rajah's Koran the page
on which the adoption of George was written, and signed by the Meer
himself. He received a large sum for this service, which, however, he
evaded by a fraud, sending over to England not the real document itself,
but a copy made by himself, and admirably counterfeited. It was the
possession of this by Stapylton which enabled him to exercise a great
control over our suit,--now averring that it was lost; now, under
pledge of secrecy, submitting it to the inspection of some of the
Indian authorities. Stapylton, in a word, saw himself in a position to
establish our claim, whenever the time came that by making Josephine his
wife, he could secure the fortune. This is all that we know up to
this, but it is a great deal, and shows in what a maze of duplicity and
treachery we have been involved for more than twenty years. The chief
point, however, is that the real deed, written in the Meer's Koran, and
torn out of it by the Moonshee, in his first impulse to forward it to
Stapylton, is now extant, and the Koran itself is there to show the
jagged margin of the torn-out leaf, and the corresponding page on the
opposite side of the volume. Stapylton refuses to utter one word since
the accusation against him has been made; and as the charges stand to
falsifying documents, abstraction of funds, and other derelictions in
India, he is now under a heavy bail to appear when called on.
The whole business has made me so nervous and excitable that I cannot
close my eyes at night, and I feel feverish and restless all day. It is
very shocking to think of a man one has never injured, never heard of,
animated with a spirit so inimical as to pass years of life in working
ill to us. He would appear to have devoted himself to the task of
blackening poor George's character and defaming him. It would seem that
Mr. Howard Stapylton was one of those who took an active part against
George. Whether this young fellow caught the contagion of this
antipathy, or helped to feed it, I cannot tell; but it is certain that
all the stories of cruelty and oppression the India Board used to trump
up to us came from this one source; and at the end of all he seeks to be
one of a family he has striven for years to ruin and to crush! I am lost
in my efforts to understand this, though Stamer and Withering assure
me they can read the man like print. Indeed, they see inferences and
motives in fifty things which convey nothing to me; and whenever I feel
myself stopped by some impassable barrier, to them it is only a bridge
that conducts to a fresh discovery.
The Stapyltons are all in arms now that another sportsman has winged the
bird for them; and each day increases the number of accusations against
this unfortunate fellow. It is true, dear Dinah, that our own prospects
brighten through all this. I am constantly receiving civil messages
and hopeful assurances; and even some of the directors have called to
express sympathy and good wishes. But how chilled is the happiness that
comes dashed with the misfortune of another! What a terrible deal it
detracts from our joy to know that every throb of pleasure to ourselves
has cost a pang of misery elsewhere! I wish this fellow could have gone
his way, never minding us; or, if that could n't be, that he 'd have
grown tired of persecuting those who had never harmed him, and given us
up!
They are now assailing him on all sides. One has found that he forged a
will; another that he falsified a signature; and a miserable creature--a
native Indian, who happened to be in that Manchester riot the other
day--has now been ferreted out to swear that Stapylton followed him
through a suburb, down a lane, and into a brick-field, where he cut
him down and left him for dead. There seems a great deal of venom
and acrimony in all this; and though the man is unquestionably not my
friend, and I see that this persecution continues, I find it very hard
not to stand by him.
As for Withering, it has made the veteran ten years younger. He is up
every morning at five, and I hear that he never goes to his room till
long past midnight. These are the pastimes that to such men replace
the sports of the field and the accidents of the chase. They have
their vacillations of hope and fear, their moments of depression and of
triumph in them; and they run a fellow-creature to earth with all the
zest of a hard rider after a fox.
Tell my darling Fifine that I am longing to be at home again,--longing
for the quiet roof, and the roses at the window, and the murmur of the
river, and her own sweet voice better than them all. And what a deal of
happiness is in our power if we would only consent to enjoy it, without
running after some imaginary good, some fancied blessing, which is
to crown our wishes! If I could but only have guessed at the life of
anxiety, doubt, and vacillation the pursuit of this claim would have
cost me,--the twenty years of fever,--
I give you my word, Dinah, I 'd rather have earned my daily bread with a
spade, or, when too old for that, taken to fishing for a livelihood.
But why do I complain of anything at this moment? When have I been so
truly happy for many a long year? Conyers never leaves me,--he talks of
George from morning to night. And I now see that with all my affection
for that dear boy, I only half knew his noble nature, his fine and
generous character. If you only heard of the benevolent things he has
done; the poor fellows he has sent home to their families at his own
cost; the sums he has transmitted to wives and widows of soldiers in
England; the children whose care and support he has provided for! These
were the real drains on that fortune that the world thought wasted and
squandered in extravagance. And do you know, Dinah, there is a vein of
intense egotism in my heart that I never so much as suspected! I found
it out by chance,--it was in marking how far less I was touched by the
highest and best traits of my poor boy than by the signs of love to
myself! and when Conyers said, "He was always talking about you; he
never did anything important without the question, 'How would "Dad" like
this, I wonder? would "Dad" say "God speed" in this case?' And his first
glass of wine every day was to the health of that dear old father over
the seas."
To you who loved him only a little less than myself, I have no shame
in the confession of this weakness. I suppose Conyers, however, has hit
upon it, for he harps on this theme continually, and, in sheer pride of
heart, I feel ten years younger for it.
Here comes Withering to say, "Some more wonderful news;" but I have
begged him to keep it till I have sealed this letter, which if it grows
any longer, I 'll never have courage to send to you. A dozen kisses to
Fifine I can, however, transmit without any increase to the postage.
Give my love to young Conyers; tell him I am charmed with his father,--I
never met any one so companionable to me, and I only long for the day
when the same roof shall cover all of us.
Yours, my dearest sister, ever affectionately,
Peter Barrington.
FROM T. WITHERING, ESQ., TO MISS DINAH BARRINGTON, "THE HOME."
Long's Hotel, Bond Street.
My dear Miss Barrington,--If your brother has deputed me to write to
you, it is not that he is ill, but simply that the excitement caused by
some late events here has so completely mastered him that he can neither
sit quiet a moment, nor address him steadily to any task. Nor am I
surprised it should be so. Old, weather-beaten sailor on the ocean of
life as I am, I feel an amount of feverishness and anxiety I am half
ashamed of. Truth is, my dear Miss Dinah, we lawyers get so much
habituated to certain routine rogueries that we are almost shocked when
we hear of a wickedness not designated by a statute. But I must not
occupy your time with such speculations, the more since I have only a
brief space to give to that report of proceedings to which I want your
attention. And, first of all, I will entreat you to forgive me for all
want of sequence or connection in what I may say, since events have
grown so jumbled together in my mind, that it is perfectly impossible
for me to be certain whether what I relate should come before or after
some other recorded fact In a word, I mean to give you an outline of our
discoveries, without showing the track of our voyage on the map, or even
saying how we came by our knowledge.
You are aware, Barrington tells me, how Stapylton came by the name he
bears. Aware that he was for some of his earlier years domesticated
with old Howard Stapylton at Ghurtnapore, in some capacity between
confidential valet and secretary,--a position that was at once one of
subordination and trust,--it would now appear that a Moonshee, who
had long served Colonel Barrington as Persian correspondent, came into
Howard Stapylton's service in the same capacity: how introduced, or
by whom, we know not. With this Moonshee, the young fellow I speak of
became an intimate and close friend, and it is supposed obtained from
him all that knowledge of your nephew's affairs which enabled him to see
to what his claim pretended, and what were its prospects of success. It
is now clear enough that he only regarded this knowledge at first as a
means of obtaining favor from the Indian Government. It was, in fact,
by ceding to them in detail certain documents, that he got his first
commission in the Madras Fusiliers, and afterwards his promotion in the
same regiment; and when, grown more ambitious, he determined to enter
the King's service, the money for purchase came from the same source.
Being, however, a fellow of extravagant habits, his demands grew at last
to be deemed excessive and importunate; and though his debts had been
paid three several times, he was again found involving himself as
before, and again requiring assistance. This application was, however,
resisted; and it was apparently on the strength of that refusal that
he suddenly changed his tactics, turned his attention towards us, and
bethought him that by forwarding your grandniece's claim,--if he could
but win her affections in the mean while,--he would secure as a wife one
of the richest heiresses in Europe. An examination of dates proves this,
by showing that his last application to the Indian Board was only a few
weeks before he exchanged into the regiment of Hussars he lately served
with, and just then ordered to occupy Kilkenny. In one word, when it
was no longer profitable to oppose Josephine's claim, he determined to
support it and make it his own. The "Company," however, fully assured
that by the papers in their possession they could prove their own cause
against Colonel Barrington, resisted all his menaces,--when, what does
he do? It was what only a very daring and reckless fellow would ever
have thought of,--one of those insolent feats of boldness that succeed
by the very shock they create. He goes to the Secret Committee at the
India House and says: "Of the eighteen documents I have given you,
seven are false. I will not tell you which they are, but if you do not
speedily compromise this claim and make a satisfactory settlement on
Colonel Barrington's daughter, I'll denounce you, at all the peril it
may be to myself." At first they agree, then they hesitate, then they
treat again, and so does the affair proceed, till suddenly--no one can
guess why--they assume a tone of open defiance, and flatly declare
they will hold no further intercourse with him, and even threaten with
exposure any demand on his part.
This rejection of him came at a critical moment. It was just when the
press had begun to comment on the cruelty of his conduct at Peterloo,
and when a sort of cry was got up through the country to have him
dismissed from the service. We all saw, but never suspected, why he was
so terribly cut up at this time. It was hard to believe that he could
have taken mere newspaper censure so much to heart. We never guessed
the real cause, never saw that he was driven to his last expedient,
and obliged to prejudice all his hope of success by precipitancy. If he
could not make Josephine his wife at once, on the very moment, all was
lost. He made a bold effort at this. Who knows if he might not have
succeeded but for you, as Josephine was very young, my old friend
himself utterly unfit to cope with anything but open hostility? I say
again, I 'd not have answered for the result if you had not been in
command of the fortress. At all events, he failed; and in the failure
lost his temper so far as to force a quarrel upon your brother. He
failed, however; and no sooner was he down, than the world was atop
of him: creditors, Jews, bill-discounters, and, last of all, the
Stapyltons, who, so long as he bore their family name thousands of miles
off, or associated it with deeds of gallantry, said nothing; now, that
they saw it held up to attack and insult, came forward to declare that
he never belonged to them, and at length appealed formally to the Horse
Guards, to learn under what designation he had entered the service, and
at what period taken the name he went by.
Stapylton's application for leave to sell out had just been sent in;
and once more the newspapers set up the cry that this man should not be
permitted to carry away to Aix and Baden the proceeds of a sale which
belonged to his "creditors." You know the world, and I need not tell you
all the pleasant things it told this fellow, for men are pretty nigh
as pitiless as crows to their wounded. I thought the complication had
reached its limit, when I learned yesterday evening that Stapylton had
been summoned before a police magistrate for a case of assault committed
by him when in command of his regiment at Manchester. The case had
evidently been got up by a political party, who, seeing the casual
unpopularity of the man, determined to profit by it. The celebrated
radical barrister, Hesketh, was engaged for the plaintiff.
When I arrived at the court, it was so full that it was with difficulty
I got a passage to a seat behind the bench. There were crowds of
fashionables present, the well-known men about town, and the idlers of
the clubs, and a large sprinkling of military men, for the news of the
case had got wind already.
Stapylton, dressed in black, and looking pale and worn, but still
dignified and like a gentleman, had not a single friend with him. I own
to you, I felt ashamed to be there, and was right glad when he did not
recognize me.
Though the case opened by a declaration that this was no common assault
case, wherein in a moment of passion a man had been betrayed into an
excess, I knew the cant of my craft too well to lay any stress on such
assertion, and received it as the ordinary exordium. As I listened,
however, I was struck by hearing that the injured man was asserted to
be one well known to Stapylton, with whom he had been for years in
intimacy, and that the assault was in reality a deliberate attempt to
kill, and not, as had been represented, a mere passing act of savage
severity committed in hot blood. "My client," said he, "will be brought
before you; he is a Hindoo, but so long a resident of this country that
he speaks our language fluently. You shall hear his story yourselves,
and yourselves decide on its truthfulness. His wounds are, however, of
so serious a nature that it will be advisable his statement should be
a brief one." As he said this, a dark-complexioned fellow, with a look
half-frightened, half defiant, was carried forwards in a chair, and
deposited, as he sat, on the table. He gave his name as Lai Adeen, his
age as forty-eight, his birthplace Majamarha, near Agra. He came to this
country twelve years ago, as servant to an officer who had died on the
passage, and after many hardships in his endeavor to earn a livelihood,
obtained employment at Manchester in the mill of Brandling and Bennett,
where he was employed to sweep the corridors and the stairs; his wages
were nine shillings a week. All this, and much more of the same kind,
he told simply and collectedly. I tried to see Stapylton while this
was going on, but a pillar of the gallery, against which he leaned,
concealed him from my view.
I omit a great deal, not without its interest, but reserving it for
another time, and come to his account of the night on which he was
wounded. He said that as the cavalry marched on that morning into
Manchester, he was struck by seeing at the head of the regiment one he
had never set his eyes on for years, but whose features he knew too well
to be deceived in.
"I tried to get near him, that he might recognize me," said he; "but the
crowd kept me back, and I could not. I thought, indeed, at one moment he
had seen me, and knew me; but as he turned his head away, I supposed I
was mistaken.
"It was on the following evening, when the riot broke out in Mill
Street, that I saw him next. I was standing at the door of a chemist's
shop when the cavalry rode by at a walk. There was a small body of them
in front, at about forty or fifty paces, and who, finding a sort of
barricade across the street, returned to the main body, where they
seemed to be reporting this. A cry arose that the troops had been
blocked up at the rear, and at the same instant a shower of stones came
from the side-streets and the house-tops. Thinking to do him a service,
I made my way towards him I knew, in order to tell him by what way he
could make his escape; and jostled and pushed, and half ridden down, I
laid my hand on his horse's shoulder to keep myself from falling. 'Stand
back, you scoundrel!' said he, striking me with the hilt of his sword in
the face. 'Don't you know me, master?' cried I, in terror. He bent down
in his saddle till his face was almost close to mine, and then, reining
his horse back to give him room for a blow, he aimed a desperate cut at
me. I saw it coming, and threw myself down; but I rose the next instant
and ran. The street was already so clear by this time, I got into
Cleever's Alley, down Grange Street, up the lane that leads to the
brick-fields, and at last into the fields themselves. I was just
thinking I was safe, when I saw a horseman behind me. He saw me, and
dashed at me. I fell upon my knees to ask mercy, and he gave me this;"
and he pointed to the bandages which covered his forehead, stained as
they were with clotted blood. "I fell on my face, and he tried to make
his horse trample on me; but the beast would not, and he only touched
me with his hoof as he sprang across me. He at last dismounted to see,
perhaps, if I were dead; but a shout from some of the rioters warned him
to mount again; and he rode away, and I lay there till morning. It is
not true that I was in prison and escaped,--that I was taken to the
hospital, and ran away from it. I was sheltered in one of the clay-huts
of the brickmakers for several weeks, afraid to come abroad, for I knew
that the Sahib was a great man and could take my life. It was only by
the persuasions of others that I left my hiding-place and have come here
to tell my story."
On being questioned why this officer could possibly desire to injure
him, what grudge one in such a station could bear him, he owned he could
not say; they had never been enemies, and, indeed, it was in the hope
of a friendly recognition and assistance that he approached him in Mill
Street.
Stapylton's defence was very brief, given in an off-hand, frank manner,
which disposed many in his favor. He believed the fellow meant to attack
him; he certainly caught hold of his bridle. It was not his intention
to give him more than a passing blow; but the utterance of a Hindoo
curse--an expression of gross outrage in the East--recalled prejudices
long dormant, and he gave the rascal chase, and cut him over the
head,--not a severe cut, and totally unaccompanied by the other details
narrated.
"As for our former acquaintance I deny it altogether. I have seen
thousands of his countrymen, and may have seen him; but, I repeat, I
never knew him, nor can he presume to say he knew me!"
The Hindoo smiled a faint, sickly smile, made a gesture of deep
humility, and asked if he might put a few questions to the "Sahib."
"Were you in Naghapoor in the year of the floods?"
"Yes," said Stapylton, firmly, but evidently with an effort to appear
calm.
"In the service of the great Sahib, Howard Stapylton?"
"In his service? Certainly not. I lived with him as his friend, and
became his adopted heir.''
"What office did you fill when you first came to the 'Residence'?"
"I assisted my friend in the duties of his government; I was a good
Oriental scholar, and could write and speak a dialect he knew nothing
of. But I submit to the court that this examination, prompted and
suborned by others, has no other object than to insult me, by leading to
disclosures of matters essentially private in their nature."
"Let me ask but one question," said the barrister. "What name did you
bear before you took that of Stapylton?"
"I refuse to submit to this insolence," said Stapylton, rising, angrily.
"If the laws of the country only can lend themselves to assist the
persecutions of a rascally Press, the sooner a man of honor seeks
another land the better. Adjudicate on this case, sirs; I will not stoop
to bandy words with these men."
"I now, sir," said Hesketh, opening his bag and taking out a roll of
papers, "am here to demand a committal for forgery against the person
before you, passing under the name of Horace Stapylton, but whose real
designation is Samuel Scott Edwardes, son of Samuel Edwardes, a name
notorious enough once."
I cannot go on, my dear friend; the emotions that overpowered me at the
time, and compelled me to leave the court, are again threatening me,
and my brain reels at the recollection of a scene which, even to my
fast-fading senses, was the most trying of my life.
To General Conyers I must refer you for what ensued after I left. I
cannot even say who came home with me to the hotel, though I am aware
I owed that kindness to some one. The face of that unhappy man is yet
before me, and all the calm in which I have written up to this leaves
me, as I think over one of the most terrible incidents of my life.
Your brother, shocked of course, bears up bravely, and hopes to write to
you to-morrow.
One word of good cheer before I close this miserable record. The Indian
directors have written to offer excellent terms--splendidly liberal
terms, Conyers calls them, and I agree with him. We have had a very
busy week of it here, but it will be well requited if all that I now
anticipate be confirmed to us. Barrington begs you will tell your
neighbors, the Dills, that Tom--I think that is the name--has just
arrived at Southampton with General Hunter, and will be here to-morrow
evening.
I have cut out a short passage from the newspaper to finish my
narrative. I will send the full report, as published, to-morrow.
Your attached friend,
T. Withering.
"The chief police-office in Marlborough Street was yesterday the scene
of a very shocking incident. The officer whose conduct at the head of
his regiment in Manchester has of late called for the almost unanimous
reprobation of the Press, was, while answering to a charge of aggravated
assault, directly charged with forgery. Scarcely was the allegation
made, than he drew a pistol from his pocket, and, placing the muzzle to
his mouth, pulled the trigger. The direction of the weapon, however, was
accidentally turned, and the ball, instead of proceeding upwards, passed
through the lower jaw, fracturing the bone, and created a terrible
wound. It is supposed that the large vessels are not injured, and that
he may yet recover. All who witnessed the scene describe it as one of
intense horror.
"The unhappy man was at once removed to the Middlesex Hospital. He has
not uttered a word since the event; and when asked if there were any
relatives or friends whom he wished might be sent for, merely shook his
head negatively. It is said that when the result of the consultation
held on him was announced to him as favorable, he seemed rather grieved
than otherwise at the tidings."
FROM PETER BARRINGTON TO DINAH, HIS SISTER.
My dear Dinah,--How glad am I to tell you that we leave this to-morrow,
and a large party of us, too, all for "The Home." Put young Conyers in
my dressing-room, so that the large green bedroom can be free for the
General, at least for one of the generals--for we have another here,
Hunter, who will also be our guest. Then there will be Withering. As for
myself, I can be stowed away anywhere. What happiness would there be to
us all at such a meeting, if it were not for that poor wretch who lies
in all his agony a few streets off, and who is never out of my thoughts.
I went twice to the hospital to see him. The first time I lost courage,
and came away. The second, I sent up my name, and asked if he would wish
to see me. The only answer I got was my visiting-card torn in two! How
hard it is for an injurer to forgive him he has injured! I have arranged
with the Stapyltons, however, who instigated the charge of forgery,
not to press it; at least, they are to take bail, and the bail will
be forfeited, so I understand it; but Withering will explain all more
clearly.
Our own affairs are all as bright and prosperous as our best wishes
could desire. The Council have had all the evidence before them, and the
Moonshee has produced his copy of the Koran, with the torn leaf fitting
into the jagged margin, and George is vindicated at last in everything.
His loyalty, his disinterestedness, his honesty, all established. The
ceremony of his marriage has been fully recognized; and General Conyers
tells me that the lowest estimate of our claim is a little short of a
quarter of a million sterling. He counsels me not to be exigent in
my terms; if he knew me better, perhaps, he would not have deemed the
advice so necessary.
What will Fifine say to all this wealth? Will she want to go back to
India, and be a princess, and ride about on an elephant; or will she
reconcile herself to such humble ways as ours? I am most eager to hear
how she will take the tidings. Withering says it will not spoil her;
that knowing nothing of life in its moneyed relations, she runs no
risk of being carried away by any vulgar notions of her own importance
through riches.
Conyers has never once hinted at his son's pretensions since Fifine has
become an heiress; and I fancy--it may be only fancy--is a shade or so
cool towards me, so that I have not referred to them. But what can I do?
I cannot offer him my granddaughter, nor--if what you tell me be true,
that they are always quarrelling--would the proposal be a great kindness
to either.
Here is Tom Dill, too, and what a change! He is the image of Polly; and
a fine, well-grown, straight-figured fellow, that looks you manfully in
the face,--not the slouching, loutish, shamefaced creature you remember
him. Hunter has had him gazetted to an Ensigncy in the 10th Foot, and
he will, or I much mistake him, do honest credit to the recommendation.
Hunter takes him about with him wherever he goes, telling all about
the shipwreck and Tom's gallantry,--enough to turn the lad's head with
vanity, but that he is a fine, simple-hearted creature, who thinks very
little of himself or his achievement. He seems to have no other thought
than what Polly, his sister, will say and think of him.
He also will be one of our party; that is if I can persuade him to make
"The Home" his headquarters while our friends are with us. What a strong
muster we shall be; and how we 'll astonish that old bin of Madeira,
Dinah! By the way, I have been rather boastful about it to Conyers, and
let some bottles have the sun on them for a couple of hours every day.
I should like to try my chance once more of seeing that poor fellow
at the hospital, but Withering will not hear of it; he got positively
ill-tempered at the bare mention of such a wish. Even Conyers says,
"Better not," with an air that may mean for the sick man's sake as much
as my own.
A little more of this life of noise, confusion, and excitement would
finish me. This city existence, with its incessant events and its never
ending anxieties, is like walking in a high wind with the chimney-pots
falling and crashing on every side of one,--while I am pitying the
fellow whose skull is just cracked, I am forced to remember that my own
is in danger. And yet there are people who like it; who tell you
that out of London there is no living; that the country is a grave,
aggravated by the consciousness that one is dead and buried there!
On Tuesday,--Wednesday, at farthest,--Dinah, look out for us. I do not
believe there is that prize in the wheel that would tempt me again away
from home! and till I reach it, believe, my dear Dinah,
Your loving brother,
Peter Barrington.
I have just seen Conyers. He met Sir Harvey Hethrington, the Home
Secretary, this morning, and they got into a talk over our business,
and H. said how cruelly I had been treated all this time back, and how
unfairly poor George's memory was dealt with. "We want," said he, "to
show your friend our respect and our sympathy, and we have thought of
submitting his name to the King for a Baronetcy. How do you think Mr.
Barrington himself would take our project?" "I 'll find out," said
Conyers, as he told me of the conversation. "If they don't let me
off, Conyers," said I, "ask them to commute it to Knighthood, for the
heralds' fees will be smaller; but I'll try, meanwhile, if I can't
escape either." So that now, Dinah, you may expect me on Saturday. I
told you what a place this was; you are never sure what may befall you
from one moment to another!
CHAPTER XX. THE END
Fortune had apparently ceased to persecute Peter Barrington.
The Minister did not press honors upon him, and he was free to wait for
his companions, and in their company he returned to Ireland.
The news of his success--great as it was, magnified still more--had
preceded him to his own country; and he was met, as all lucky men are
met, and will be met to the end of time, by those who know the world and
feelingly estimate that the truly profitable are the fortunate!
Not that he remarked how many had suddenly grown so cordial; what
troops of passing acquaintances had become in a moment warm friends,
well-wishing and affectionate. He never so much as suspected that "Luck"
is a deity worshipped by thousands, who even in the remotest way are not
to be benefited by it. He had always regarded the world as a far better
thing than many moralists would allow it to be,--unsteady, wilful,
capricious, if you like--but a well-intentioned, kindly minded world,
that would at all times, where passion or prejudice stood aloof,
infinitely rather do the generous thing than the cruel one.
Little wonder, then, if he journeyed in a sort of ovation! At every
change of horses in each village they passed, there was sure to be some
one who wanted to shake his hand. People hobbled out on crutches and
quitted sick-beds to say how "glad they were;" mere acquaintances most
of them, who felt a strange mysterious sort of self-consequence in
fancying themselves for the moment the friends of Peter Barrington, the
millionnaire! This is all very curious, but it is a fact,--a fact which
I make no pretence to explain, however.
"And here comes the heartiest well-wisher of them all!" cried
Barrington, as he saw his sister standing on the roadside, near the
gate. With thoughtful delicacy, his companions lingered behind, while
he went to meet and embraced her. "Was I not a true prophet, Dinah dear?
Did I not often foretell this day to you?" said he, as he drew her arm,
and led her along, forgetting all about his friends and companions.
"Have they paid the money, Peter?" said she, sharply.
"Of course they have not; such things are not settled like the fare of a
hackney-coach. But our claim is acknowledged, and, fifty thousand
times better, George Barrington's name absolved from every shadow of an
imputation."
"What is the amount they agree to give?"
"Upon my life, I don't know,--that is, I don't recollect, there were
so many interviews and such discussions; but Withering can tell you
everything. Withering knows it all. Without him and Conyers I don't
know how I could have got on. If you had heard how he spoke of George at
the Council! 'You talk of my services,' said he; 'they are no more
fit to be compared with those of Colonel Barrington, than are my petty
grievances with the gross wrongs that lie on his memory.' Withering
was there; he heard the words, and described the effect of them as
actually overwhelming."
"And Withering believes the whole thing to be settled?"
"To be sure, he does! Why should he oppose his belief to that of the
whole world? Why, my dear Dinah, it is not one, nor two, but some
hundreds of people have come to wish me joy. They had a triumphal arch
at Naas, with 'Welcome to Barrington' over it. At Carlow, Fishbourne
came out with the corporation to offer me congratulations."
She gave a hasty, impatient shake of the head, but repressed the sharp
reply that almost trembled on her lips.
"By George!" cried he, "it does one's heart good to witness such a burst
of generous sentiment. You 'd have thought some great national benefit
had befallen, or that some one--his country's idol--had just reaped the
recompense of his great services. They came flocking out of the towns as
we whirled past, cheering lustily, and shouting, 'Barrington forever!'"
"I detest a mob!" said she, pursing up her lips.
"These were no mobs, Dinah; these were groups of honest fellows, with
kind hearts and generous wishes."
Another, but more decisive, toss of the head warned Peter that the
discussion had gone far enough; indeed she almost said so, by asking
abruptly, "What is to be done about the boy Conyers? He is madly in love
with Josephine."
"Marry her, I should say!"
"As a cure for the complaint, I suppose. But what if she will not have
him? What if she declares that she 'd like to go back to the convent
again,--that she hates the world, and is sorry she ever came out into
it,--that she was happier with the sisters--"
"Has she said all this to you, sister?"
"Certainly not, Peter," said Dinah, bridling up. "These were confidences
imparted to the young man himself. It was he told me of them: he came
to me last night in a state bordering on distraction. He was hesitating
whether he would not throw himself into the river or go into a marching
regiment."
"This is only a laughing matter, then, Dinah?" said Peter, smiling.
"Nothing of the kind, brother! He did not put the alternatives so much
in juxtaposition as I have; but they lay certainly in that manner on his
thoughts. But when do your friends arrive? I thought they were to have
come with you?"
"What a head I have, Dinah! They are all here; two carriages of them. I
left them on the road when I rushed on to meet you. Oh, here they come!
here they are!"
"My brother's good fortune, gentlemen, has made him seem to forget what
adversity never did; but I believe you all know how welcome you are
here? Your son, General Conyers, thought to meet you earlier, by taking
boat down to the village, and the girls went with him. Your friend,
Polly Dill, is one of them, General Hunter."
Having thus, with one sweep of the scythe, cut down a little of all
around her, she led the way towards the cottage, accepting the arm of
General Conyers with an antiquated grace that sorely tried Hunter's good
manners not to smile at.
"I know what you are looking at, what you are thinking of, Barrington,"
said Withering, as he saw the other stand a moment gazing at the
landscape on the opposite side of the river.
"I don't think you do, Tom," said he, smiling.
"You were thinking of buying that mountain yonder. You were saying to
yourself, 'I 'll be the owner of that beech wood before I'm a month
older!'"
"Upon my life, you 're right! though I have n't the remotest notion of
how you guessed it. The old fellow that owns it shall name his own terms
to-morrow morning. Here come the girls, and they 've got Tom Dill with
them. How the fellow rows! and Fifine is laughing away at Conyers's
attempt to keep the boat straight. Look at Hunter, too; he 's off to
meet them. Is he 'going in' for the great heiress prize, eh, Tom?" said
he, with a knowing smile.
Though Hunter assisted the ladies to land with becoming gallantry, he
did not offer his arm to Josephine, but dropped behind, where Tom Dill
brought up the rear with his sister.
"We have no confidences that you may not listen to," said Polly, as she
saw that he hesitated as to joining them. "Tom, indeed, has been telling
of yourself, and you may not care to hear your own praises."
"If they come from you, I 'm all ears for them."
"Isn't that pretty, Tom? Did you ever hear any one ask more candidly
for--no, not flattery--what is it to be called?"
Tom, however, could not answer, for he had stopped to shake hands with
Darby, whose "May I never!" had just arrested him.
"What an honest, fine-hearted fellow it is!" said Hunter, as they moved
on, leaving Tom behind.
"But if you had n't found it out, who would have known, or who
acknowledged it? I know--for he has told me--all you have been to
him."
"Pooh, pooh! nothing; less than nothing. He owes all that he is to
himself. He is one of those fellows who, once they get into the right
groove in life, are sure to go ahead. Not even you could make a doctor
of him. Nature made him a soldier."
Polly blushed slightly at the compliment to those teachings she believed
a secret, and he went on,--
"What has the world been doing here since I left?"
"Pretty much what it did while you were here. It looked after its
turnips and asparagus, took care of its young calves, fattened its
chickens, grumbled at the dear-ness of everything, and wondered when Dr.
Buck would preach a new sermon."
"No deaths,--no marriages?"
"None. There was only one candidate for both, and he has done
neither,--Major M'Cormick."
"Confound that old fellow! I had forgotten him. Do you remember the
last day I saw you here? We were in the garden, talking, as we believed,
without witnesses. Well, he overheard us. He heard every word we said,
and a good deal more that we did not say."
"Yes; so he informed me, a few days after."
"You don't mean to say that he had the impertinence--"
"The frankness, General,--the charming candor,--to tell me that I was a
very clever girl, and not to be discouraged by one failure or two; that
with time and perseverance--I think he said perseverance--some one was
sure to take a fancy to me: he might not, perhaps, be handsome, possibly
not very young; his temper, too, might chance to be more tart than
was pleasant; in a word, he drew such a picture that I had to stop him
short, and ask was he making me a proposal? He has never spoken to me
since!"
"I feel as if I could break his neck," muttered Hunter, below his
breath; then added, "Do you remember that I asked leave to write to you
once,--only once?"
"Yes, I remember it."
"And you would not answer me. You shook your head, as though to say the
permission would be of no service to me; that I might write, but, you
understand, that it would only be to indulge in a delusion--"
"What an expressive shake of the head that meant all that!"
"Ah! there it is again; never serious, never grave! And now I want
you to be both. Since I landed in England, I ran down for a day to
Devonshire. I saw an old aunt of mine, who, besides being very rich,
has retained no small share of the romance of her life. She always had
a dash of hero-worship about her, and so I took down Tom with me to show
her the gallant fellow whose name was in all the newspapers, and of whom
all the world was talking. She was charmed with him,--with his honest,
manly simplicity, his utter want of all affectation. She asked me ten
times a day, 'Can I not be of service to him? Is there no step he wishes
to purchase? Is there nothing we can do for him?' 'Nothing,' said I; 'he
is quite equal to his own fortune.' 'He may have brothers,' said she.
'He has a sister,' said I,--'a sister who has made him all that he is,
and it was to repay her love and affection that he has shown himself
to be the gallant fellow we have seen him.' 'Tell her to come and see
me.--that is,' said she, correcting herself, 'give her a letter I shall
write, and persuade her, if you can, to oblige me by doing what I ask.'
Here is the letter; don't say no till you have read it. Nay, don't shake
your head so deploringly; things may be hard without being impossible.
At all events, read her note carefully. It's a droll old hand, but clear
as print."
"I'll read it," said she, looking at the letter; but the sorrowful tone
revealed how hopelessly she regarded the task.
"Ask Tom about her; and make Tom tell you what she is like. By Jove! he
has such an admiration for the old damsel, I was half afraid he meant to
be my uncle."
They reached the cottage laughing pleasantly over this conceit, and
Polly hurried up to her room to read the letter. To her surprise,
Josephine was there already, her eyes very red with crying, and her
cheeks flushed and feverish-looking.
"My dearest Fifine, what is all this for, on the happiest day of your
life?" said she, drawing her arm around her.
"It's all your fault,--all your doing," said the other, averting her
head, as she tried to disengage herself from the embrace.
"My fault,--my doing? What do you mean, dearest, what can I have done to
deserve this?"
"You know very well what you have done. You knew all the time how it
would turn out."
Polly protested firmly that she could not imagine what was attributed to
her, and only after a considerable time obtained the explanation of the
charge. Indeed it was not at first easy to comprehend it, given, as
it was, in the midst of tears, and broken at every word by sobs. The
substance was this: that Fifine, in an attempted imitation of Polly's
manner,--an effort to copy the coquetting which she fancied to be so
captivating,--had ventured to trifle so far with young Conyers, that,
after submitting to every alternative of hope and fear for weeks
long, he at last gave way, and determined to leave the house, quit the
country, and never meet her more. "It was to be like you I did it,"
cried she, sobbing bitterly, "and see what it has led me to."
"Well, dearest, be really like me for half an hour; that is, be very
patient and very quiet. Sit down here, and don't leave this till I come
back to you."
Polly kissed her hot cheek as she spoke; and the other sat down where
she was bade, with the half-obedient sulkiness of a naughty child.
"Tell young Mr. Conyers to come and speak to me. I shall be in the
garden," said she to his servant; and before she had gone many paces he
was beside her.
"Oh, Polly dearest! have you any hope for me?" cried he, in agony. "If
you knew the misery I am enduring."
"Come and take a walk with me," said she, passing her arm within his. "I
think you will like to hear what I have to tell you."
The revelation was not a very long one; and as they passed beneath the
room where Josephine sat, Polly called out, "Come down here, Fifine, we
are making a bouquet; try if you can find 'heart's-ease.'"
What a happy party met that day at dinner! All were in their best
spirits, each contented with the other. "Have you read my aunt's note?"
whispered Hunter to Polly, as they passed into the drawing-room.
"Yes. I showed it also to Miss Dinah. I asked her advice."
"And what did she say,--what did she advise?"
"She said she 'd think over it and tell me to-morrow."
"To-morrow! Why not now,--why not at once?" cried he, impatiently. "I
'll speak to her myself;" and he hurried to the little room where Miss
Dinah was making tea.
It was not a very long interview; and Hunter returned, fond, radiant,
and triumphant. "She's the cleverest old woman I ever met in my life,"
said he; "and the best, besides, after my Aunt Dorothy. She said that
such an invitation as that was too cordial to be coldly declined; that
it meant more--far more--than a politeness; that you ought to go, yes,
by all means; and if there was any difficulty about the journey, or any
awkwardness in travelling so far, why, there was an easy remedy for it,
as well as for meeting my aunt a perfect stranger."
"And what was that?"
"To go as her niece, dearest Polly,--to be the wife of a man who loves
you."
"Is it possible that you have so much to say to each other that you
won't take tea?" cried Aunt Dinah; while she whispered to Withering, "I
declare we shall never have a sociable moment till they're all married
off, and learn to conduct themselves like reasonable creatures."
Is it not the best testimony we can give to happiness, that it is a
thing to feel and not describe,--to be enjoyed, but not pictured? It is
like a debt that I owe to my reader, to show him "The Home" as it was
when blissful hearts were gathered under its roof; and yet, for the life
of me, I cannot acquit myself of it. To say that there were old people
with their memories of the past, and young ones with their hopes of the
future; that there were bygones to sigh over, and vistas to gaze at,
conveys but little of the kindliness by which heart opened to heart,
and sorrow grew lighter by mutual endurance, and joys became brighter as
they were imparted to another.
"So I find," said Barrington, as they sat at breakfast together, "that
Josephine insists on going back to the convent, and Fred is resolved on
an exchange into the Infantry, and is off for Canada immediately."
"Not a bit of it!" broke in Hunter, who remarked nothing of the roguish
drollery of old Peter's eye, nor even suspected that the speech was made
in mockery. "Master Fred is coming with me into Kilkenny this morning,
for a visit to the Dean, or whatever he is, who dispenses those social
handcuffs they call licenses."
"Why, they were quarrelling all the morning," repeated Harrington.
"So we were, sir, and so we mean to do for many a year," said Josephine;
"and to keep us in countenance, I hear that General Hunter and Polly
have determined to follow our example."
"What do I hear, Miss Dill?" said Miss Barrington, with an affected
severity.
"I'm afraid, madam, it is true; there has been what my father calls 'a
contagious endemic' here lately, and we have both caught it; but ours
are mild cases, and we hope soon to recover."
"What's this I see here?" cried Fred, who, to conceal his shame, had
taken up the newspaper. "Listen to this: 'The notorious Stapylton,
alias Edwardes, whose case up to yesterday was reported all but
hopeless, made his escape from the hospital, and has not since been
heard of. It would appear that some of the officials had been bribed to
assist his evasion, and a strict inquiry will be immediately set on foot
into the affair.'"
"Do you think he has got over to France?" whispered Peter to Withering.
"Of course he has; the way was all open, and everything ready for him!"
"Then I am thoroughly happy!" cried Barrington, "and there's not even
the shadow of a cloud over our present sunshine."
THE END.