The Project Gutenberg EBook of Charles O'Malley, The Irish Dragoon, Volume1 (of 2), by Charles LeverThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: Charles O'Malley, The Irish Dragoon, Volume 1 (of 2)Author: Charles LeverRelease Date: February 2, 2007 [EBook #8577]First posted on August 13, 2004Last Updated: September 2, 2016Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLES O'MALLEY, I. ***Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team.CHARLES O'MALLEYThe Irish DragoonBY CHARLES LEVER.WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY PHIZ.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.[Illustration: THE SUNK FENCE]TO THEMOST NOBLE THE MARQUESS OF DOURO, M.P., D.C.L., ETC., ETC.MY DEAR LORD,--The imperfect attempt to picture forth some scenes of the mostbrilliant period of my country's history might naturally suggest theirdedication to the son of him who gave that era its glory. I feel,however, in the weakness of the effort, the presumption of such athought, and would simply ask of you to accept these volumes as asouvenir of many delightful hours passed long since in your society,and a testimony of the deep pride with which I regard the honor of yourfriendship.Believe me, my dear Lord, with every respect and esteem,Yours, most sincerely,THE AUTHOR.BRUSSELS, November, 1841.A WORD OF EXPLANATION.KIND PUBLIC,--Having so lately taken my leave of the stage, in a farewell benefit, it isbut fitting that I should explain the circumstances which once more bringme before you,--that I may not appear intrusive, where I have met with buttoo much indulgence.A blushing debutante--entre nous, the most impudent Irishman that everswaggered down Sackville Street--has requested me to present him toyour acquaintance. He has every ambition to be a favorite with you; butsays--God forgive him--he is too bashful for the foot-lights.He has remarked---as, doubtless, many others have done--upon what veryslight grounds, and with what slender pretension, my Confessions havemet with favor at the hands of the press and the public; and the idea hasoccurred to him to indite his own. Had his determination ended here,I should have nothing to object to; but unfortunately, he expects me tobecome his editor, and in some sort responsible for the faults of hisproduction. I have wasted much eloquence and more breath in assuring himthat I was no tried favorite of the public, who dared take libertieswith them; that the small rag of reputation I enjoyed, was a very scantycovering for my own nakedness; that the plank which swam with one, wouldmost inevitably sink with two; and lastly, that the indulgence so oftenbestowed upon a first effort is as frequently converted into censure on theolder offender. My arguments have, however, totally failed, and he remainsobdurate and unmoved. Under these circumstances I have yielded; and as,happily for me, the short and pithy direction to the river Thames, in theCritic, "to keep between its banks," has been imitated by my friend, I findall that is required of me is to write my name upon the title and go inpeace. Such, he informs me, is modern editorship.In conclusion, I would beg, that if the debt he now incurs at your handsremain unpaid, you would kindly bear in mind that your remedy lies againstthe drawer of the bill and not against its mere humble indorser,HARRY LORREQUERBRUSSELS, March, 1840.PREFACEThe success of Harry Lorrequer was the reason for writing Charles O'Malley.That I myself was in no wise prepared for the favor the public bestowed onmy first attempt is easily enough understood. The ease with which I strungmy stories together,--and in reality the Confessions of Harry Lorrequer arelittle other than a note-book of absurd and laughable incidents,--led meto believe that I could draw on this vein of composition without any limitwhatever. I felt, or thought I felt, an inexhaustible store of fun andbuoyancy within me, and I began to have a misty, half-confused impressionthat Englishmen generally labored under a sad-colored temperament, tookdepressing views of life, and were proportionately grateful to any one whowould rally them even passingly out of their despondency, and give them alaugh without much trouble for going in search of it.When I set to work to write Charles O'Malley I was, as I have ever been,very low with fortune, and the success of a new venture was pretty much aseventful to me as the turn of the right color at rouge-et-noir. At thesame time I had then an amount of spring in my temperament, and a power ofenjoying life which I can honestly say I never found surpassed. The worldhad for me all the interest of an admirable comedy, in which the partallotted myself, if not a high or a foreground one, was eminently suitedto my taste, and brought me, besides, sufficiently often on the stage toenable me to follow all the fortunes of the piece. Brussels, where I wasthen living, was adorned at the period by a most agreeable English society.Some leaders of the fashionable world of London had come there to refit andrecruit, both in body and estate. There were several pleasant and a greatnumber of pretty people among them; and so far as I could judge, thefashionable dramas of Belgrave Square and its vicinity were being performedin the Rue Royale and the Boulevard de Waterloo with very considerablesuccess. There were dinners, balls, djeners, and picnics in the Bois deCambre, excursions to Waterloo, and select little parties to Bois-fort,--acharming little resort in the forest whose intense cockneyism becameperfectly inoffensive as being in a foreign land, and remote from theinvasion of home-bred vulgarity. I mention all these things to show theadjuncts by which I was aided, and the rattle of gayety by which I was, asit were, "accompanied," when I next tried my voice.The soldier element tinctured strongly our society, and I will say mostagreeably. Among those whom I remember best were several old Peninsulars.Lord Combermere was of this number, and another of our set was an officerwho accompanied, if indeed he did not command, the first boat party whocrossed the Douro. It is needless to say how I cultivated a society sofull of all the storied details I was eager to obtain, and how generouslydisposed were they to give me all the information I needed. On topographyespecially were they valuable to me, and with such good result that I havebeen more than once complimented on the accuracy of my descriptions ofplaces which I have never seen and whose features I have derived entirelyfrom the narratives of my friends.When, therefore, my publishers asked me could I write a story in theLorrequer vein, in which active service and military adventure could figuremore prominently than mere civilian life, and where the achievements of aBritish army might form the staple of the narrative,--when this questionwas propounded me, I was ready to reply: Not one, but fifty. Do not mistakeme, and suppose that any overweening confidence in my literary powers wouldhave emboldened me to make this reply; my whole strength lay in the factthat I could not recognize anything like literary effort in the matter. Ifthe world would only condescend to read that which I wrote precisely as Iwas in the habit of talking, nothing could be easier than for me to occupythem. Not alone was it very easy to me, but it was intensely interestingand amusing to myself, to be so engaged.The success of Harry Lorrequer had been freely wafted across the Germanocean, but even in its mildest accents it was very intoxicating incense tome; and I set to work on my second book with a thrill of hope as regardsthe world's favor which--and it is no small thing to say it--I can yetrecall.I can recall, too, and I am afraid more vividly still, some of thedifficulties of my task when I endeavored to form anything like an accurateor precise idea of some campaigning incident or some passage of arms fromthe narratives of two distinct and separate "eye-witnesses." What mistrustI conceived for all eye-witnesses from my own brief experience of theirtestimonies! What an impulse did it lend me to study the nature and thetemperament of narrator, as indicative of the peculiar coloring he mightlend his narrative; and how it taught me to know the force of the Frenchepigram that has declared how it was entirely the alternating popularity ofMarshal Soult that decided whether he won or lost the battle of Toulouse.While, however, I was sifting these evidences, and separating, as well asI might, the wheat from the chaff, I was in a measure training myself forwhat, without my then knowing it, was to become my career in life. This wasnot therefore altogether without a certain degree of labor, but so lightand pleasant withal, so full of picturesque peeps at character and humorousviews of human nature, that it would be the very rankest ingratitude of meif I did not own that I gained all my earlier experiences of the world invery pleasant company,--highly enjoyable at the time, and with matter forcharming souvenirs long after.That certain traits of my acquaintances found themselves embodied in someof the characters of this story I do not to deny. The principal of naturalselection adapts itself to novels as to Nature, and it would have demandedan effort above my strength to have disabused myself at the desk of allthe impressions of the dinner-table, and to have forgotten features whichinterested or amused me.One of the personages of my tale I drew, however, with very little aid fromfancy. I would go so far as to say that I took him from the life, if mymemory did not confront me with the lamentable inferiority of my picture tothe great original it was meant to portray.With the exception of the quality of courage, I never met a man whocontained within himself so many of the traits of Falstaff as theindividual who furnished me with Major Monsoon. But the major--I mustcall him so, though that rank was far beneath his own--was a man ofunquestionable bravery. His powers as a story-teller were to my thinkingunrivalled; the peculiar reflections on life which he would passinglyintroduce, the wise apothegms, were after a morality essentially of his owninvention. Then he would indulge in the unsparing exhibition of himself insituations such as other men would never have confessed to, all blended upwith a racy enjoyment of life, dashed occasionally with sorrow that ourtenure of it was short of patriarchal. All these, accompanied by a faceredolent of intense humor, and a voice whose modulations were managed withthe skill of a consummate artist,--all these, I say, were above me toconvey; nor indeed as I re-read any of the adventures in which he figures,am I other than ashamed at the weakness of my drawing and the poverty of mycoloring.That I had a better claim to personify him than is always the lot of anovelist; that I possessed, so to say, a vested interest in his life andadventures,--I will relate a little incident in proof; and my accuracy, ifnecessary, can be attested by another actor in the scene, who yet survives.I was living a bachelor life at Brussels, my family being at Ostendefor the bathing, during the summer of 1840. The city was comparativelyempty,--all the so-called society being absent at the various spas or bathsof Germany. One member of the British legation, who remained at his post torepresent the mission, and myself, making common cause of our desolationand ennui, spent much of our time together, and dined tte--tte everyday.It chanced that one evening, as we were hastening through the park onour way to dinner, we espied the major--for as major I must speak ofhim--lounging along with that half-careless, half-observant air we had bothof us remarked as indicating a desire to be somebody's, anybody's guest,rather than surrender himself to the homeliness of domestic fare."There's that confounded old Monsoon," cried my diplomatic friend. "It'sall up if he sees us, and I can't endure him."Now, I must remark that my friend, though very far from insensible to thehumoristic side of the major's character, was not always in the vein toenjoy it; and when so indisposed he could invest the object of his dislikewith something little short of antipathy. "Promise me," said he, as Monsooncame towards us,--"promise me, you'll not ask him to dinner." Before Icould make any reply, the major was shaking a hand of either of us, andrapturously expatiating over his good luck at meeting us. "Mrs. M.," saidhe, "has got a dreary party of old ladies to dine with her, and I have comeout here to find some pleasant fellow to join me, and take our mutton-choptogether.""We're behind our time, Major," said my friend, "sorry to leave youso abruptly, but must push on. Eh, Lorrequer," added he, to evokecorroboration on my part."Harry says nothing of the kind," replied Monsoon, "he says, or he's goingto say, 'Major, I have a nice bit of dinner waiting for me at home, enoughfor two, will feed three, or if there be a short-coming, nothing easierthan to eke out the deficiency by another bottle of Moulton; come alongwith us then, Monsoon, and we shall be all the merrier for your company.'"Repeating his last words, "Come along, Monsoon," etc., I passed my armwithin his, and away we went. For a moment my friend tried to get free andleave me, but I held him fast and carried him along in spite of himself. Hewas, however, so chagrined and provoked that till the moment we reached mydoor he never uttered a word, nor paid the slightest attention toMonsoon, who talked away in a vein that occasionally made gravity all butimpossible.Our dinner proceeded drearily enough, the diplomatist's stiffness neverrelaxed for a moment, and my own awkwardness damped all my attempts atconversation. Not so, however, Monsoon, he ate heartily, approved ofeverything, and pronounced my wine to be exquisite. He gave us a perfectdiscourse on sherry and Spanish wines in general, told us the secret of theAmontillado flavor, and explained that process of browning by boiling downwine which some are so fond of in England. At last, seeing perhaps that theprotection had little charm for us, with his accustomed tact, he divergedinto anecdote. "I was once fortunate enough," said he, "to fall upon someof that choice sherry from the St. Lucas Luentas which is always reservedfor royalty. It was a pale wine, delicious in the drinking, and leaving nomore flavor in the mouth than a faint dryness that seemed to say, anotherglass. Shall I tell you how I came by it?" And scarcely pausing for reply,he told the story of having robbed his own convoy, and stolen the wine hewas in charge of for safe conveyance.I wish I could give any, even the weakest idea of how he narrated thatincident,--the struggle that he portrayed between duty and temptation, andthe apologetic tone of his voice in which he explained that the frame ofmind that succeeds to any yielding to seductive influences, is often, inthe main, more profitable to a man than is the vain-glorious sense ofhaving resisted a temptation. "Meekness is the mother of all the virtues,"said he, "and there is no being meek without frailty." The story, told ashe told it, was too much for the diplomatist's gravity, he resisted allsigns of attention as long as he was able, and at last fairly roared outwith laughter.As soon as I myself recovered from the effects of his drollery, I said,"Major, I have a proposition to make you. Let me tell the story in print,and I'll give you five naps.""Are you serious, Harry?" asked he. "Is this on honor?""On honor, assuredly," I replied."Let me have the money down, on the nail, and I'll give you leave to haveme and my whole life, every adventure that ever befell me, ay, and if youlike, every moral reflection that my experiences have suggested.""Done!" cried I, "I agree.""Not so fast," cried the diplomatist, "we must make a protocol of this; thehigh contracting parties must know what they give and what they receive,I'll draw out the treaty."He did so at full length on a sheet of that solemn blue-tinted paper, sodedicated to despatch purposes; he duly set fourth the concession and theconsideration. We each signed the document; he witnessed and sealed it; andMonsoon pocketed my five napoleons, filling a bumper to any success thebargain might bring me, and of which I have never had reason to expressdeep disappointment.This document, along with my university degree, my commission in a militiaregiment, and a vast amount of letters very interesting to me, was seizedby the Austrian authorities on the way from Como to Florence, in the Augustof 1847, being deemed part of a treasonable correspondence,--probablypurposely allegorical in form,--and never restored to me. I fairly own thatI'd give all the rest willingly to repossess myself of the Monsoon treaty,not a little for the sake of that quaint old autograph, faintly shaken bythe quiet laugh with which he wrote it.That I did not entirely fail in giving my major some faint resemblanceto the great original from whom I copied him, I may mention that he wasspeedily recognized in print by the Marquis of Londonderry, the well-knownSir Charles Stuart of the Peninsular campaign. "I know that fellow well,"said he, "he once sent me a challenge, and I had to make him a very humbleapology. The occasion was this: I had been out with a single aide-de-campto make a reconnaissance in front of Victor's division; and to avoidattracting any notice, we covered over our uniform with two common grayovercoats which reached to the feet, and effectually concealed our rank asofficers. Scarcely, however, had we topped a hill which commanded the viewof the French, than a shower of shells flew over and around us. Amazed tothink how we could have been so quickly noticed, I looked around me, anddiscovered, quite close in my rear, your friend Monsoon with what he calledhis staff,--a popinjay set of rascals dressed out in green and gold, andwith more plumes and feathers than the general staff ever boasted. Carriedaway by momentary passion at the failure of my reconnaissance, I burst outwith some insolent allusion to the harlequin assembly which had drawn theFrench fire upon us. Monsoon saluted me respectfully, and retired without aword; but I had scarcely reached my quarters when a 'friend' of his waitedon me with a message, a very categorical message it was, too, 'it must be ameeting or an ample apology.' I made the apology, a most full one, for themajor was right, and I had not a fraction of reason to sustain me in myconduct, and we have been the best of friends ever since."I myself had heard the incident before this from Monsoon, but told amongother adventures whose exact veracity I was rather disposed to question,and did not therefore accord it all the faith that was its due; and I admitthat the accidental corroboration of this one event very often served topuzzle me afterwards, when I listened to stories in which the major seemeda second Munchausen, but might, like in this of the duel, have been amongthe truest and most matter-of-fact of historians. May the reader be notless embarrassed than myself, is my sincere, if not very courteous, prayer.I have no doubt myself, that often in recounting some strange incident,--apersonal experience it always was,--he was himself more amused by thecredulity of the hearers, and the amount of interest he could excite inthem, than were they by the story. He possessed the true narrative gusto,and there was a marvellous instinct in the way in which he would vary atale to suit the tastes of an audience; while his moralizings were almostcertain to take the tone of a humoristic quiz on the company.Though fully aware that I was availing myself of the contract thatdelivered him into my hands, and dining with me two or three days a week,he never lapsed into any allusion to his appearance in print; and the storyhad been already some weeks published before he asked me to lend him "thatlast thing--he forgot the name of it--I was writing."Of Frank Webber I have said, in a former notice, that he was one of myearliest friends, my chum in college, and in the very chambers where I havelocated Charles O'Malley, in Old Trinity. He was a man of the highest orderof abilities, and with a memory that never forgot, but ruined and run toseed by the idleness that came of a discursive, uncertain temperament.Capable of anything, he spent his youth in follies and eccentricities;every one of which, however, gave indications of a mind inexhaustible inresources, and abounding in devices and contrivances that none other buthimself would have thought of. Poor fellow, he died young; and perhaps itis better it should have been so. Had he lived to a later day, he wouldmost probably have been found a foremost leader of Fenianism; and fromwhat I knew of him, I can say he would have been a more dangerous enemy toEnglish rule than any of those dealers in the petty larceny of rebellion wehave lately seen among us.I have said that of Mickey Free I had not one but one thousand types.Indeed, I am not quite sure that in my last visit to Dublin, I did notchance on a living specimen of the "Free" family, much readier in reparte,quicker with an apropos, and droller in illustration than my own Mickey.This fellow was "boots" at a great hotel in Sackville Street; and I owe himmore amusement and some heartier laughs than it has been always my fortuneto enjoy in a party of wits. His criticisms on my sketches of Irishcharacter were about the shrewdest and the best I ever listened to; andthat I am not bribed to this by any flattery, I may remark that they weremore often severe than complimentary, and that he hit every blunder ofimage, every mistake in figure, of my peasant characters, with an acutenessand correctness which made me very grateful to know that his dailyoccupations were limited to blacking boots, and not polishing off authors.I believe I have now done with my confessions, except I should like to ownthat this story was the means of according me a more heartfelt glow ofsatisfaction, a more gratifying sense of pride, than anything I ever haveor ever shall write, and in this wise. My brother, at that time the rectorof an Irish parish, once forwarded to me a letter from a lady unknown tohim, but who had heard he was the brother of "Harry Lorrequer," and whoaddressed him not knowing where a letter might be directed to myself. Theletter was the grateful expression of a mother, who said, "I am thewidow of a field officer, and with an only son, for whom I obtained apresentation to Woolwich; but seeing in my boy's nature certain traits ofnervousness and timidity which induced me to hesitate on embarking him inthe career of a soldier, I became very unhappy and uncertain which courseto decide on."While in this state of uncertainty, I chanced to make him a birthdaypresent of 'Charles O'Malley,' the reading of which seemed to act like acharm on his whole character, inspiring him with a passion for movement andadventure, and spiriting him to an eager desire for a military life. Seeingthat this was no passing enthusiasm, but a decided and determined bent,I accepted the cadetship for him; and his career has been not alonedistinguished as a student, but one which has marked him out for an almosthare-brained courage, and for a dash and heroism that give high promise forhis future."Thank your brother for me," wrote she, "a mother's thanks for the welfareof an only son; and say how I wish that my best wishes for him and hiscould recompense him for what I owe him."I humbly hope that it may not be imputed to me as unpardonable vanity,--therecording of this incident. It gave me an intense pleasure when I heard it;and now, as I look back on it, it invests this story for myself with aninterest which nothing else that I have written can afford me.I have now but to repeat what I have declared in former editions, mysincere gratitude for the favor the public still continues to bestowon me,--a favor which probably associates the memory of this book withwhatever I have since done successfully, and compels me to remember thatto the popularity of "Charles O'Malley" I am indebted for a great share ofthat kindliness in criticism, and that geniality in judgment, which--formore than a quarter of a century--my countrymen have graciously bestowed ontheir faithful friend and servant,CHARLES LEVER.TRIESTE, 1872.CONTENTS.CHAPTERI.       DALY'S CLUB-HOUSEII.      THE ESCAPEIII.     MR. BLAKEIV.      THE HUNTV.       THE DRAWING-ROOMVI.      THE DINNERVII.     THE FLIGHT FROM GURT-NA-MORRAVIII.    THE DUELIX.      THE RETURNX.       THE ELECTIONXI.      AN ADVENTUREXII.     MICKEY FREEXIII.    THE JOURNEYXIV.     DUBLINXV.      CAPTAIN POWERXVI.     THE VICE-PROVOSTXVII.    TRINITY COLLEGE.--A LECTUREXVIII.   THE INVITATION.--THE WAGERXIX.     THE BALLXX.      THE LAST NIGHT IN TRINITYXXI.     THE PHOENIX PARKXXII.    THE ROADXXIII.   CORKXXIV.    THE ADJUTANT'S DINNERXXV.     THE ENTANGLEMENTXXVI.    THE PREPARATIONXXVII.   THE SUPPERXXVIII.  THE VOYAGEXXIX.    THE ADJUTANT'S STORY.--LIFE IN DERBYXXX.     FRED POWER'S ADVENTURE IN PHILIPSTOWNXXXI.    THE VOYAGE CONTINUEDXXXII.   MR. SPARKS'S STORYXXXIII.  THE SKIPPERXXXIV.   THE LANDXXXV.    MAJOR MONSOONXXXVI.   THE LANDINGXXXVII.  LISBONXXXVIII. THE RUA NUOVAXXXIX.   THE VILLAXL.      THE DINNERXLI.     THE ROUTEXLII.    THE FAREWELLXLIII.   THE MARCHXLIV.    THE BIVOUACXLV.     THE DOUROXLVI.    THE MORNINGXLVII.   THE REVIEWXLVIII.  THE QUARRELXLIX.    THE ROUTE CONTINUEDL.       THE WATCH-FIRELI.      THE MARCHLII.     THE PAGELIII.    ALVASLIV.     THE SUPPERLV.      THE LEGIONLVI.     THE DEPARTURELVII.    CUESTALVIII.   THE LETTERLXIX.    MAJOR O'SHAUGHNESSYLX.      PRELIMINARIESLXI.     ALL RIGHTLXII.    THE DUELLXIII.   NEWS FROM GALWAYLXIV.    AN ADVENTURE WITH SIR ARTHURLXV.     TALAVERALXVI.    NIGHT AFTER TALAVERALXVII.   THE OUTPOSTILLUSTRATIONS BY PHIZ IN VOL. IEtchingsTHE SUNK FENCETHE RESCUECHARLES POPS THE QUESTIONTHE SKIRMISHIllustrations in the TextMR. BLAKE'S DRESSING-ROOMTHE ELECTIONMR. CROW WELL PLUCKEDFRANK WEBBER AT HIS STUDIESMISS JUDY MACANTHE ADJUTANT'S AFTER-DINNER RIDETHE RIVAL FLUNKIESMAJOR MONSOON AND DONNA MARIATHE SALUTATIONA TOUCH AT LEAP-FROG WITH NAPOLEONMAJOR MONSOON TRYING TO CHARGEMR. FREE'S SONGTHE COAT OF MAILCHARLES O'MALLEY.THE IRISH DRAGOON.CHAPTER I.DALY'S CLUB-HOUSE.The rain was dashing in torrents against the window-panes, and the windsweeping in heavy and fitful gusts along the dreary and deserted streets,as a party of three persons sat over their wine, in that stately old pilewhich once formed the resort of the Irish Members, in College Green,Dublin, and went by the name of Daly's Club-House. The clatter of fallingtiles and chimney-pots, the jarring of the window-frames, and howling ofthe storm without seemed little to affect the spirits of those within asthey drew closer to a blazing fire before which stood a small table coveredwith the remains of a dessert, and an abundant supply of bottles, whosecharacteristic length of neck indicated the rarest wines of France andGermany; while the portly magnum of claret--the wine par excellence ofevery Irish gentleman of the day--passed rapidly from hand to hand, theconversation did not languish, and many a deep and hearty laugh followedthe stories which every now and then were told, as some reminiscence ofearly days was recalled, or some trait of a former companion remembered.One of the party, however, was apparently engrossed by other thoughts thanthose of the mirth and merriment around; for in the midst of all he wouldturn suddenly from the others, and devote himself to a number of scatteredsheets of paper, upon which he had written some lines, but whose crossedand blotted sentences attested how little success had waited uponhis literary labors. This individual was a short, plethoric-looking,white-haired man of about fifty, with a deep, round voice, and a chuckling,smothering laugh, which, whenever he indulged not only shook his own ampleperson, but generally created a petty earthquake on every side of him. Forthe present, I shall not stop to particularize him more closely; but when Iadd that the person in question was a well-known member of the Irish Houseof Commons, whose acute understanding and practical good sense were veiledunder an affected and well-dissembled habit of blundering that did farmore for his party than the most violent and pointed attacks of his moreaccurate associates, some of my readers may anticipate me in pronouncinghim to be Sir Harry Boyle. Upon his left sat a figure the most unlike himpossible. He was a tall, thin, bony man, with a bolt-upright air and a mostsaturnine expression; his eyes were covered by a deep green shade, whichfell far over his face, but failed to conceal a blue scar that crossing hischeek ended in the angle of his mouth, and imparted to that feature, whenhe spoke, an apparently abortive attempt to extend towards his eyebrow; hisupper lip was covered with a grizzly and ill-trimmed mustache, which addedmuch to the ferocity of his look, while a thin and pointed beard on hischin gave an apparent length to the whole face that completed its ruefulcharacter. His dress was a single-breasted, tightly buttoned frock, in onebutton-hole of which a yellow ribbon was fastened, the decoration of aforeign service, which conferred upon its wearer the title of count; andthough Billy Considine, as he was familiarly called by his friends, wasa thorough Irishman in all his feelings and affections, yet he had noobjection to the designation he had gained in the Austrian army. The Countwas certainly no beauty, but somehow, very few men of his day had a fancyfor telling him so. A deadlier hand and a steadier eye never covered hisman in the Phoenix; and though he never had a seat in the House, he wasalways regarded as one of the government party, who more than once haddamped the ardor of an opposition member by the very significant threatof "setting Billy at him." The third figure of the group was a large,powerfully built, and handsome man, older than either of the others, butnot betraying in his voice or carriage any touch of time. He was attired inthe green coat and buff vest which formed the livery of the club; and inhis tall, ample forehead, clear, well-set eye, and still handsome mouth,bore evidence that no great flattery was necessary at the time which calledGodfrey O'Malley the handsomest man in Ireland."Upon my conscience," said Sir Harry, throwing down his pen with an air ofill-temper, "I can make nothing of it! I have got into such an infernalhabit of making bulls, that I can't write sense when I want it!""Come, come," said O'Malley, "try again, my dear fellow. If you can'tsucceed, I'm sure Billy and I have no chance.""What have you written? Let us see," said Considine, drawing the papertowards him, and holding it to the light. "Why, what the devil is all this?You have made him 'drop down dead after dinner of a lingering illnessbrought on by the debate of yesterday.'""Oh, impossible!""Well, read it yourself; there it is. And, as if to make the thing lesscredible, you talk of his 'Bill for the Better Recovery of Small Debts.'I'm sure, O'Malley, your last moments were not employed in that manner.""Come, now," said Sir Harry, "I'll set all to rights with a postscript.'Any one who questions the above statement is politely requested to call onMr. Considine, 16 Kildare Street, who will feel happy to afford him everysatisfaction upon Mr. O'Malley's decease, or upon miscellaneous matters.""Worse and worse," said O'Malley. "Killing another man will never persuadethe world that I'm dead.""But we'll wake you, and have a glorious funeral.""And if any man doubt the statement, I'll call him out," said the Count."Or, better still," said Sir Harry, "O'Malley has his action at law fordefamation.""I see I'll never get down to Galway at this rate," said O'Malley; "and asthe new election takes place on Tuesday week, time presses. There are morewrits flying after me this instant than for all the government boroughs.""And there will be fewer returns, I fear," said Sir Harry."Who is the chief creditor?" asked the Count."Old Stapleton, the attorney in Fleet Street, has most of the mortgages.""Nothing to be done with him in this way?" said Considine, balancing thecorkscrew like a hair trigger."No chance of it.""May be," said Sir Harry, "he might come to terms if I were to call andsay, 'You are anxious to close accounts, as your death has just takenplace.' You know what I mean.""I fear so should he, were you to say so. No, no, Boyle, just try a plain,straightforward paragraph about my death; we'll have it in Falkner's paperto-morrow. On Friday the funeral can take place, and, with the blessingo' God, I'll come to life on Saturday at Athlone, in time to canvass themarket.""I think it wouldn't be bad if your ghost were to appear to old Timins thetanner, in Naas, on your way down. You know he arrested you once before.""I prefer a night's sleep," said O'Malley. "But come, finish the squib forthe paper.""Stay a little," said Sir Harry, musing; "it just strikes me that if everthe matter gets out I may be in some confounded scrape. Who knows if it isnot a breach of privilege to report the death of a member? And to tell youtruth, I dread the Sergeant and the Speaker's warrant with a very livelyfear.""Why, when did you make his acquaintance?" said the Count."Is it possible you never heard of Boyle's committal?" said O'Malley. "Yousurely must have been abroad at the time. But it's not too late to tell ityet.""Well, it's about two years since old Townsend brought in his EnlistmentBill, and the whole country was scoured for all our voters, who werescattered here and there, never anticipating another call of the House, andsupposing that the session was just over. Among others, up came our friendHarry, here, and the night he arrived they made him a 'Monk of the Screw,'and very soon made him forget his senatorial dignities. On the eveningafter his reaching town, the bill was brought in, and at two in the morningthe division took place,--a vote was of too much consequence not to lookafter it closely,--and a Castle messenger was in waiting in ExchequerStreet, who, when the debate was closing, put Harry, with three others,into a coach, and brought them down to the House. Unfortunately, however,they mistook their friends, voted against the bill, and amidst the loudestcheering of the opposition, the government party were defeated. The rage ofthe ministers knew no bounds, and looks of defiance and even threats wereexchanged between the ministers and the deserters. Amidst all this poorHarry fell fast asleep and dreamed that he was once more in ExchequerStreet, presiding among the monks, and mixing another tumbler. At length heawoke and looked about him. The clerk was just at the instant reading out,in his usual routine manner, a clause of the new bill, and the remainderof the House was in dead silence. Harry looked again around on every side,wondering where was the hot water, and what had become of the whiskeybottle, and above all, why the company were so extremely dull and ungenial.At length, with a half-shake, he roused up a little, and giving a lookof unequivocal contempt on every side, called out, 'Upon my soul, you'repleasant companions; but I'll give you a chant to enliven you!' So saying,he cleared his throat with a couple of short coughs, and struck up, withthe voice of a Stentor, the following verse of a popular ballad:--'And they nibbled away, both night and day,Like mice in a round of Glo'ster;Great rogues they were all, both great and small,From Flood to Leslie Foster.Great rogues all.Chorus, boys!' If he was not joined by the voices of his friends in thesong, it was probably because such a roar of laughing never was heard sincethe walls were roofed over. The whole House rose in a mass, and my friendHarry was hurried over the benches by the sergeant-at-arms, and left forthree weeks in Newgate to practise his melody.""All true," said Sir Harry; "and worse luck to them for not liking music.But come, now, will this do? 'It is our melancholy duty to announce thedeath of Godfrey O'Malley, Esq., late member for the county of Galway,which took place on Friday evening, at Daly's Club-House. This esteemedgentleman's family--one of the oldest in Ireland, and among whom it washereditary not to have any children--'"Here a burst of laughter from Considine and O'Malley interrupted thereader, who with the greatest difficulty could be persuaded that he wasagain bulling it."The devil fly away with it," said he; "I'll never succeed.""Never mind," said O'Malley, "the first part will do admirably; and let usnow turn our attention to other matters."A fresh magnum was called for, and over its inspiring contents all thedetails of the funeral were planned; and as the clock struck four the partyseparated for the night, well satisfied with the result of their labors.CHAPTER II.THE ESCAPE.When the dissolution of Parliament was announced the following morning inDublin, its interest in certain circles was manifestly increased by thefact that Godfrey O'Malley was at last open to arrest; for as in oldentimes certain gifted individuals possessed some happy immunity againstdeath by fire or sword, so the worthy O'Malley seemed to enjoy a no lessvaluable privilege, and for many a year had passed among the myrmidons ofthe law as writ-proof. Now, however, the charm seemed to have yielded; andpretty much with the same feeling as a storming party may be supposed toexperience on the day that a breach is reported as practicable, did thehonest attorneys retained in the various suits against him rally round eachother that morning in the Four Courts.Bonds, mortgages, post-obits, promissory notes--in fact, every imaginablespecies of invention for raising the O'Malley exchequer for the precedingthirty years--were handed about on all sides, suggesting to the mind of anuninterested observer the notion that had the aforesaid O'Malley been anindependent and absolute monarch, instead of merely being the member forGalway, the kingdom over whose destinies he had been called to presidewould have suffered not a little from a depreciated currency and anextravagant issue of paper. Be that as it might, one thing was clear,--thewhole estates of the family could not possibly pay one fourth of the debt;and the only question was one which occasionally arises at a scanty dinneron a mail-coach road,--who was to be the lucky individual to carve thejoint, where so many were sure to go off hungry?It was now a trial of address between these various and highly giftedgentlemen who should first pounce upon the victim; and when the skill oftheir caste is taken into consideration, who will doubt that every feasibleexpedient for securing him was resorted to? While writs were struck againsthim in Dublin, emissaries were despatched to the various surroundingcounties to procure others in the event of his escape. Ne exeats weresworn, and water-bailiffs engaged to follow him on the high seas; and asthe great Nassau balloon did not exist in those days, no imaginable mode ofescape appeared possible, and bets were offered at long odds that withintwenty-four hours the late member would be enjoying his otium cumdignitate in his Majesty's jail of Newgate.Expectation was at the highest, confidence hourly increasing, success allbut certain, when in the midst of all this high-bounding hope the dreadfulrumor spread that O'Malley was no more. One had seen it just five minutesbefore in the evening edition of Falkner's paper; another heard it in thecourts; a third overheard the Chief-Justice stating it to the Master of theRolls; and lastly, a breathless witness arrived from College Green withthe news that Daly's Club-House was shut up, and the shutters closed.To describe the consternation the intelligence caused on every side isimpossible; nothing in history equals it,--except, perhaps, the entranceof the French army into Moscow, deserted and forsaken by its formerinhabitants. While terror and dismay, therefore, spread amidst that wideand respectable body who formed O'Malley's creditors, the preparationsfor his funeral were going on with every rapidity. Relays of horses wereordered at every stage of the journey, and it was announced that, intestimony of his worth, a large party of his friends were to accompany hisremains to Portumna Abbey,--a test much more indicative of resistancein the event of any attempt to arrest the body, than of anything likereverence for their departed friend.Such was the state of matters in Dublin when a letter reached me onemorning at O'Malley Castle, whose contents will at once explain thewriter's intention, and also serve to introduce my unworthy self to myreader. It ran thus:--DALY'S, about eight in the evening.Dear Charley,--Your uncle Godfrey, whose debts (God pardonhim!) are more numerous than the hairs of his wig, was obliged todie here last night. We did the thing for him completely; and alldoubts as to the reality of the event are silenced by thecircumstantial detail of the newspaper, "that he was confined sixweeks to his bed from a cold he caught, ten days ago, while on guard."Repeat this; for it is better we had all the same story till hecomes to life again, which, may be, will not take place beforeTuesday or Wednesday. At the same time, canvass the county for him,and say he'll be with his friends next week, and up in Woodford andthe Scariff barony. Say he died a true Catholic; it will serve him onthe hustings. Meet us in Athlone on Saturday, and bring your uncle'smare with you. He says he'd rather ride home. And tell Father MacShane, to have a bit of dinner ready about four o'clock, for the corpsecan get nothing after he leaves Mountmellick. No more now, fromYours ever,HARRY BOYLETo CHARLES O'MALLEY, Esq.,O'Malley Castle, Galway.When this not over-clear document reached me I was the sole inhabitant ofO'Malley Castle,--a very ruinous pile of incongruous masonry, that stood ina wild and dreary part of the county of Galway, bordering on the Shannon.On every side stretched the property of my uncle, or at least what had oncebeen so; and indeed, so numerous were its present claimants that he wouldhave been a subtle lawyer who could have pronounced upon the rightfulowner. The demesne around the castle contained some well-grown and handsometimber, and as the soil was undulating and fertile, presented many featuresof beauty; beyond it, all was sterile, bleak, and barren. Long tracts ofbrown heath-clad mountain or not less unprofitable valleys of tall andwaving fern were all that the eye could discern, except where the broadShannon, expanding into a tranquil and glassy lake, lay still andmotionless beneath the dark mountains, a few islands, with some ruinedchurches and a round tower, alone breaking the dreary waste of water.Here it was that I passed my infancy and my youth; and here I now stood,at the age of seventeen, quite unconscious that the world contained aughtfairer and brighter than that gloomy valley with its rugged frame ofmountains.When a mere child, I was left an orphan to the care of my worthy uncle. Myfather, whose extravagance had well sustained the family reputation, hadsquandered a large and handsome property in contesting elections for hisnative county, and in keeping up that system of unlimited hospitality forwhich Ireland in general, and Galway more especially, was renowned. Theresult was, as might be expected, ruin and beggary. He died, leaving everyone of his estates encumbered with heavy debts, and the only legacy he leftto his brother was a boy four years of age, entreating him with his lastbreath, "Be anything you like to him, Godfrey, but a father, or at leastsuch a one as I have proved."Godfrey O'Malley some short time previous had lost his wife, and when thisnew trust was committed to him he resolved never to remarry, but to rearme up as his own child and the inheritor of his estates. How weighty andonerous an obligation this latter might prove, the reader can form someidea. The intention was, however, a kind one; and to do my uncle justice,he loved me with all the affection of a warm and open heart.From my earliest years his whole anxiety was to fit me for the part of acountry gentleman, as he regarded that character,--namely, I rode boldlywith fox-hounds; I was about the best shot within twenty miles of us; Icould swim the Shannon at Holy Island; I drove four-in-hand better than thecoachman himself; and from finding a hare to hooking a salmon, my equalcould not be found from Killaloe to Banagher. These were the staple of myendowments. Besides which, the parish priest had taught me a little Latin,a little French, a little geometry, and a great deal of the life andopinions of Saint Jago, who presided over a holy well in the neighborhood,and was held in very considerable repute.When I add to this portraiture of my accomplishments that I was nearly sixfeet high, with more than a common share of activity and strength for myyears, and no inconsiderable portion of good looks, I have finished mysketch, and stand before my reader.It is now time I should return to Sir Harry's letter, which so completelybewildered me that, but for the assistance of Father Roach, I should havebeen totally unable to make out the writer's intentions. By his advice, Iimmediately set out for Athlone, where, when I arrived, I found myuncle addressing the mob from the top of the hearse, and recounting hismiraculous escapes as a new claim upon their gratitude."There was nothing else for it, boys; the Dublin people insisted onmy being their member, and besieged the club-house. I refused; theythreatened. I grew obstinate; they furious. 'I'll die first,' said I.'Galway or nothing!'""Hurrah!" from the mob. "O'Malley forever!""And ye see, I kept my word, boys,--I did die; I died that evening at aquarter past eight. There, read it for yourselves; there's the paper. Waswaked and carried out, and here I am after all, ready to die in earnest foryou, but never to desert you."The cheers here were deafening, and my uncle was carried through the marketdown to the mayor's house, who, being a friend of the opposite party, wascomplimented with three groans; then up the Mall to the chapel, besidewhich father Mac Shane resided. He was then suffered to touch the earthonce more; when, having shaken hands with all of his constituency withinreach, he entered the house, to partake of the kindest welcome and bestreception the good priest could afford him.My uncle's progress homeward was a triumph. The real secret of his escapehad somehow come out, and his popularity rose to a white heat. "An' it'slittle O'Malley cares for the law,--bad luck to it; it's himself can laughat judge and jury. Arrest him? Nabocklish! Catch a weasel asleep!" etc.Such were the encomiums that greeted him as he passed on towards home;while shouts of joy and blazing bonfires attested that his success wasregarded as a national triumph.The west has certainly its strong features of identity. Had my unclepossessed the claims of the immortal Howard; had he united in his personall the attributes which confer a lasting and an ennobling fame uponhumanity,--he might have passed on unnoticed and unobserved; but forthe man that had duped a judge and escaped the sheriff, nothing wassufficiently flattering to mark their approbation. The success of theexploit was twofold; the news spread far and near, and the very storycanvassed the county better than Billy Davern himself, the Athloneattorney.This was the prospect now before us; and however little my readers maysympathize with my taste, I must honestly avow that I looked forward toit with a most delighted feeling. O'Malley Castle was to be the centreof operations, and filled with my uncle's supporters; while I, a merestripling, and usually treated as a boy, was to be intrusted with animportant mission, and sent off to canvass a distant relation, with whommy uncle was not upon terms, and who might possibly be approachable by ayounger branch of the family, with whom he had never any collision.CHAPTER III.MR. BLAKE.Nothing but the exigency of the case could ever have persuaded my uncle tostoop to the humiliation of canvassing the individual to whom I was nowabout to proceed as envoy-extraordinary, with full powers to make any orevery amende, provided only his interest and that of his followers shouldbe thereby secured to the O'Malley cause. The evening before I set out wasdevoted to giving me all the necessary instructions how I was to proceed,and what difficulties I was to avoid."Say your uncle's in high feather with the government party," said SirHarry, "and that he only votes against them as a ruse de guerre, as theFrench call it.""Insist upon it that I am sure of the election without him; but that forfamily reasons he should not stand aloof from me; that people are talkingof it in the country.""And drop a hint," said Considine, "that O'Malley is greatly improved inhis shooting.""And don't get drunk too early in the evening, for Phil Blake has beautifulclaret," said another."And be sure you don't make love to the red-headed girls," added a third;"he has four of them, each more sinfully ugly than the other.""You'll be playing whist, too," said Boyle; "and never mind losing a fewpounds. Mrs. B., long life to her, has a playful way of turning the king.""Charley will do it all well," said my uncle; "leave him alone. And now letus have in the supper."It was only on the following morning, as the tandem came round to the door,that I began to feel the importance of my mission, and certain misgivingscame over me as to my ability to fulfil it. Mr. Blake and his family,though estranged from my uncle for several years past, had been always mostkind and good-natured to me; and although I could not, with propriety, havecultivated any close intimacy with them, I had every reason to suppose thatthey entertained towards me nothing but sentiments of good-will. The headof the family was a Galway squire of the oldest and most genuine stock, agreat sportsman, a negligent farmer, and most careless father; he lookedupon a fox as an infinitely more precious part of the creation than aFrench governess, and thought that riding well with hounds was a far bettergift than all the learning of a Parson. His daughters were after hisown heart,--the best-tempered, least-educated, most high-spirited, gay,dashing, ugly girls in the county, ready to ride over a four-foot palingwithout a saddle, and to dance the "Wind that shakes the barley" for fourconsecutive hours, against all the officers that their hard fate, and theHorse Guards, ever condemned to Galway.The mamma was only remarkable for her liking for whist, and her invariablegood fortune thereat,--a circumstance the world were agreed in ascribingless to the blind goddess than her own natural endowments.Lastly, the heir of the house was a stripling of about my own age, whoseaccomplishments were limited to selling spavined and broken-winded horsesto the infantry officers, playing a safe game at billiards, and acting asjackal-general to his sisters at balls, providing them with a sufficiencyof partners, and making a strong fight for a place at the supper-table forhis mother. These fraternal and filial traits, more honored at home thanabroad, had made Mr. Matthew Blake a rather well-known individual in theneighborhood where he lived.Though Mr. Blake's property was ample, and strange to say for his county,unencumbered, the whole air and appearance of his house and groundsbetrayed anything rather than a sufficiency of means. The gate lodge was amiserable mud-hovel with a thatched and falling roof; the gate itself, awooden contrivance, one half of which was boarded and the other railed; theavenue was covered with weeds, and deep with ruts; and the clumps of youngplantation, which had been planted and fenced with care, were now open tothe cattle, and either totally uprooted or denuded of their bark and dying.The lawn, a handsome one of some forty acres, had been devoted to anexercise-ground for training horses, and was cut up by their feet beyondall semblance of its original destination; and the house itself, a largeand venerable structure of above a century old, displayed every variety ofcontrivance, as well as the usual one of glass, to exclude the weather. Thehall-door hung by a single hinge, and required three persons each morningand evening to open and shut it; the remainder of the day it lay pensivelyopen; the steps which led to it were broken and falling; and the wholeaspect of things without was ruinous in the extreme. Within, matters weresomewhat better, for though the furniture was old, and none of it clean,yet an appearance of comfort was evident; and the large grate, blazing withits pile of red-hot turf, the deep-cushioned chairs, the old black mahoganydinner-table, and the soft carpet, albeit deep with dust, were not to bedespised on a winter's evening, after a hard day's run with the "Blazers."Here it was, however, that Mr. Philip Blake had dispensed his hospitalitiesfor above fifty years, and his father before him; and here, with a retinueof servants as gauches and ill-ordered as all about them, was heaccustomed to invite all that the county possessed of rank and wealth,among which the officers quartered in his neighborhood were neverneglected, the Miss Blakes having as decided a taste for the army as anyyoung ladies of the west of Ireland; and while the Galway squire, withhis cords and tops, was detailing the latest news from Ballinasloe in onecorner, the dandy from St. James's Street might be seen displaying morearts of seductive flattery in another than his most accurate insoucianewould permit him to practise in the elegant salons of London or Paris, andthe same man who would have "cut his brother," for a solecism of dress orequipage, in Bond Street, was now to be seen quietly domesticated, eatingfamily dinners, rolling silk for the young ladies, going down the middlein a country dance, and even descending to the indignity of long whist at"tenpenny" points, with only the miserable consolation that the companywere not honest.It was upon a clear frosty morning, when a bright blue sky and a sharp butbracing air seem to exercise upon the feelings a sense no less pleasurablethan the balmiest breeze and warmest sun of summer, that I whipped myleader short round, and entered the precincts of "Gurt-na-Morra." As Iproceeded along the avenue, I was struck by the slight traces of repairshere and there evident,--a gate or two that formerly had been parallel tothe horizon had been raised to the perpendicular; some ineffectual effortsat paint were also perceptible upon the palings; and, in short, everythingseemed to have undergone a kind of attempt at improvement.When I reached the door, instead of being surrounded, as of old, by a tribeof menials frieze-coated, bare-headed, and bare-legged, my presence wasannounced by a tremendous ringing of bells from the hands of an oldfunctionary in a very formidable livery, who peeped at me through thehall-window, and whom, with the greatest difficulty, I recognized as myquondam acquaintance, the butler. His wig alone would have graced a king'scounsel; and the high collar of his coat, and the stiff pillory of hiscravat denoted an eternal adieu to so humble a vocation as drawing a cork.Before I had time for any conjecture as to the altered circumstances about,the activity of my friend at the bell had surrounded me with "four othersworse than himself," at least they were exactly similarly attired; andprobably from the novelty of their costume, and the restraints of sounusual a thing as dress, were as perfectly unable to assist themselvesor others as the Court of Aldermen would be were they to rig out in platearmor of the fourteenth century. How much longer I might have gone onconjecturing the reasons for the masquerade around, I cannot say; but myservant, an Irish disciple of my uncle's, whispered in my ear, "It's ared-breeches day, Master Charles,--they'll have the hoith of company in thehouse." From the phrase, it needed little explanation to inform me that itwas one of those occasions on which Mr. Blake attired all the hangers-onof his house in livery, and that great preparations were in progress for amore than usually splendid reception.In the next moment I was ushered into the breakfast-room, where a party ofabove a dozen persons were most gayly enjoying all the good cheer for whichthe house had a well-deserved repute. After the usual shaking of hands andhearty greetings were over, I was introduced in all form to Sir GeorgeDashwood, a tall and singularly handsome man of about fifty, with anundress military frock and ribbon. His reception of me was somewhatstrange; for as they mentioned my relationship to Godfrey O'Malley, hesmiled slightly, and whispered something to Mr. Blake, who replied, "Oh,no, no; not the least. A mere boy; and besides--" What he added I lost, forat that moment Nora Blake was presenting me to Miss Dashwood.If the sweetest blue eyes that ever beamed beneath a forehead of snowywhiteness, over which dark brown and waving hair fell less in curls thanmasses of locky richness, could only have known what wild work they weremaking of my poor heart, Miss Dashwood, I trust, would have looked at herteacup or her muffin rather than at me, as she actually did on that fatalmorning. If I were to judge from her costume, she had only just arrived,and the morning air had left upon her cheek a bloom that contributedgreatly to the effect of her lovely countenance. Although very young, herform had all the roundness of womanhood; while her gay and sprightly mannerindicated all the sans gne which only very young girls possess, andwhich, when tempered with perfect good taste, and accompanied by beauty andno small share of talent, forms an irresistible power of attraction.Beside her sat a tall, handsome man of about five-and-thirty or perhapsforty years of age, with a most soldierly air, who as I was presented tohim scarcely turned his head, and gave me a half-nod of very unequivocalcoldness. There are moments in life in which the heart is, as it were, laidbare to any chance or casual impression with a wondrous sensibility ofpleasure or its opposite. This to me was one of those; and as I turned fromthe lovely girl, who had received me with a marked courtesy, to the coldair and repelling hauteur of the dark-browed captain, the blood rushedthrobbing to my forehead; and as I walked to my place at the table, Ieagerly sought his eye, to return him a look of defiance and disdain,proud and contemptuous as his own. Captain Hammersley, however, never tookfurther notice of me, but continued to recount, for the amusement of thoseabout him, several excellent stories of his military career, which, Iconfess, were heard with every test of delight by all save me. One thinggalled me particularly,--and how easy is it, when you have begun bydisliking a person, to supply food for your antipathy,--all his allusionsto his military life were coupled with half-hinted and ill-concealedsneers at civilians of every kind, as though every man not a soldier wereabsolutely unfit for common intercourse with the world, still more for anyfavorable reception in ladies' society.The young ladies of the family were a well-chosen auditory, for theiradmiration of the army extended from the Life Guards to the VeteranBattalion, the Sappers and Miners included; and as Miss Dashwood was thedaughter of a soldier, she of course coincided in many of, if not all, hisopinions. I turned towards my neighbor, a Clare gentleman, and tried toengage him in conversation, but he was breathlessly attending to thecaptain. On my left sat Matthew Blake, whose eyes were firmly rivetedupon the same person, and who heard his marvels with an interest scarcelyinferior to that of his sisters. Annoyed and in ill-temper, I ate mybreakfast in silence, and resolved that the first moment I could obtain ahearing from Mr. Blake I would open my negotiation, and take my leave atonce of Gurt-na-Morra.We all assembled in a large room, called by courtesy the library, whenbreakfast was over; and then it was that Mr. Blake, taking me aside,whispered, "Charley, it's right I should inform you that Sir GeorgeDashwood there is the Commander of the Forces, and is come down here atthis moment to--" What for, or how it should concern me, I was not tolearn; for at that critical instant my informant's attention was called offby Captain Hammersley asking if the hounds were to hunt that day."My friend Charley here is the best authority upon that matter," said Mr.Blake, turning towards me."They are to try the Priest's meadows," said I, with an air of someimportance; "but if your guests desire a day's sport, I'll send word overto Brackely to bring the dogs over here, and we are sure to find a fox inyour cover.""Oh, then, by all means," said the captain, turning towards Mr. Blake, andaddressing himself to him,--"by all means; and Miss Dashwood, I'm sure,would like to see the hounds throw off."Whatever chagrin the first part of his speech caused me, the latter set myheart a-throbbing; and I hastened from the room to despatch a messenger tothe huntsman to come over to Gurt-na-Morra, and also another to O'MalleyCastle to bring my best horse and my riding equipments as quickly aspossible."Matthew, who is this captain?" said I, as young Blake met me in the hall."Oh, he is the aide-de-camp of General Dashwood. A nice fellow, isn't he?""I don't know what you may think," said I, "but I take him for the mostimpertinent, impudent, supercilious--"The rest of my civil speech was cut short by the appearance of the veryindividual in question, who, with his hands in his pockets and a cigar inhis mouth, sauntered forth down the steps, taking no more notice of MatthewBlake and myself than the two fox-terriers that followed at his heels.However anxious I might be to open negotiations on the subject of mymission, for the present the thing was impossible; for I found that SirGeorge Dashwood was closeted closely with Mr. Blake, and resolved to waittill evening, when chance might afford me the opportunity I desired.As the ladies had retired to dress for the hunt, and as I felt no peculiardesire to ally myself with the unsocial captain, I accompanied Matthew tothe stable to look after the cattle, and make preparations for the comingsport."There's Captain Hammersley's mare," said Matthew, as he pointed out ahighly bred but powerful English hunter. "She came last night; for as heexpected some sport, he sent his horses from Dublin on purpose. The otherswill be here to-day.""What is his regiment?" said I, with an appearance of carelessness, but inreality feeling curious to know if the captain was a cavalry or infantryofficer."The --th Light Dragoons,""You never saw him ride?" said I."Never; but his groom there says he leads the way in his own country.""And where may that be?""In Leicestershire, no less," said Matthew."Does he know Galway?""Never was in it before. It's only this minute he asked Moses Daly if theox-fences were high here.""Ox-fences! Then he does not know what a wall is?""Devil a bit; but we'll teach him.""That we will," said I, with as bitter a resolution to impart theinstruction as ever schoolmaster did to whip Latin grammar into one of thegreat unbreeched."But I had better send the horses down to the Mill," said Matthew; "we'lldraw that cover first."So saying, he turned towards the stable, while I sauntered alone towardsthe road by which I expected the huntsman. I had not walked half a milebefore I heard the yelping of the dogs, and a little farther on I saw oldBrackely coming along at a brisk trot, cutting the hounds on each side, andcalling after the stragglers."Did you see my horse on the road, Brackely?" said I."I did, Misther Charles; and troth, I'm sorry to see him. Sure yerselfknows better than to take out the Badger, the best steeple-chaser inIreland, in such a country as this,--nothing but awkward stone-fences, andnot a foot of sure ground in the whole of it.""I know it well, Brackely; but I have my reasons for it.""Well, may be you have; what cover will your honor try first?""They talk of the Mill," said I; "but I'd much rather try Morran-a-Gowl.""Morran-a-Gowl! Do you want to break your neck entirely?""No, Brackely, not mine.""Whose, then, alannah?""An English captain's, the devil fly away with him! He's come down hereto-day, and from all I can see is a most impudent fellow; so, Brackely--""I understand. Well, leave it to me; and though I don't like the onlydeer-park wall on the hill, we'll try it this morning with the blessing.I'll take him down by Woodford, over the Devil's Mouth,--it's eighteen footwide this minute with the late rains,--into the four callows; then over thestone-walls, down to Dangan; then take a short cast up the hill, blow hima bit, and give him the park wall at the top. You must come in then fresh,and give him the whole run home over Sleibhmich. The Badger knows it all,and takes the road always in a fly,--a mighty distressing thing for thehorse that follows, more particularly if he does not understand a stonycountry. Well, if he lives through this, give him the sunk fence and thestone wall at Mr. Blake's clover-field, for the hounds will run into thefox about there; and though we never ride that leap since Mr. Malone brokehis neck at it, last October, yet upon an occasion like this, and for thehonor of Galway--""To be sure, Brackely; and here's a guinea for you, and now trot on towardsthe house. They must not see us together, or they might suspect something.But, Brackely," said I, calling out after him, "if he rides at all fair,what's to be done?""Troth, then, myself doesn't know. There is nothing so bad west of Athlone.Have ye a great spite again him?""I have," said I, fiercely."Could ye coax a fight out of him?""That's true," said I; "and now ride on as fast as you can."Brackely's last words imparted a lightness to my heart and my step, and Istrode along a very different man from what I had left the house half anhour previously.CHAPTER IV.THE HUNT.Although we had not the advantages of a southerly wind and cloudy sky, theday towards noon became strongly over-cast, and promised to afford us goodscenting weather; and as we assembled at the meet, mutual congratulationswere exchanged upon the improved appearance of the day. Young Blake hadprovided Miss Dashwood with a quiet and well-trained horse, and his sisterswere all mounted as usual upon their own animals, giving to our turnoutquite a gay and lively aspect. I myself came to cover upon a hackney,having sent Badger with a groom, and longed ardently for the moment when,casting the skin of my great-coat and overalls, I should appear before theworld in my well-appointed "cords and tops." Captain Hammersley had not asyet made his appearance, and many conjectures were afloat as to whether "hemight have missed the road, or changed his mind," or "forgot all about it,"as Miss Dashwood hinted."Who, pray, pitched upon this cover?" said Caroline Blake, as she lookedwith a practised eye over the country on either side."There is no chance of a fox late in the day at the Mill," said thehuntsman, inventing a lie for the occasion."Then of course you never intend us to see much of the sport; for after youbreak cover, you are entirely lost to us.""I thought you always followed the hounds," said Miss Dashwood, timidly."Oh, to be sure we do, in any common country, but here it is out of thequestion; the fences are too large for any one, and if I am not mistaken,these gentlemen will not ride far over this. There, look yonder, wherethe river is rushing down the hill: that stream, widening as it advances,crosses the cover nearly midway,--well, they must clear that; and then youmay see these walls of large loose stones nearly five feet in height. Thatis the usual course the fox takes, unless he heads towards the hills andgoes towards Dangan, and then there's an end of it; for the deer-park wallis usually a pull up to every one except, perhaps, to our friend Charleyyonder, who has tried his fortune against drowning more than once there.""Look, here he comes," said Matthew Blake, "and looking splendidly too,--alittle too much in flesh perhaps, if anything.""Captain Hammersley!" said the four Miss Blakes, in a breath. "Where ishe?""No; it's the Badger I'm speaking of," said Matthew, laughing, and pointingwith his finger towards a corner of the field where my servant wasleisurely throwing down a wall about two feet high to let him pass."Oh, how handsome! What a charger for a dragoon!" said Miss Dashwood.Any other mode of praising my steed would have been much more acceptable.The word "dragoon" was a thorn in my tenderest part that rankled andlacerated at every stir. In a moment I was in the saddle, and scarcelyseated when at once all the mauvais honte of boyhood left me, and Ifelt every inch a man. I often look back to that moment of my life, andcomparing it with similar ones, cannot help acknowledging how purely is theself-possession which so often wins success the result of some slight andtrivial association. My confidence in my horsemanship suggested moralcourage of a very different kind; and I felt that Charles O'Malleycurvetting upon a thorough-bred, and the same man ambling upon a shelty,were two and very dissimilar individuals."No chance of the captain," said Matthew, who had returned from areconnaissance upon the road; "and after all it's a pity, for the day isgetting quite favorable."While the young ladies formed pickets to look out for the gallantmilitaire, I seized the opportunity of prosecuting my acquaintance withMiss Dashwood, and even in the few and passing observations that fell fromher, learned how very different an order of being she was from all I hadhitherto seen of country belles. A mixture of courtesy with navet; awish to please, with a certain feminine gentleness, that always flatters aman, and still more a boy that fain would be one,--gained momentarilymore and more upon me, and put me also on my mettle to prove to my faircompanion that I was not altogether a mere uncultivated and unthinkingcreature, like the remainder of those about me."Here he is at last," said Helen Blake, as she cantered across a fieldwaving her handkerchief as a signal to the captain, who was now seenapproaching at a brisk trot.As he came along, a small fence intervened; he pressed his horse a little,and as he kissed hands to the fair Helen, cleared it in a bound, and was inan instant in the midst of us."He sits his horse like a man, Misther Charles," said the old huntsman;"troth, we must give him the worst bit of it."Captain Hammersley was, despite all the critical acumen with which Icanvassed him, the very beau-ideal of a gentleman rider; indeed, although avery heavy man, his powerful English thorough-bred, showing not less bonethan blood, took away all semblance of overweight; his saddle was wellfitting and well placed, as also was his large and broad-reined snaffle;his own costume of black coat, leathers, and tops was in perfect keeping,and even to his heavy-handled hunting-whip I could find nothing to cavilat. As he rode up he paid his respects to the ladies in his usual free andeasy manner, expressed some surprise, but no regret, at hearing that he waslate, and never deigning any notice of Matthew or myself, took his placebeside Miss Dashwood, with whom he conversed in a low undertone."There they go!" said Matthew, as five or six dogs, with their heads up,ran yelping along a furrow, then stopped, howled again, and once more setoff together. In an instant all was commotion in the little valleybelow us. The huntsman, with his hand to his mouth, was calling off thestragglers, and the whipper-in followed up the leading dogs with the restof the pack. "They've found! They're away!" said Matthew; and as he spokea yell burst from the valley, and in an instant the whole pack were off atfull speed. Rather more intent that moment upon showing off my horsemanshipthan anything else, I dashed spurs into Badger's sides, and turned himtowards a rasping ditch before me; over we went, hurling down behind us arotten bank of clay and small stones, showing how little safety there hadbeen in topping instead of clearing it at a bound. Before I was well-seatedagain the captain was beside me. "Now for it, then," said I; and away wewent. What might be the nature of his feelings I cannot pretend to state,but my own were a strange mlange of wild, boyish enthusiasm, revenge,and recklessness. For my own neck I cared little,--nothing; and as I ledthe way by half a length, I muttered to myself, "Let him follow me fairlythis day, and I ask no more."The dogs had got somewhat the start of us; and as they were in full cry,and going fast, we were a little behind. A thought therefore struck methat, by appearing to take a short cut upon the hounds, I should come downupon the river where its breadth was greatest, and thus, at one coup, mighttry my friend's mettle and his horse's performance at the same time. Onwe went, our speed increasing, till the roar of the river we were nowapproaching was plainly audible. I looked half around, and now perceivedthe captain was standing in his stirrups, as if to obtain a view of whatwas before him; otherwise his countenance was calm and unmoved, and nota muscle betrayed that he was not cantering on a parade. I fixed myselffirmly in my seat, shook my horse a little together, and with a shout whoseimport every Galway hunter well knows rushed him at the river. I saw thewater dashing among the large stones; I heard it splash; I felt a boundlike the ricochet of a shot; and we were over, but so narrowly that thebank had yielded beneath his hind legs, and it needed a bold effort of thenoble animal to regain his footing. Scarcely was he once more firm, whenHammersley flew by me, taking the lead, and sitting quietly in his saddle,as if racing. I know of little in my after-life like the agony of thatmoment; for although I was far, very far, from wishing real ill to him, yetI would gladly have broken my leg or my arm if he could not have beenable to follow me. And now, there he was, actually a length and a half inadvance! and worse than all, Miss Dashwood must have witnessed the whole,and doubtless his leap over the river was better and bolder than mine.One consolation yet remained, and while I whispered it to myself I feltcomforted again. "His is an English mare. They understand these leaps; butwhat can he make of a Galway wall?" The question was soon to be solved.Before us, about three fields, were the hounds still in full cry; a largestone-wall lay between, and to it we both directed our course together."Ha!" thought I, "he is floored at last," as I perceived that the captainheld his course rather more in hand, and suffered me to lead. "Now, then,for it!" So saying, I rode at the largest part I could find, well knowingthat Badger's powers were here in their element. One spring, one plunge,and away we were, galloping along at the other side. Not so the captain;his horse had refused the fence, and he was now taking a circuit of thefield for another trial of it."Pounded, by Jove!" said I, as I turned round in my saddle to observe him.Once more she came at it, and once more balked, rearing up, at the sametime, almost so as to fall backward.My triumph was complete; and I again was about to follow the hounds, when,throwing a look back, I saw Hammersley clearing the wall in a most splendidmanner, and taking a stretch of at least thirteen feet beyond it. Oncemore he was on my flanks, and the contest renewed. Whatever might be thesentiments of the riders (mine I confess to), between the horses it nowbecame a tremendous struggle. The English mare, though evidently superiorin stride and strength, was slightly overweighted, and had not, besides,that cat-like activity an Irish horse possesses; so that the advantages anddisadvantages on either side were about equalized. For about half an hournow the pace was awful. We rode side by side, taking our leaps atexactly the same instant, and not four feet apart. The hounds were stillconsiderably in advance, and were heading towards the Shannon, whensuddenly the fox doubled, took the hillside, and made for Dangan. "Now,then, comes the trial of strength," I said, half aloud, as I threw my eyeup a steep and rugged mountain, covered with wild furze and tall heath,around the crest of which ran, in a zigzag direction, a broken anddilapidated wall, once the enclosure of a deer park. This wall, whichvaried from four to six feet in height, was of solid masonry, and would, inthe most favorable ground, have been a bold leap. Here, at the summit of amountain, with not a yard of footing, it was absolutely desperation.By the time that we reached the foot of the hill, the fox, followed closelyby the hounds, had passed through a breach in the wall; while MatthewBlake, with the huntsmen and whipper-in, was riding along in search of agap to lead the horses through. Before I put spurs to Badger to face thehill, I turned one look towards Hammersley. There was a slight curl,half-smile, half-sneer, upon his lip that actually maddened me, and had aprecipice yawned beneath my feet, I should have dashed at it after that.The ascent was so steep that I was obliged to take the hill in a slantingdirection; and even thus, the loose footing rendered it dangerous in theextreme.At length I reached the crest, where the wall, more than five feet inheight, stood frowning above and seeming to defy me. I turned my horse fullround, so that his very chest almost touched the stones, and with a boldcut of the whip and a loud halloo, the gallant animal rose, as if rearing,pawed for an instant to regain his balance, and then, with a frightfulstruggle, fell backwards, and rolled from top to bottom of the hill,carrying me along with him; the last object that crossed my sight, as I laybruised and motionless, being the captain as he took the wall in a flyingleap, and disappeared at the other side. After a few scrambling efforts torise, Badger regained his legs and stood beside me; but such was the shockand concussion of my fall that all the objects around seemed wavering andfloating before me, while showers of bright sparks fell in myriads beforemy eyes. I tried to rise, but fell back helpless. Cold perspiration brokeover my forehead, and I fainted. From that moment I can remember nothing,till I felt myself galloping along at full speed upon a level table-land,with the hounds about three fields in advance, Hammersley riding foremost,and taking all his leaps coolly as ever. As I swayed to either side upon mysaddle, from weakness, I was lost to all thought or recollection, save aflickering memory of some plan of vengeance, which still urged me forward.The chase had now lasted above an hour, and both hounds and horses began tofeel the pace at which they were going. As for me, I rode mechanically; Ineither knew nor cared for the dangers before me. My eye rested on but oneobject; my whole being was concentrated upon one vague and undefined senseof revenge. At this instant the huntsman came alongside of me."Are you hurted, Misther Charles? Did you fall? Your cheek is all blood,and your coat is torn in two; and, Mother o' God! his boot is ground topowder; he does not hear me! Oh, pull up! pull up, for the love of theVirgin! There's the clover-field and the sunk fence before you, and you'llbe killed on the spot!""Where?" cried I, with the cry of a madman. "Where's the clover-field;where's the sunk fence? Ha! I see it; I see it now."So saying, I dashed the rowels into my horse's flanks, and in an instantwas beyond the reach of the poor fellow's remonstances. Another moment Iwas beside the captain. He turned round as I came up; the same smile wasupon his mouth; I could have struck him. About three hundred yards beforeus lay the sunk fence; its breadth was about twenty feet, and a wall ofclose brickwork formed its face. Over this the hounds were now clambering;some succeeded in crossing, but by far the greater number fell back,howling, into the ditch.I turned towards Hammersley. He was standing high in his stirrups, and ashe looked towards the yawning fence, down which the dogs were tumbling inmasses, I thought (perhaps it was but a thought) that his cheek was paler.I looked again; he was pulling at his horse. Ha! it was true then; he wouldnot face it. I turned round in my saddle, looked him full in the face, andas I pointed with my whip to the leap, called out in a voice hoarse withpassion, "Come on!" I saw no more. All objects were lost to me from thatmoment. When next my senses cleared, I was standing amidst the dogs, wherethey had just killed. Badger stood blown and trembling beside me, his headdrooping and his flanks gored with spur-marks. I looked about, but allconsciousness of the past had fled; the concussion of my fall had shakenmy intellect, and I was like one but half-awake. One glimpse, short andfleeting, of what was taking place shot through my brain, as old Brackelywhispered to me, "By my soul, ye did for the captain there." I turned avague look upon him, and my eyes fell upon the figure of a man that laystretched and bleeding upon a door before me. His pale face was crossedwith a purple stream of blood that trickled from a wound beside hiseyebrow; his arms lay motionless and heavily at either side. I knew himnot. A loud report of a pistol aroused me from my stupor; I looked back. Isaw a crowd that broke suddenly asunder and fled right and left. I hearda heavy crash upon the ground; I pointed with my finger, for I could notutter a word."It is the English mare, yer honor; she was a beauty this morning, butshe's broke her shoulder-bone and both her legs, and it was best to put herout of pain."CHAPTER V.THE DRAWING-ROOM.On the fourth day following the adventure detailed in the last chapter, Imade my appearance in the drawing-room, my cheek well blanched by copiousbleeding, and my step tottering and uncertain. On entering the room, Ilooked about in vain for some one who might give me an insight into theoccurrences of the four preceding days; but no one was to be met with. Theladies, I learned, were out riding; Matthew was buying a new setter, Mr.Blake was canvassing, and Captain Hammersley was in bed. Where was MissDashwood?--in her room; and Sir George?--he was with Mr. Blake."What! Canvassing, too?""Troth, that same was possible," was the intelligent reply of the oldbutler, at which I could not help smiling. I sat down, therefore, in theeasiest chair I could find, and unfolding the county paper, resolved uponlearning how matters were going on in the political world. But somehow,whether the editor was not brilliant or the fire was hot or that my owndreams were pleasanter to indulge in than his fancies, I fell sound asleep.How differently is the mind attuned to the active, busy world of thoughtand action when awakened from sleep by any sudden and rude summons to ariseand be stirring, and when called into existence by the sweet and silverynotes of softest music stealing over the senses, and while they impartawakening thoughts of bliss and beauty, scarcely dissipating the dreamyinfluence of slumber! Such was my first thought, as, with closed lids, thethrilling chords of a harp broke upon my sleep and aroused me to a feelingof unutterable pleasure. I turned gently round in my chair and beheld MissDashwood. She was seated in a recess of an old-fashioned window; the paleyellow glow of a wintry sun at evening fell upon her beautiful hair, andtinged it with such a light as I have often since then seen in Rembrandt'spictures; her head leaned upon the harp, and as she struck its chords atrandom, I saw that her mind was far away from all around her. As I looked,she suddenly started from her leaning attitude, and parting back her curlsfrom her brow, she preluded a few chords, and then sighed forth, ratherthan sang, that most beautiful of Moore's melodies,--"She is far from the land where her young hero sleeps."Never before had such pathos, such deep utterance of feeling, met myastonished sense; I listened breathlessly as the tears fell one by one downmy cheek; my bosom heaved and fell; and when she ceased, I hid my headbetween my hands and sobbed aloud. In an instant, she was beside me, andplacing her hand upon my shoulder, said,--"Poor dear boy, I never suspected you of being there, or I should not havesung that mournful air."I started and looked up; and from what I know not, but she suddenlycrimsoned to her very forehead, while she added in a less assured tone,--"I hope, Mr. O'Malley, that you are much better; and I trust there is noimprudence in your being here.""For the latter, I shall not answer," said I, with a sickly smile; "butalready I feel your music has done me service.""Then let me sing more for you.""If I am to have a choice, I should say, Sit down, and let me hear you talkto me. My illness and the doctor together have made wild work of my poorbrain; but if you will talk to me--""Well, then, what shall it be about? Shall I tell you a fairy tale?""I need it not; I feel I am in one this instant.""Well, then, what say you to a legend; for I am rich in my stores of them?""The O'Malleys have their chronicles, wild and barbarous enough without theaid of Thor and Woden.""Then, shall we chat of every-day matters? Should you like to hear how theelection and the canvass go on?""Yes; of all things.""Well, then, most favorably. Two baronies, with most unspeakable names,have declared for us, and confidence is rapidly increasing among our party.This I learned, by chance, yesterday; for papa never permits us to knowanything of these matters,--not even the names of the candidates.""Well, that was the very point I was coming to; for the government wereabout to send down some one just as I left home, and I am most anxious tolearn who it is.""Then am I utterly valueless; for I really can't say what party thegovernment espouses, and only know of our own.""Quite enough for me that you wish it success," said I, gallantly. "Perhapsyou can tell me if my uncle has heard of my accident?""Oh, yes; but somehow he has not been here himself, but sent a friend,--aMr. Considine, I think; a very strange person he seemed. He demanded to seepapa, and it seems, asked him if your misfortune had been a thing of hiscontrivance, and whether he was ready to explain his conduct about it; and,in fact, I believe he is mad.""Heaven confound him!" I muttered between my teeth."And then he wished to have an interview with Captain Hammersley. However,he is too ill; but as the doctor hoped he might be down-stairs in a week,Mr. Considine kindly hinted that he should wait.""Oh, then, do tell me how is the captain.""Very much bruised, very much disfigured, they say," said she, halfsmiling; "but not so much hurt in body as in mind.""As how, may I ask?" said I, with an appearance of innocence."I don't exactly understand it; but it would appear that there wassomething like rivalry among you gentlemen chasseurs on that lucklessmorning, and that while you paid the penalty of a broken head, he wasdestined to lose his horse and break his arm.""I certainly am sorry,--most sincerely sorry for any share I might have hadin the catastrophe; and my greatest regret, I confess, arises from the factthat I should cause you unhappiness.""Me? Pray explain.""Why, as Captain Hammersley--""Mr. O'Malley, you are too young now to make me suspect you have anintention to offend; but I caution you, never repeat this."I saw that I had transgressed, but how, I most honestly confess, I couldnot guess; for though I certainly was the senior of my fair companion inyears, I was most lamentably her junior in tact and discretion.The gray dusk of evening had long fallen as we continued to chat togetherbeside the blazing wood embers,--she evidently amusing herself with theoriginal notions of an untutored, unlettered boy, and I drinking deepthose draughts of love that nerved my heart through many a breach andbattlefield.Our colloquy was at length interrupted by the entrance of Sir George, whoshook me most cordially by the hand, and made the kindest inquiries aboutmy health."They tell me you are to be a lawyer. Mr. O'Malley," said he; "and if so, Imust advise you to take better care of your headpiece.""A lawyer, Papa; oh dear me! I should never have thought of his beinganything so stupid.""Why, silly girl, what would you have a man be?""A dragoon, to be sure, Papa," said the fond girl, as she pressed her armaround his manly figure, and looked up in his face with an expression ofmingled pride and affection.That word sealed my destiny.CHAPTER VI.THE DINNER.When I retired to my room to dress for dinner, I found my servant waitingwith a note from my uncle, to which, he informed me, the messenger expectedan answer.I broke the seal and read:--DEAR CHARLEY,--Do not lose a moment in securing old Blake,--ifyou have not already done so,--as information has just reachedme that the government party has promised a cornetcy to youngMatthew if he can bring over his father. And these are the peopleI have been voting with--a few private cases excepted--for thirtyodd years!I am very sorry for your accident. Considine informs me that itwill need explanation at a later period. He has been in Athlonesince Tuesday, in hopes to catch the new candidate on his way down,and get him into a little private quarrel before the day; if hesucceeds, it will save the county much expense, and conduce greatly tothe peace and happiness of all parties. But "these things," as FatherRoach says, "are in the hands of Providence." You must also persuadeold Blake to write a few lines to Simon Mallock, about theCoolnamuck mortgage. We can give him no satisfaction at present,at least such as he looks for; and don't be philandering any longerwhere you are, when your health permits a change of quarters.Your affectionate uncle,GODFREY O'MALLEY.P.S. I have just heard from Considine. He was out this morningand shot a fellow in the knee; but finds that after all he wasnot the candidate, but a tourist that was writing a book aboutConnemara.P.S. No. 2. Bear the mortgage in mind, for old Mallock is aspiteful fellow, and has a grudge against me, since I horsewhippedhis son in Banagher. Oh, the world, the world! G. O'M.Until I read this very clear epistle to the end, I had no very preciseconception how completely I had forgotten all my uncle's interests, andneglected all his injunctions. Already five days had elapsed, and I had notas much as mooted the question to Mr. Blake, and probably all this time myuncle was calculating on the thing as concluded; but, with one hole in myhead and some half-dozen in my heart, my memory was none of the best.Snatching up the letter, therefore, I resolved to lose no more time, andproceeded at once to Mr. Blake's room, expecting that I should, as theevent proved, find him engaged in the very laborious duty of making histoilet.[Illustration: MR. BLAKE'S DRESSING ROOM.]"Come in, Charley," said he, as I tapped gently at the door. "It's onlyCharley, my darling. Mrs. B. won't mind you.""Not the least in life," responded Mrs. B., disposing at the same time apair of her husband's corduroys tippet fashion across her ample shoulders,which before were displayed in the plenitude and breadth of coloring wefind in a Rubens. "Sit down, Charley, and tell us what's the matter."As until this moment I was in perfect ignorance of the Adam-and-Eve-likesimplicity in which the private economy of Mr. Blake's household wasconducted, I would have gladly retired from what I found to be a mutualterritory of dressing-room had not Mr. Blake's injunctions been issuedsomewhat like an order to remain."It's only a letter, sir," said I, stuttering, "from my uncle about theelection. He says that as his majority is now certain, he should feelbetter pleased in going to the poll with all the family, you know, sir,along with him. He wishes me just to sound your intentions,--to make outhow you feel disposed towards him; and--and, faith, as I am but a poordiplomatist, I thought the best way was to come straight to the point andtell you so.""I perceive," said Mr. Blake, giving his chin at the moment an awful gashwith the razor,--"I perceive; go on.""Well, sir, I have little more to say. My uncle knows what influence youhave in Scariff, and expects you'll do what you can there.""Anything more?" said Blake, with a very dry and quizzical expression Ididn't half like,--"anything more?""Oh, yes; you are to write a line to old Mallock.""I understand; about Coolnamuck, isn't it?""Exactly; I believe that's all.""Well, now, Charley, you may go down-stairs, and we'll talk it over afterdinner.""Yes, Charley dear, go down, for I'm going to draw on my stockings," saidthe fair Mrs. Blake, with a look of very modest consciousness.When I had left the room I couldn't help muttering a "Thank God!" for thesuccess of a mission I more than once feared for, and hastened to despatcha note to my uncle, assuring him of the Blake interest, and adding that forpropriety's sake I should defer my departure for a day or two longer.This done, with a heart lightened of its load and in high spirits at mycleverness, I descended to the drawing-room. Here a very large party werealready assembled, and at every opening of the door a new relay of Blakes,Burkes, and Bodkins was introduced. In the absence of the host, Sir GeorgeDashwood was "making the agreeable" to the guests, and shook hands withevery new arrival with all the warmth and cordiality of old friendship.While thus he inquired for various absent individuals, and asked mostaffectionately for sundry aunts and uncles not forthcoming, a slightincident occurred which by its ludicrous turn served to shorten the longhalf-hour before dinner. An individual of the party, a Mr. Blake, had, fromcertain peculiarities of face, obtained in his boyhood the sobriquet of"Shave-the-wind." This hatchet-like conformation had grown with his growth,and perpetuated upon him a nickname by which alone was he ever spoken ofamong his friends and acquaintances; the only difference being that as hecame to man's estate, brevity, that soul of wit, had curtailed the epithetto mere "Shave." Now, Sir George had been hearing frequent reference madeto him always by this name, heard him ever so addressed, and perceived himto reply to it; so that when he was himself asked by some one what sport hehad found that day among the woodcocks, he answered at once, with a bow ofvery grateful acknowledgment, "Excellent, indeed; but entirely owing towhere I was placed in the copse. Had it not been for Mr. Shave there--"I need not say that the remainder of his speech, being heard on all sides,became one universal shout of laughter, in which, to do him justice, theexcellent Shave himself heartily joined. Scarcely were the sounds of mirthlulled into an apparent calm, when the door opened and the host and hostessappeared. Mrs. Blake advanced in all the plenitude of her charms, arrayedin crimson satin, sorely injured in its freshness by a patch of greaseupon the front about the same size and shape as the continent of Europe inArrowsmith's Atlas. A swan's-down tippet covered her shoulders; massivebracelets ornamented her wrists; while from her ears descended two Irishdiamond ear-rings, rivalling in magnitude and value the glass pendants ofa lustre. Her reception of her guests made ample amends, in warmth andcordiality, for any deficiency of elegance; and as she disposed her ampleproportions upon the sofa, and looked around upon the company, she appearedthe very impersonation of hospitality.After several openings and shuttings of the drawing-room door, accompaniedby the appearance of old Simon the butler, who counted the party at leastfive times before he was certain that the score was correct, dinner wasat length announced. Now came a moment of difficulty, and one which, astesting Mr. Blake's tact, he would gladly have seen devolve upon some othershoulders; for he well knew that the marshalling a room full of mandarins,blue, green, and yellow, was "cakes and gingerbread" to ushering a Galwayparty in to dinner.First, then, was Mr. Miles Bodkin, whose grandfather would have been a lordif Cromwell had not hanged him one fine morning. Then Mrs. Mosey Blake'sfirst husband was promised the title of Kilmacud if it was ever restored;whereas Mrs. French of Knocktunmor's mother was then at law for a title.And lastly, Mrs. Joe Burke was fourth cousin to Lord Clanricarde, as is orwill be every Burke from this to the day of judgment. Now, luckily for herprospects, the lord was alive; and Mr. Blake, remembering a very sage adageabout "dead lions," etc., solved the difficulty at once by gracefullytucking the lady under his arm and leading the way. The others soonfollowed, the priest of Portumna and my unworthy self bringing up the rear.When, many a year afterwards, the hard ground of a mountain bivouac,with its pitiful portion of pickled cork-tree yclept mess-beef, and thatpyroligneous aquafortis they call corn-brandy have been my hard fare,I often looked back to that day's dinner with a most heart-yearningsensation,--a turbot as big as the Waterloo shield, a sirloin that seemedcut from the sides of a rhinoceros, a sauce-boat that contained anoyster-bed. There was a turkey, which singly would have formed the mainarmy of a French dinner, doing mere outpost duty, flanked by a picket ofham and a detached squadron of chickens carefully ambushed in a forestof greens; potatoes, not disguised  la matre d'htel and tortured toresemble bad macaroni, but piled like shot in an ordnance-yard, were postedat different quarters; while massive decanters of port and sherry stoodproudly up like standard bearers amidst the goodly array. This was noneof your austere "great dinners," where a cold and chilling plateau ofartificial nonsense cuts off one-half of the table from intercourse withthe other; when whispered sentences constitute the conversation, and allthe friendly recognition of wine-drinking, which renews acquaintance andcements an intimacy, is replaced by the ceremonious filling of your glassby a lackey; where smiles go current in lieu of kind speeches, and epigramand smartness form the substitute for the broad jest and merry story. Farfrom it. Here the company ate, drank, talked, laughed,--did all but sing,and certainly enjoyed themselves heartily. As for me, I was little morethan a listener; and such was the crash of plates, the jingle of glasses,and the clatter of voices, that fragments only of what was passingaround reached me, giving to the conversation of the party a characteroccasionally somewhat incongruous. Thus such sentences as the following ranfoul of each other every instant:--"No better land in Galway"--"where could you find such facilities"--"forshooting Mr. Jones on his way home"--"the truth, the whole truth, andnothing but the truth"--"kiss"--"Miss Blake, she's the girl with a foot andankle"--"Daly has never had wool on his sheep"--"how could he"--"whatdoes he pay for the mountain"--"four and tenpence a yard"--"not a pennyless"--"all the cabbage-stalks and potato-skins"--"with some bog stuffthrough it"--"that's the thing to"--"make soup, with a red herring in itinstead of salt"--"and when he proposed for my niece, ma'am, says he"--"mixa strong tumbler, and I'll make a shake-down for you on the floor"--"andmay the Lord have mercy on your soul"--"and now, down the middle andup again"--"Captain Magan, my dear, he is the man"--"to shave a pigproperly"--"it's not money I'm looking for, says he, the girl of myheart"--"if she had not a wind-gall and two spavins"--"I'd have given herthe rights of the church, of coorse," said Father Roach, bringing up therear of this ill-assorted jargon.Such were the scattered links of conversation I was condemned to listen to,till a general rise on the part of the ladies left us alone to discuss ourwine and enter in good earnest upon the more serious duties of the evening.Scarcely was the door closed when one of the company, seizing thebell-rope, said, "With your leave, Blake, we'll have the 'dew' now.""Good claret,--no better," said another; "but it sits mighty cold on thestomach.""There's nothing like the groceries, after all,--eh, Sir George?" said anold Galway squire to the English general, who acceded to the fact, which heunderstood in a very different sense."Oh, punch, you are my darlin'," hummed another, as a large, square,half-gallon decanter of whiskey was placed on the table, the variousdecanters of wine being now ignominiously sent down to the end of the boardwithout any evidence of regret on any face save Sir George Dashwood's, whomixed his tumbler with a very rebellious conscience.Whatever were the noise and clamor of the company before, they were nothingto what now ensued. As one party were discussing the approaching contest,another was planning a steeple-chase, while two individuals, unhappilyremoved from each other the entire length of the table, were what is called"challenging each other's effects" in a very remarkable manner,--theprocess so styled being an exchange of property, when each party, settingan imaginary value upon some article, barters it for another, the amountof boot paid and received being determined by a third person, who is theumpire. Thus a gold breast-pin was swopped, as the phrase is, against ahorse; then a pair of boots, then a Kerry bull, etc.,--every imaginablespecies of property coming into the market. Sometimes, as matters of verydubious value turned up, great laughter was the result. In this verynational pastime, a Mr. Miles Bodkin, a noted fire-eater of the west, wasa great proficient; and it is said he once so completely succeeded indespoiling an uninitiated hand, that after winning in succession his horse,gig, harness, etc., he proceeded seriatim to his watch, ring, clothes,and portmanteau, and actually concluded by winning all he possessed, andkindly lent him a card-cloth to cover him on his way to the hotel.His success on the present occasion was considerable, and his spiritsproportionate. The decanter had thrice been replenished, and the flushedfaces and thickened utterance of the guests evinced that from the coldproperties of the claret there was but little to dread. As for Mr. Bodkin,his manner was incapable of any higher flight, when under the influence ofwhiskey, than what it evinced on common occasions; and as he sat at the endof the table fronting Mr. Blake, he assumed all the dignity of the ruler ofthe feast, with an energy no one seemed disposed to question. In answer tosome observations of Sir George, he was led into something like an orationupon the peculiar excellences of his native country, which ended in adeclaration that there was nothing like Galway."Why don't you give us a song, Miles? And may be the general would learnmore from it than all your speech-making.""To be sure," cried the several voices together,--"to be sure; let us hearthe 'Man for Galway'!"Sir George having joined most warmly in the request, Mr. Bodkin filled uphis glass to the brim, bespoke a chorus to his chant, and clearing hisvoice with a deep hem, began the following ditty, to the air which Moorehas since rendered immortal by the beautiful song, "Wreath the Bowl," etc.And, although the words are well known in the west, for the information ofless-favored regions, I here transcribe--THE MAN FOR GALWAY.To drink a toast,A proctor roast,Or bailiff as the case is;To kiss your wife,Or take your lifeAt ten or fifteen paces;To keep game-cocks, to hunt the fox,To drink in punch the Solway,With debts galore, but fun far more,--Oh, that's "the man for Galway."CHORUS: With debts, etc.The King of OudeIs mighty proud,And so were onst the Caysars;But ould Giles EyreWould make them stare,Av he had them with the Blazers.To the devil I fling--ould Runjeet Sing,He's only a prince in a small way,And knows nothing at all of a six-foot wall;Oh, he'd never "do for Galway."CHORUS: With debts, etc.Ye think the BlakesAre no "great shakes;"They're all his blood relations.And the Bodkins sneezeAt the grim Chinese,For they come from the Phenaycians.So fill the brim, and here's to himWho'd drink in punch the Solway,With debts galore, but fun far more,--Oh, that's "the man for Galway."CHORUS: With debts, etc.I much fear that the reception of this very classic ode would not be asfavorable in general companies as it was on the occasion I first heard it;for certainly the applause was almost deafening, and even Sir George, thedefects of whose English education left some of the allusions out of hisreach, was highly amused, and laughed heartily.The conversation once more reverted to the election; and although I was toofar from those who seemed best informed on the matter to hear much, I couldcatch enough to discover that the feeling was a confident one. This wasgratifying to me, as I had some scruples about my so long neglecting myuncle's cause."We have Scariff to a man," said Bodkin."And Mosey's tenantry," said another. "I swear, though there's not afreehold registered on the estate, that they'll vote, every mother's sonof them, or devil a stone of the court-house they'll leave standing onanother.""And may the Lord look to the returning officer!" said a third, throwing uphis eyes."Mosey's tenantry are droll boys; and like their landlord, more by token,they never pay any rent.""And what for shouldn't they vote?" said a dry-looking little old fellow ina red waistcoat; "when I was the dead agent--""The dead agent!" interrupted Sir George, with a start."Just so," said the old fellow, pulling down his spectacles from hisforehead, and casting a half-angry look at Sir George, for what he hadsuspected to be a doubt of his veracity."The general does not know, may be, what that is," said some one."You have just anticipated me," said Sir George; "I really am in mostprofound ignorance.""It is the dead agent," says Mr. Blake, "who always provides substitutesfor any voters that may have died since the last election. A very importantfact in statistics may thus be gathered from the poll-books of this county,which proves it to be the healthiest part of Europe,--a freeholder has notdied in it for the last fifty years.""The 'Kiltopher boys' won't come this time; they say there's no use tryingto vote when so many were transported last assizes for perjury.""They're poor-spirited creatures," said another."Not they,--they are as decent boys as any we have; they're willing towreck the town for fifty shillings' worth of spirits. Besides, if theydon't vote for the county, they will for the borough."This declaration seemed to restore these interesting individuals to favor;and now all attention was turned towards Bodkin, who was detailing the planof a grand attack upon the polling-booths, to be headed by himself. By thistime, all the prudence and guardedness of the party had given way; whiskeywas in the ascendant, and every bold stroke of election policy, everycunning artifice, every ingenious device, was detailed and applauded ina manner which proved that self-respect was not the inevitable gift of"mountain dew."The mirth and fun grew momentarily more boisterous, and Miles Bodkin, whohad twice before been prevented proposing some toast by a telegraphicsignal from the other end of the table, now swore that nothing shouldprevent him any longer, and rising with a smoking tumbler in his hand,delivered himself as follows:--"No, no, Phil Blake, ye needn't be winkin' at me that way; it's little Icare for the spawn of the ould serpent. [Here great cheers greeted thespeaker, in which, without well knowing why, I heartily joined.] I'm goingto give a toast, boys,--a real good toast, none of your sentimental thingsabout wall-flowers or the vernal equinox, or that kind of thing, but asensible, patriotic, manly, intrepid toast,--toast you must drink in themost universal, laborious, and awful manner: do ye see now? [Loud cheers.]If any man of you here present doesn't drain this toast to the bottom [herethe speaker looked fixedly at me, as did the rest of the company]--then, bythe great-gun of Athlone, I'll make him eat the decanter, glass-stopper andall, for the good of his digestion: d'ye see now?"The cheering at this mild determination prevented my hearing what followed;but the peroration consisted in a very glowing eulogy upon some personunknown, and a speedy return to him as member for Galway. Amidst all thenoise and tumult at this critical moment, nearly every eye at the table wasturned upon me; and as I concluded that they had been drinking my uncle'shealth, I thundered away at the mahogany with all my energy. At length thehip-hipping over, and comparative quiet restored, I rose from my seat toreturn thanks; but, strange enough, Sir George Dashwood did so likewise.And there we both stood, amidst an uproar that might well have shaken thecourage of more practised orators; while from every side came cries of"Hear, hear!"--"Go on, Sir George!"--"Speak out, General!"--"Sit down,Charley!"--"Confound the boy!"--"Knock the legs from under him!" etc. Notunderstanding why Sir George should interfere with what I regarded as mypeculiar duty, I resolved not to give way, and avowed this determination inno very equivocal terms. "In that case," said the general, "I am to supposethat the young gentleman moves an amendment to your proposition; and as theetiquette is in his favor, I yield." Here he resumed his place amidst amost terrific scene of noise and tumult, while several humane proposals asto my treatment were made around me, and a kind suggestion thrown out tobreak my neck by a near neighbor. Mr. Blake at length prevailed upon theparty to hear what I had to say,--for he was certain I should not detainthem above a minute. The commotion having in some measure subsided, Ibegan: "Gentlemen, as the adopted son of the worthy man whose health youhave just drunk--" Heaven knows how I should have continued; but here myeloquence was met by such a roar of laughing as I never before listened to.From one end of the board to the other it was one continued shout, and wenton, too, as if all the spare lungs of the party had been kept in reservefor the occasion. I turned from one to the other; I tried to smile, andseemed to participate in the joke, but failed; I frowned; I looked savagelyabout where I could see enough to turn my wrath thitherward,--and, as itchanced, not in vain; for Mr. Miles Bodkin, with an intuitive perception ofmy wishes, most suddenly ceased his mirth, and assuming a look of frowningdefiance that had done him good service upon many former occasions, roseand said:--"Well, sir, I hope you're proud of yourself. You've made a nice beginningof it, and a pretty story you'll have for your uncle. But if you'd like tobreak the news by a letter the general will have great pleasure in frankingit for you; for, by the rock of Cashel, we'll carry him in against all theO'Malley's that ever cheated the sheriff."Scarcely were the words uttered, when I seized my wineglass, and hurled itwith all my force at his head; so sudden was the act, and so true the aim,that Mr. Bodkin measured his length upon the floor ere his friends couldappreciate his late eloquent effusion. The scene now became terrific;for though the redoubted Miles was hors-de-combat, his friends made atremendous rush at, and would infallibly have succeeded in capturing me,had not Blake and four or five others interposed. Amidst a desperatestruggle, which lasted for some minutes, I was torn from the spot, carriedbodily up-stairs, and pitched headlong into my own room; where, havingdoubly locked the door on the outside, they left me to my own cool and notover-agreeable reflections.CHAPTER VII.THE FLIGHT FROM GURT-NA-MORRA.It was by one of those sudden and inexplicable revulsions whichoccasionally restore to sense and intellect the maniac of years standing,that I was no sooner left alone in my chamber than I became perfectlysober. The fumes of the wine--and I had drunk deeply--were dissipated atonce; my head, which but a moment before was half wild with excitement, wasnow cool, calm, and collected; and stranger than all, I, who had only anhour since entered the dining-room with all the unsuspecting freshness ofboyhood, became, by a mighty bound, a man,--a man in all my feelings ofresponsibility, a man who, repelling an insult by an outrage, had resolvedto stake his life upon the chance. In an instant a new era in life hadopened before me; the light-headed gayety which fearlessness and youthimpart was replaced by one absorbing thought,--one all-engrossing,all-pervading impression, that if I did not follow up my quarrel withBodkin, I was dishonored and disgraced, my little knowledge of such mattersnot being sufficient to assure me that I was now the aggressor, and thatany further steps in the affair should come from his side.So thoroughly did my own griefs occupy me, that I had no thought for thedisappointment my poor uncle was destined to meet with in hearing that theBlake interest was lost to him, and the former breach between the familiesirreparably widened by the events of the evening. Escape was my firstthought; but how to accomplish it? The door, a solid one of Irish oak,doubly locked and bolted, defied all my efforts to break it open; thewindow was at least five-and-twenty feet from the ground, and not a treenear to swing into. I shouted, I called aloud, I opened the sash, and triedif any one outside were within hearing; but in vain. Weary and exhausted,I sat down upon my bed and ruminated over my fortunes. Vengeance--quick,entire, decisive vengeance--I thirsted and panted for; and every momentI lived under the insult inflicted on me seemed an age of torturing andmaddening agony. I rose with a leap; a thought had just occurred to me.I drew the bed towards the window, and fastening the sheet to one of theposts with a firm knot, I twisted it into a rope, and let myself down towithin about twelve feet of the ground, when I let go my hold, and droppedupon the grass beneath safe and uninjured. A thin, misty rain was falling,and I now perceived, for the first time, that in my haste I had forgottenmy hat; this thought, however, gave me little uneasiness, and I took my waytowards the stable, resolving, if I could, to saddle my horse and get offbefore any intimation of my escape reached the family.When I gained the yard, all was quiet and deserted; the servants weredoubtless enjoying themselves below stairs, and I met no one on the way. Ientered the stable, threw the saddle upon "Badger," and before five minutesfrom my descent from the window, was galloping towards O'Malley Castle at apace that defied pursuit, had any one thought of it.It was about five o'clock on a dark, wintry morning as I led my horsethrough the well-known defiles of out-houses and stables which formed thelong line of offices to my uncle's house. As yet no one was stirring; andas I wished to have my arrival a secret from the family, afterproviding for the wants of my gallant gray, I lifted the latch of thekitchen-door--no other fastening being ever thought necessary, even atnight--and gently groped my way towards the stairs; all was perfectlystill, and the silence now recalled me to reflection as to what course Ishould pursue. It was all-important that my uncle should know nothing of myquarrel, otherwise he would inevitably make it his own, and by treatingme like a boy in the matter, give the whole affair the very turn I mostdreaded. Then, as to Sir Harry Boyle, he would most certainly turn thewhole thing into ridicule, make a good story, perhaps a song out of it, andlaugh at my notions of demanding satisfaction. Considine, I knew, was myman; but then he was at Athlone,--at least so my uncle's letter mentioned.Perhaps he might have returned; if not, to Athlone I should set off atonce. So resolving, I stole noiselessly up-stairs, and reached the door ofthe count's chamber; I opened it gently and entered; and though my stepwas almost imperceptible to myself, it was quite sufficient to alarm thewatchful occupant of the room, who, springing up in his bed, demandedgruffly, "Who's there?""Charles, sir," said I, shutting the door carefully, and approaching hisbedside. "Charles O'Malley, sir. I'm come to have a bit of your advice; andas the affair won't keep, I have been obliged to disturb you.""Never mind, Charley," said the count; "sit down, there's a chair somewherenear the bed,--have you found it? There! Well now, what is it? What news ofBlake?""Very bad; no worse. But it is not exactly that I came about; I've gotinto a scrape, sir.""Run off with one of the daughters," said Considine. "By jingo, I knew whatthose artful devils would be after.""Not so bad as that," said I, laughing. "It's just a row, a kind ofsquabble; something that must come--""Ay, ay," said the count, brightening up; "say you so, Charley? Begad, theyoung ones will beat us all out of the field. Who is it with,--not oldBlake himself; how was it? Tell me all."I immediately detailed the whole events of the preceding chapter, as wellas his frequent interruptions would permit, and concluded by asking whatfarther step was now to be taken, as I was resolved the matter should beconcluded before it came to my uncle's ears."There you are all right; quite correct, my boy. But there are many pointsI should have wished otherwise in the conduct of the affair hitherto."Conceiving that he was displeased at my petulance and boldness, I was aboutto commence a kind of defence, when he added,--"Because, you see," said he, assuming an oracular tone of voice, "throwinga wine-glass, with or without wine, in a man's face is merely, as you mayobserve, a mark of denial and displeasure at some observation he may havemade,--not in any wise intended to injure him, further than in the wound tohis honor at being so insulted, for which, of course, he must subsequentlycall you out. Whereas, Charley, in the present case, the view I takeis different; the expression of Mr. Bodkin, as regards your uncle, wasinsulting to a degree,--gratuitously offensive,--and warranting a blow.Therefore, my boy, you should, under such circumstances, have preferredaiming at him with a decanter: a cut-glass decanter, well aimed and low, Ihave seen do effective service. However, as you remark it was your firstthing of the kind, I am pleased with you--very much pleased with you. Now,then, for the next step." So saying, he arose from his bed, and striking alight with a tinder-box, proceeded to dress himself as leisurely as if fora dinner party, talking all the while."I will just take Godfrey's tax-cart and the roan mare on to Meelish, putthem up at the little inn,--it is not above a mile from Bodkin's; and I'llgo over and settle the thing for you. You must stay quiet till I comeback, and not leave the house on any account. I've got a case of old broadbarrels there that will answer you beautifully; if you were anything ofa shot, I'd give you my own cross handles, but they'd only spoil yourshooting.""I can hit a wine-glass in the stem at fifteen paces," said I, rathernettled at the disparaging tone in which he spoke of my performance."I don't care sixpence for that; the wine-glass had no pistol in his hand.Take the old German, then; see now, hold your pistol thus,--no finger onthe guard there, these two on the trigger. They are not hair-triggers; dropthe muzzle a bit; bend your elbow a trifle more; sight your man outsideyour arm,--outside, mind,--and take him in the hip, and if anywhere higher,no matter."By this time the count had completed his toilet, and taking the smallmahogany box which contained his peace-makers under his arm, led the waytowards the stables. When we reached the yard, the only person stirringthere was a kind of half-witted boy, who, being about the house, wasemployed to run of messages from the servants, walk a stranger's horse, orto do any of the many petty services that regular domestics contrive alwaysto devolve upon some adopted subordinate. He was seated upon a stone stepformerly used for mounting, and though the day was scarcely breaking, andthe weather severe and piercing, the poor fellow was singing an Irish song,in a low monotonous tone, as he chafed a curb chain between his hands withsome sand. As we came near he started up, and as he pulled off his cap tosalute us, gave a sharp and piercing glance at the count, then at me,then once more upon my companion, from whom his eyes were turned to thebrass-bound box beneath his arm,--when, as if seized with a sudden impulse,he started on his feet, and set off towards the house with the speed of agreyhound, not, however, before Considine's practised eye had anticipatedhis plan; for throwing down the pistol-case, he dashed after him, and in aninstant had seized him by the collar."It won't do, Patsey," said the count; "you can't double on me.""Oh, Count, darlin', Mister Considine avick, don't do it, don't now," saidthe poor fellow, falling on his knees, and blubbering like an infant."Hold your tongue, you villain, or I'll cut it out of your head," saidConsidine."And so I will; but don't do it, don't for the love of--""Don't do what, you whimpering scoundrel? What does he think I'll do?""Don't I know very well what you're after, what you're always after too?Oh, wirra, wirra!" Here he wrung his hands, and swayed himself backwardsand forwards, a true picture of Irish grief."I'll stop his blubbering," said Considine, opening the box and taking outa pistol, which he cocked leisurely, and pointed at the poor fellow's head;"another syllable now, and I'll scatter your brains upon that pavement.""And do, and divil thank you; sure, it's your trade."The coolness of the reply threw us both off our guard so completely that weburst out into a hearty fit of laughing."Come, come," said the count, at last, "this will never do; if he goes onthis way, we'll have the whole house about us. Come, then, harness the roanmare; and here's half a crown for you.""I wouldn't touch the best piece in your purse," said the poor boy; "sureit's blood-money, no less."The words were scarcely spoken, when Considine seized him by the collarwith one hand, and by the wrist with the other, and carried him over theyard to the stable, where, kicking open the door, he threw him on a heap ofstones, adding, "If you stir now, I'll break every bone in your body;" athreat that seemed certainly considerably increased in its terrors, fromthe rough gripe he had already experienced, for the lad rolled himself uplike a ball, and sobbed as if his heart were breaking.Very few minutes sufficed us now to harness the mare in the tax-cart, andwhen all was ready, Considine seized the whip, and locking the stable-doorupon Patsey, was about to get up, when a sudden thought struck him."Charley," said he, "that fellow will find some means to give the alarm; wemust take him with us." So saying, he opened the door, and taking the poorfellow by the collar, flung him at my feet in the tax-cart.We had already lost some time, and the roan mare was put to her fastestspeed to make up for it. Our pace became, accordingly, a sharp one; and asthe road was bad, and the tax-cart no "patent inaudible," neither of usspoke. To me this was a great relief. The events of the last few days hadgiven them the semblance of years, and all the reflection I could musterwas little enough to make anything out of the chaotic mass,--love,mischief, and misfortune,--in which I had been involved since my leavingO'Malley Castle."Here we are, Charley," said Considine, drawing up short at the door of alittle country ale-house, or, in Irish parlance, shebeen, which stood atthe meeting of four bleak roads, in a wild and barren mountain tract besidethe Shannon. "Here we are, my boy! Jump out and let us be stirring.""Here, Patsey, my man," said the count, unravelling the prostrate anddoubly knotted figure at our feet; "lend a hand, Patsey." Much to myastonishment, he obeyed the summons with alacrity, and proceeded tounharness the mare with the greatest despatch. My attention was, however,soon turned from him to my own more immediate concerns, and I followed mycompanion into the house."Joe," said the count to the host, "is Mr. Bodkin up at the house thismorning?""He's just passed this way, sir, with Mr. Malowney of Tillnamuck, in thegig, on their way from Mr. Blake's. They stopped here to order horses to goover to O'Malley Castle, and the gossoon is gone to look for a pair.""All right," said Considine, and added, in a whisper, "we've done it well,Charley, to be beforehand, or the governor would have found it all out andtaken the affair into his own hands. Now all you have to do is to stayquietly here till I come back, which will not be above an hour at farthest.Joe, send me the pony; keep an eye on Patsey, that he doesn't play us atrick. The short way to Mr. Bodkin's is through Scariff. Ay, I know itwell; good-by, Charley. By the Lord, we'll pepper him!"These were the last words of the worthy count as he closed the door behindhim, and left me to my own not very agreeable reflections. Independently ofmy youth and perfect ignorance of the world, which left me unable to formany correct judgment on my conduct, I knew that I had taken a great dealof wine, and was highly excited when my unhappy collision with Mr. Bodkinoccurred. Whether, then, I had been betrayed into anything which couldfairly have provoked his insulting retort or not, I could not remember; andnow my most afflicting thought was, what opinion might be entertained of meby those at Blake's table; and above all, what Miss Dashwood herself wouldthink, and what narrative of the occurrence would reach her. The greateffort of my last few days had been to stand well in her estimation, toappear something better in feeling, something higher in principle, than therude and unpolished squirearchy about me; and now here was the end ofit! What would she, what could she, think, but that I was the samepunch-drinking, rowing, quarrelling bumpkin as those whom I had so latelybeen carefully endeavoring to separate myself from? How I hated myself forthe excess to which passion had betrayed me, and how I detested my opponentas the cause of all my present misery. "How very differently," thoughtI, "her friend the captain would have conducted himself. His quiet andgentlemanly manner would have done fully as much to wipe out any insult onhis honor as I could do, and after all, would neither have disturbed theharmony of a dinner-table, nor made himself, as I shuddered to think Ihad, a subject of rebuke, if not of ridicule." These harassing, torturingreflections continued to press on me, and I paced the room with my handsclasped and the perspiration upon my brow. "One thing is certain,--I cannever see her again," thought I; "this disgraceful business must, in someshape or other, become known to her, and all I have been saying theselast three days rise up in judgment against this one act, and stamp me animpostor! I that decried--nay, derided--our false notion of honor. Wouldthat Considine were come! What can keep him now?" I walked to the door; aboy belonging to the house was walking the roan before the door. "What had,then, become of Pat?" I inquired; but no one could tell. He had disappearedshortly after our arrival, and had not been seen afterwards. My ownthoughts were, however, too engrossing to permit me to think more of thiscircumstance, and I turned again to enter the house, when I saw Considineadvancing up the road at the full speed of his pony."Out with the mare, Charley! Be alive, my boy!--all's settled." So saying,he sprang from the pony and proceeded to harness the roan with the greatesthaste, informing me in broken sentences, as he went on with all thearrangements."We are to cross the bridge of Portumna. They won the ground, and it seemsBodkin likes the spot; he shot Peyton there three years ago. Worse lucknow, Charley, you know; by all the rule of chance, he can't expect the samething twice,--never four by honors in two deals. Didn't say that, though. Asweet meadow, I know it well; small hillocks, like molehills; all over it.Caught him at breakfast; I don't think he expected the message to come fromus, but said it was a very polite attention,--and so it was, you know."So he continued to ramble on as we once more took our seats in the tax-cartand set out for the ground."What are you thinking of, Charley?" said the count, as I kept silent forsome minutes."I'm thinking, sir, if I were to kill him, what I must do after.""Right, my boy; nothing like that, but I'll settle all for you. Upon myconscience, if it wasn't for the chance of his getting into another quarreland spoiling the election, I'd go back for Godfrey; he'd like to see youbreak ground so prettily. And you say you're no shot?""Never could do anything with the pistol to speak of, sir," said I,remembering his rebuke of the morning."I don't mind that. You've a good eye; never take it off him after you'reon the ground,--follow him everywhere. Poor Callaghan, that's gone, shothis man always that way. He had a way of looking without winking that wasvery fatal at a short distance; a very good thing to learn, Charley, whenyou have a little spare time."Half-an-hour's sharp driving brought us to the river side, where a boathad been provided by Considine to ferry us over. It was now about eighto'clock, and a heavy, gloomy morning. Much rain had fallen overnight, andthe dark and lowering atmosphere seemed charged with more. The mountainslooked twice their real size, and all the shadows were increased toan enormous extent. A very killing kind of light it was, as the countremarked.CHAPTER VIII.THE DUEL.As the boatmen pulled in towards the shore we perceived, a few hundredyards off, a group of persons standing, whom we soon recognized as ouropponents. "Charley," said the count, grasping my arm tightly, as I stoodup to spring on the land,--"Charley, although you are only a boy, as I maysay, I have no fear for your courage; but still more than that is needfulhere. This Bodkin is a noted duellist, and will try to shake your nerve.Now, mind that you take everything that happens quite with an air ofindifference; don't let him think that he has any advantage over you, andyou'll see how the tables will be turned in your favor.""Trust to me, Count" said I; "I'll not disgrace you."He pressed my hand tightly, and I thought that I discerned something likea slight twitch about the corners of his grim mouth, as if some sudden andpainful thought had shot across his mind; but in a moment he was calm, andstern-looking as ever."Twenty minutes late, Mr. Considine," said a short, red-faced littleman, with a military frock and foraging cap, as he held out his watch inevidence."I can only say, Captain Malowney, that we lost no time since we parted. Wehad some difficulty in finding a boat; but in any case, we are here now,and that, I opine, is the important part of the matter.""Quite right,--very just indeed. Will you present me to your young friend.Very proud to make your acquaintance, sir; your uncle and I met more thanonce in this kind of way. I was out with him in '92,--was it? no, I thinkit was '93,--when he shot Harry Burgoyne, who, by-the-bye, was called thecrack shot of our mess; but, begad, your uncle knocked his pistol hand toshivers, saying, in his dry way, 'He must try the left hand this morning.'Count, a little this side, if you please."While Considine and the captain walked a few paces apart from where Istood, I had leisure to observe my antagonist, who stood among a group ofhis friends, talking and laughing away in great spirits. As the tone theyspoke in was not of the lowest, I could catch much of their conversation atthe distance I was from them. They were discussing the last occasion thatBodkin had visited this spot, and talking of the fatal event which happenedthen."Poor devil," said Bodkin, "it wasn't his fault; but you see some of the--th had been showing white feathers before that, and he was obliged to goout. In fact, the colonel himself said, 'Fight, or leave the corps.' Well,out he came; it was a cold morning in February, with a frost the nightbefore going off in a thin rain. Well, it seems he had the consumption orsomething of that sort, with a great cough and spitting of blood, and thisweather made him worse; and he was very weak when he came to the ground.Now, the moment I got a glimpse of him, I said to myself, 'He's pluckenough, but as nervous as a lady;' for his eye wandered all about, and hismouth was constantly twitching. 'Take off your great-coat, Ned,' said oneof his people, when they were going to put him up; 'take it off, man.' Heseemed to hesitate for an instant, when Michael Blake remarked, 'Arrah, lethim alone; it's his mother makes him wear it, for the cold he has.' Theyall began to laugh at this; but I kept my eye upon him, and I saw that hischeek grew quite livid and a kind of gray color, and his eyes filled up. 'Ihave you now,' said I to myself, and I shot him through the lung.""And this poor fellow," thought I, "was the only son of a widowed mother."I walked from the spot to avoid hearing further, and felt, as I did so,something like a spirit of vengeance rising within me, for the fate of oneso untimely cut off."Here we are, all ready," said Malowney, springing over a small fence intothe adjoining field. "Take your ground, gentlemen."Considine took my arm and walked forward. "Charley," said he, "I am to givethe signal; I'll drop my glove when you are to fire, but don't look at meat all. I'll manage to catch Bodkin's eye; and do you watch him steadily,and fire when he does.""I think that the ground we are leaving behind us is rather better," saidsome one."So it is," said Bodkin; "but it might be troublesome to carry the younggentleman down that way,--here all is fair and easy."The next instant we were placed; and I well remember the first thought thatstruck me was, that there could be no chance of either of us escaping."Now then," said the count, "I'll walk twelve paces, turn and drop thisglove; at which signal you fire, and together mind. The man who reserveshis shot falls by my hand." This very summary denunciation seemed to meetgeneral approbation, and the count strutted forth. Notwithstanding theadvice of my friend, I could not help turning my eyes from Bodkin to watchthe retiring figure of the count. At length he stopped; a second or twoelapsed; he wheeled rapidly round, and let fall the glove. My eye glancedtowards my opponent; I raised my pistol and fired. My hat turned half roundupon my head, and Bodkin fell motionless to the earth. I saw the peoplearound me rush forward; I caught two or three glances thrown at me with anexpression of revengeful passion; I felt some one grasp me round the waist,and hurry me from the spot; and it was at least ten minutes after, as wewere skimming the surface of the broad Shannon, before I could well collectmy scattered faculties to remember all that was passing, as Considine,pointing to the two bullet-holes in my hat, remarked, "Sharp practice,Charley; it was the overcharge saved you.""Is he killed, sir?" I asked."Not quite, I believe, but as good. You took him just above the hip.""Can he recover?" said I, with a voice tremulous from agitation, which Ivainly endeavored to conceal from my companion."Not if the doctor can help it," said Considine; "for the fool keeps pokingabout for the ball. But now let's think of the next step,--you'll have toleave this, and at once, too."Little more passed between us. As we rowed towards the shore, Considinewas following up his reflections, and I had mine,--alas! too many and toobitter to escape from.As we neared the land a strange spectacle caught our eye. For aconsiderable distance along the coast crowds of country people wereassembled, who, forming in groups and breaking into parties of two andthree, were evidently watching with great anxiety what was taking place atthe opposite side. Now, the distance was at least a mile, and therefore anypart of the transaction which had been enacting there must have been quitebeyond their view. While I was wondering at this, Considine cried outsuddenly, "Too infamous, by Jove! We're murdered men!""What do you mean?" said I."Don't you see that?" said he, pointing to something black which floatedfrom a pole at the opposite side of the river."Yes; what is it?""It's his coat they've put upon an oar to show the people he'skilled,--that's all. Every man here's his tenant; and look--there! They'renot giving us much doubt as to their intention."Here a tremendous yell burst forth from the mass of people along the shore,which rising to a terrific cry sunk gradually down to a low wailing, thenrose and fell again several times as the Irish death-cry filled the air androse to Heaven, as if imploring vengeance on a murderer.The appalling influence of the keen, as it is called, had been familiarto me from my infancy; but it needed the awful situation I was placed in toconsummate its horrors. It was at once my accusation and my doom. I knewwell--none better--the vengeful character of the Irish peasant of the west,and that my death was certain I had no doubt. The very crime that sat uponmy heart quailed its courage and unnerved my arm. As the boatmenlooked from us towards the shore and again at our faces, they, as ifinstinctively, lay upon their oars, and waited for our decision as to whatcourse to pursue."Rig the spritsail, my boys," said Considine, "and let her head lie up theriver; and be alive, for I see they're bailing a boat below the little reefthere, and will be after us in no time."The poor fellows, who, although strangers to us, sympathizing in what theyperceived to be our imminent danger, stepped the light spar which actedas mast, and shook out their scanty rag of canvas in a minute. Considinemeanwhile went aft, and steadying her head with an oar, held the smallcraft up to the wind till she lay completely over, and as she rushedthrough the water, ran dipping her gun-wale through the white foam."Where can we make without tacking, boys?" inquired the count."If it blows on as fresh, sir, we'll run you ashore within half a mile ofthe Castle.""Put an oar to leeward," said Considine, "and keep her up more to the wind,and I promise you, my lads, you will not go home fresh and fasting if youland us where you say.""Here they come," said the other boatman, as he pointed back with hisfinger towards a large yawl which shot suddenly from the shore, with sixsturdy fellows pulling at their oars, while three or four others wereendeavoring to get up their rigging, which appeared tangled and confused atthe bottom of the boat; the white splash of water which fell each momentbeside her showing that the process of bailing was still continued."Ah, then, may I never--av it isn't the ould 'Dolphin' they have launchedfor the cruise," said one of our fellows."What's the 'Dolphin,' then?""An ould boat of the Lord's [Lord Clanricarde's] that didn't see water,except when it rained, these four years, and is sun-cracked from stem tostern.""She can sail, however," said Considine, who watched with a painful anxietythe rapidity of her course through the water."Nabocklish, she was a smuggler's jolly-boat, and well used to it. Lookhow they're pulling. God pardon them, but they're in no blessed humor thismorning.""Lay out upon your oars, boys; the wind's failing us," cried the count, asthe sail flapped lazily against the mast."It's no use, yer honor," said the elder. "We'll be only breaking ourhearts to no purpose. They're sure to catch us.""Do as I bade you, at all events. What's that ahead of us there?""The Oat Rock, sir. A vessel with grain struck there and went down withall aboard, four years last winter. There's no channel between it and theshore,--all sunk rocks, every inch of it. There's the breeze."The canvas fell over as he spoke, and the little craft lay down to it tillthe foaming water bubbled over her lee bow."Keep her head up, sir; higher--higher still."But Considine little heeded the direction, steering straight for the narrowchannel the man alluded to."Tear and ages, but you're going right for the cloch na quirka!""Arrah, an' the devil a taste I'll be drowned for your devarsion!" said theother, springing up."Sit down there, and be still," roared Considine, as he drew a pistol fromthe case at his feet, "if you don't want some leaden ballast to keep youso! Here, Charley, take this, and if that fellow stirs hand or foot--youunderstand me."The two men sat sulkily in the bottom of the boat, which now was actuallyflying through the water. Considine's object was a clear one. He saw thatin sailing we were greatly overmatched, and that our only chance lay inreaching the narrow and dangerous channel between Oat Rock and the shore,by which we should distance the pursuit, the long reef of rocks that ranout beyond requiring a wide berth to escape from. Nothing but the dangerbehind us could warrant so rash a daring. The whole channel was dotted withpatches of white and breaking foam,--the sure evidence of the mischiefbeneath,--while here and there a dash of spurting spray flew up from thedark water, where some cleft rock lay hid below the flood. Escape seemedimpossible; but who would not have preferred even so slender a chance withso frightful an alternative behind him? As if to add terror to the scene,Considine had scarcely turned the boat ahead of the channel when atremendous blackness spread over all around, the thunder pealed forth, andamidst the crashing of the hail and the bright glare of lightning a squallstruck us and laid us nearly keel uppermost for several minutes. I wellremember we rushed through the dark and blackened water, our little craftmore than half filled, the oars floating off to leeward, and we ourselveskneeling on the bottom planks for safety. Roll after roll of loud thunderbroke, as it were, just above our heads; while in the swift dashing rainthat seemed to hiss around us every object was hidden, and even the otherboat was lost to our view. The two poor fellows--I shall never forget theirexpression. One, a devout Catholic, had placed a little leaden image of asaint before him in the bow, and implored its intercession with a torturingagony of suspense that wrung my very heart. The other, apparently lessalive to such consolations as his Church afforded, remained with his handsclasped, his mouth compressed, his brows knitted, and his dark eyes bentupon me with the fierce hatred of a deadly enemy; his eyes were sunken andbloodshot, and all told of some dreadful conflict within. The wild ferocityof his look fascinated my gaze, and amidst all the terrors of the scene Icould not look from him. As I gazed, a second and more awful squall struckthe boat; the mast went over, and with a loud report like a pistol-shotsmashed at the thwart and fell over, trailing the sail along the milky seabehind us. Meanwhile the water rushed clean over us, and the boat seemedsettling. At this dreadful moment the sailor's eye was bent upon me, hislips parted, and he muttered, as if to himself, "This it is to go to seawith a murderer." Oh, God! the agony of that moment! the heartfelt andaccusing conscience that I was judged and doomed! that the brand of Cainwas upon my brow! that my fellow-men had ceased forever to regard me as abrother! that I was an outcast and a wanderer forever! I bent forward tillmy forehead fell upon my knees, and I wept. Meanwhile the boat flew throughthe water, and Considine, who alone among us seemed not to lose hispresence of mind, cut away the mast and sent it overboard. The storm begannow to abate; and as the black mass of cloud broke from around us we beheldthe other boat, also dismasted, far behind us, while all on board ofher were employed in bailing out the water with which she seemed almostsinking. The curtain of mist that had hidden us from each other no soonerbroke than they ceased their labors for a moment, and looking towards us,burst forth into a yell so wild, so savage, so dreadful, my very heartquailed as its cadence fell upon my ear."Safe, my boy," said Considine, clapping me on the shoulder, as he steeredthe boat forth from its narrow path of danger, and once more reached thebroad Shannon,--"safe, Charley; though we've had a brush for it." In aminute more we reached the land, and drawing our gallant little craft onshore, set out for O'Malley Castle.CHAPTER IX.THE RETURN.O'Malley Castle lay about four miles from the spot we landed at, andthither accordingly we bent our steps without loss of time. We had not,however, proceeded far, when, before us on the road, we perceived a mixedassemblage of horse and foot, hurrying along at a tremendous rate. The mob,which consisted of some hundred country people, were armed with sticks,scythes, and pitchforks, and although not preserving any very militaryaspect in their order of march, were still a force quite formidable enoughto make us call a halt, and deliberate upon what we were to do."They've outflanked us, Charley," said Considine; "however, all is not yetlost. But see, they've got sight of us; here they come."At these words, the vast mass before us came pouring along, splashing themud on every side, and huzzaing like so many Indians. In the front ran abare-legged boy, waving his cap to encourage the rest, who followed him atabout fifty yards behind."Leave that fellow for me," said the count, coolly examining the lock ofhis pistol; "I'll pick him out, and load again in time for his friends'arrival. Charley, is that a gentleman I see far back in the crowd? Yes,to be sure it is? He's on a large horse--now he's pressing forward; solet--no--oh--ay, it's Godfrey O'Malley himself, and these are our ownpeople." Scarcely were the words out when a tremendous cheer arose fromthe multitude, who, recognizing us at the same instant, sprang from theirhorses and ran forward to welcome us. Among the foremost was the scarecrowleader, whom I at once perceived as poor Patsey, who, escaping in themorning, had returned at full speed to O'Malley Castle, and raised thewhole country to my rescue. Before I could address one word to my faithfulfollowers I was in my uncle's arms."Safe, my boy, quite safe?""Quite safe, sir.""No scratch anywhere?""Nothing but a hat the worse, sir," said I, showing the two bullet-holes inmy headpiece.His lip quivered as he turned and whispered something into Considine's ear,which I heard not; but the count's reply was, "Devil a bit, as cool as yousee him this minute.""And Bodkin, what of him?""This day's work's his last," said Considine; "the ball entered here. Butcome along, Godfrey; Charley's new at this kind of thing, and we had betterdiscuss matters in the house."Half-an-hour's brisk trot--for we were soon supplied with horses--broughtus back to the Castle, much to the disappointment of our cortege, who hadbeen promised a scrimmage, and went back in very ill-humor at the breachof contract.The breakfast-room, as we entered, was filled with my uncle's supporters,all busily engaged over poll-books and booth tallies, in preparation forthe eventful day of battle. These, however, were immediately thrown asideto hasten round me and inquire all the details of my duel. Considine,happily for me, however, assumed all the dignity of an historian, andrecounted the events of the morning so much to my honor and glory, that I,who only a little before felt crushed and bowed down by the misery of mylate duel, began, amidst the warm congratulations and eulogiums about me,to think I was no small hero, and in fact, something very much resembling"the man for Galway." To this feeling a circumstance that followed assistedin contributing. While we were eagerly discussing the various resultslikely to arise from the meeting, a horse galloped rapidly to the door anda loud voice called out, "I can't get off, but tell him to come here." Werushed out and beheld Captain Malowney, Mr. Bodkin's second, covered withmud from head to foot, and his horse reeking with foam and sweat. "I amhurrying on to Athlone for another doctor; but I've called to tell youthat the wound is not supposed to be mortal,--he may recover yet." Withoutwaiting for another word, he dashed spurs into his nag and rattled down theavenue at full gallop. Mr. Bodkin's dearest friend on earth could not havereceived the intelligence with more delight; and I now began to listen tothe congratulations of my friends with a more tranquil spirit. My uncle,too, seemed much relieved by the information, and heard with great goodtemper my narrative of the few days at Gurt-na-Morra. "So then," said he,as I concluded, "my opponent is at least a gentleman; that is a comfort.""Sir George Dashwood," said I, "from all I have seen, is a remarkably niceperson, and I am certain you will meet with only the fair and legitimateopposition of an opposing candidate in him,--no mean or unmanlysubterfuge.""All right, Charley. Well, now, your affair of this morning must keep youquiet for a few days, come what will; by Monday next, when the electiontakes place, Bodkin's fate will be pretty clear, one way or the other, andif matters go well, you can come into town; otherwise, I have arranged withConsidine to take you over to the Continent for a year or so; but we'lldiscuss all this in the evening. Now I must start on a canvass. Boyleexpects to meet you at dinner to-day; he is coming from Athlone on purpose.Now, good-by!"When my uncle had gone, I sank into a chair and fell into a musing fit overall the changes a few hours had wrought in me. From a mere boy whose mostserious employment was stocking the house with game or inspecting thekennel, I had sprung at once into man's estate, was complimented for mycoolness, praised for my prowess, lauded for my discretion, by thosewho were my seniors by nearly half a century; talked to in a tone ofconfidential intimacy by my uncle, and, in a word, treated in all respectsas an equal,--and such was all the work of a few hours. But so it is; theeras in life are separated by a narrow boundary,--some trifling accident,some casual rencontre impels us across the Rubicon, and we pass frominfancy to youth, from youth to manhood, from manhood to age, less bythe slow and imperceptible step of time than by some one decisive actor passion which, occurring at a critical moment, elicits a long latentfeeling, and impresses our existence with a color that tinges us for manya long year. As for me, I had cut the tie which bound me to the carelessgayety of boyhood with a rude gash. In three short days I had fallendeeply, desperately in love, and had wounded, if not killed, an antagonistin a duel. As I meditated on these things, I was aroused by the noise ofhorses' feet in the yard beneath. I opened the window and beheld no less aperson than Captain Hammersley. He was handing a card to a servant, whichhe was accompanying by a verbal message; the impression of something likehostility on the part of the captain had never left my mind, and I hasteneddown-stairs just in time to catch him as he turned from the door."Ah, Mr. O'Malley!" said he, in a most courteous tone. "They told me youwere not at home."I apologized for the blunder, and begged of him to alight and come in."I thank you very much, but, in fact, my hours are now numbered here. Ihave just received an order to join my regiment; we have been ordered forservice, and Sir George has most kindly permitted my giving up my staffappointment. I could not, however, leave the country without shaking handswith you. I owe you a lesson in horsemanship, and I'm only sorry that weare not to have another day together.""Then you are going out to the Peninsula?" said I."Why, we hope so; the commander-in-chief, they say, is in great want ofcavalry, and we scarcely less in want of something to do. I'm sorry you arenot coming with us.""Would to Heaven I were!" said I, with an earnestness that almost made mybrain start."Then, why not?""Unfortunately, I am peculiarly situated. My worthy uncle, who is all to mein this world, would be quite alone if I were to leave him; and although hehas never said so, I know he dreads the possibility of my suggesting sucha thing to him: so that, between his fears and mine, the matter is neverbroached by either party, nor do I think ever can be.""Devilish hard--but I believe you are right; something, however, may turnup yet to alter his mind, and if so, and if you do take to dragooning,don't forget George Hammersley will be always most delighted to meet you;and so good-by, O'Malley, good-by."He turned his horse's head and was already some paces off, when he returnedto my side, and in a lower tone of voice said,--"I ought to mention to you that there has been much discussion on youraffair at Blake's table, and only one opinion on the matter among allparties,--that you acted perfectly right. Sir George Dashwood,--no meanjudge of such things,--quite approves of your conduct, and, I believe,wishes you to know as much; and now, once more, good-by."CHAPTER X.THE ELECTION.The important morning at length arrived, and as I looked from my bed-roomwindow at daybreak, the crowd of carriages of all sorts and shapesdecorated with banners and placards; the incessant bustle; the hurryinghither and thither; the cheering as each new detachment of voters came up,mounted on jaunting-cars, or on horses whose whole caparison consisted ina straw rope for a bridle, and a saddle of the same frail material,--allinformed me that the election day was come. I lost no further time, butproceeded to dress with all possible despatch. When I appeared in thebreakfast-room, it was already filled with some seventy or eighty personsof all ranks and ages, mingled confusedly together, and enjoying thehospitable fare of my uncle's house, while they discussed all the detailsand prospects of the election. In the hall, the library, the largedrawing-room, too, similar parties were also assembled, and as newcomersarrived, the servants were busy in preparing tables before the door and upthe large terrace that ran the entire length of the building. Nothing couldbe more amusing than the incongruous mixture of the guests, who, with everyvariety of eatable that chance or inclination provided, were thus throwninto close contact, having only this in common,--the success of the causethey were engaged in. Here was the old Galway squire, with an ancestry thatreached to Noah, sitting side by side with the poor cotter, whose wholeearthly possession was what, in Irish phrase, is called a "potatogarden,"--meaning the exactly smallest possible patch of ground out ofwhich a very Indian-rubber conscience could presume to vote. Here sat theold simple-minded, farmer-like man, in close conversation with a littlewhite-foreheaded, keen-eyed personage, in a black coat and eye-glass,--aflash attorney from Dublin, learned in flaws of the registry, and deep inthe subtleties of election law. There was an Athlone horse-dealer, whosehabitual daily practices in imposing the halt, the lame, and the blind uponthe unsuspecting, for beasts of blood and mettle, well qualified him forthe trickery of a county contest. Then there were scores of squireengentry, easily recognized on common occasions by a green coat, brassbuttons, dirty cords, and dirtier top-boots, a lash-whip, and a half-bredfox-hound; but now, fresh-washed for the day, they presented something theappearance of a swell mob, adjusted to the meridian of Galway. A mass offrieze-coated, brow-faced, bullet-headed peasantry filled up the largespaces, dotted here and there with a sleek, roguish-eyed priest, or somelow electioneering agent detailing, for the amusement of the company, someof those cunning practices of former times which if known to the properauthorities would in all likelihood cause the talented narrator to beimproving the soil of Sidney, or fishing on the banks of the Swan river;while at the head and foot of each table sat some personal friend of myuncle, whose ready tongue, and still readier pistol, made him a personageof some consequence, not more to his own people than to the enemy. While ofsuch material were the company, the fare before them was no less varied:here some rubicund squire was deep in amalgamating the contents of avenison pasty with some of Sneyd's oldest claret; his neighbor, lessambitious, and less erudite in such matters, was devouring rashers ofbacon, with liberal potations of potteen; some pale-cheeked scion of thelaw, with all the dust of the Four Courts in his throat, was sippinghis humble beverage of black tea beside four sturdy cattle-dealers fromBallinasloe, who were discussing hot whiskey punch and spoleaion (boiledbeef) at the very primitive hour of eight in the morning. Amidst the clankof decanters, the crash of knives and plates, and the jingling of glasses,the laughter and voices of the guests were audibly increasing; and thevarious modes of "running a buck" (Anglic, substituting a vote), orhunting a badger, were talked over on all sides, while the price of aveal (a calf), or a voter, was disputed with all the energy of debate.Refusing many an offered place, I went through the different rooms insearch of Considine, to whom circumstances of late had somehow greatlyattached me."Here, Charley," cried a voice I was very familiar with,--"here's a placeI've been keeping for you.""Ah, Sir Harry, how do you do? Any of that grouse-pie to spare?""Abundance, my boy; but I'm afraid I can't say as much for the liquor.I have been shouting for claret this half-hour in vain,--do get us somenutriment down here, and the Lord will reward you. What a pity it is," headded, in a lower tone, to his neighbor--"what a pity a quart-bottle won'thold a quart; but I'll bring it before the House one of these days." Thathe kept his word in this respect, a motion on the books of the HonorableHouse will bear me witness."Is this it?" said he, turning towards a farmer-like old man, who had putsome question to him across the table; "is it the apple-pie you'll have?""Many thanks to your honor,--I'd like it, av it was wholesome.""And why shouldn't it be wholesome?" said Sir Harry."Troth, then, myself does not know; but my father, I heerd tell, died of anapple-plexy, and I'm afeerd of it."I at length found Considine, and learned that, as a very good account ofBodkin had arrived, there was no reason why I should not proceed to thehustings; but I was secretly charged not to take any prominent part in theday's proceedings. My uncle I only saw for an instant,--he begged me tobe careful, avoid all scrapes, and not to quit Considine. It was past teno'clock when our formidable procession got under way, and headed towardsthe town of Galway. The road was, for miles, crowded with our followers;banners flying and music playing, we presented something of the spectacleof a very ragged army on its march. At every cross-road a mountain-pathreinforcement awaited us, and as we wended along, our numbers weremomentarily increasing; here and there along the line, some energeticand not over-sober adherent was regaling his auditory with a speech inlaudation of the O'Malleys since the days of Moses, and more than onepriest was heard threatening the terrors of his Church in aid of a causeto whose success he was pledged and bound. I rode beside the count, who,surrounded by a group of choice spirits, recounted the various happyinventions by which he had, on divers occasions, substituted a personalquarrel for a contest. Boyle also contributed his share of electionanecdote, and one incident he related, which, I remember, amused me much atthe time.[Illustration: THE ELECTION.]"Do you remember Billy Calvert, that came down to contest Kilkenny?"inquired Sir Harry."What, ever forget him!" said Considine, "with his well-powdered wig andhis hessians. There never was his equal for lace ruffles and rings.""You never heard, may be, how he lost the election?""He resigned, I believe, or something of that sort.""No, no," said another; "he never came forward at all. There's some secretin it; for Tom Butler was elected without a contest.""Jack, I'll tell you how it happened. I was on my way up from Cork, havingfinished my own business, and just carried the day, not without a push forit. When we reached,--Lady Mary was with me,--when we reached Kilkenny, thenight before the election, I was not ten minutes in town till Butlerheard of it, and sent off express to see me; I was at my dinner when themessenger came, and promised to go over when I'd done. But faith, Tomdidn't wait, but came rushing up-stairs himself, and dashed into the roomin the greatest hurry."'Harry,' says he, 'I'm done for; the corporation of free smiths, that werealways above bribery, having voted for myself and my father before, forfour pounds ten a man, won't come forward under six guineas and whiskey.Calvert has the money; they know it. The devil a farthing we have; andwe've been paying all our fellows that can't read in Hennesy's notes, andyou know the bank's broke this three weeks.'"On he went, giving me a most disastrous picture of his cause, andconcluded by asking if I could suggest anything under the circumstances."'You couldn't get a decent mob and clear the poll?'"'I am afraid not,' said he, despondingly."'Then I don't see what's to be done, if you can't pick a fight withhimself. Will he go out?'"'Lord knows! They say he's so afraid of that, that it has prevented himcoming down till the very day. But he is arrived now; he came in theevening, and is stopping at Walsh's in Patrick Street.'"'Then I'll see what can be done,' said I."'Is that Calvert, the little man that blushes when the Lady-Lieutenantspeaks to him?' said Lady Mary."'The very man.'"'Would it be of any use to you if he could not come on the hustingsto-morrow?' said she, again."''Twould gain us the day. Half the voters don't believe he's here at all,and his chief agent cheated all the people on the last election; and ifCalvert didn't appear, he wouldn't have ten votes to register. But why doyou ask?'"'Why, that, if you like, I'll bet you a pair of diamond ear-rings hesha'n't show.'"'Done!' said Butler. 'And I promise a necklace into the bargain, if youwin; but I'm afraid you're only quizzing me.'"'Here's my hand on it,' said she. 'And now let's talk of something else.'"As Lady Mary never asked my assistance, and as I knew she was very wellable to perform whatever she undertook, you may be sure I gave myself verylittle trouble about the whole affair; and when they came, I went off tobreakfast with Tom's committee, not knowing anything that was to be done.Calvert had given orders that he was to be called at eight o'clock, and soa few minutes before that time a gentle knock came to the door.'Come in,' said he, thinking it was the waiter, and covering himself up inthe clothes; for he was the most bashful creature ever was seen,--'comein.'The door opened, and what was his horror to find that a lady entered in herdressing-gown, her hair on her shoulders, very much tossed and dishevelled.The moment she came in, she closed the door and locked it, and then satleisurely down upon a chair.Billy's teeth chattered, and his limbs trembled; for this was an adventureof a very novel kind for him. At last he took courage to speak.'I am afraid, madam,' said he, 'that you are under some unhappy mistake,and that you suppose this chamber is--''Mr. Calvert's,' said the lady, with a solemn voice, 'is it not?''Yes, madam, I am that person.''Thank God!' said the lady, with a very impressive tone. 'Here I am safe.'Billy grew very much puzzled at these words; but hoping that by his silencethe lady would proceed to some explanation, he said no more. She, however,seemed to think that nothing further was necessary, and sat still andmotionless, with her hands before her and her eyes fixed on Billy."'You seem to forget me, sir?' said she, with a faint smile."'I do, indeed, madam; the half-light, the novelty of your costume, and thestrangeness of the circumstance altogether must plead for me, if I appearrude enough.'"'I am Lady Mary Boyle,' said she."'I do remember you, madam; but may I ask--'"'Yes, yes; I know what you would ask. You would say, Why are you here? Howcomes it that you have so far outstepped the propriety of which your wholelife is an example, that alone, at such a time, you appear in the chamberof a man whose character for gallantry--'"'Oh, indeed--indeed, my lady, nothing of the kind!'"'Ah, alas! poor defenceless women learn, too late, how constantlyassociated is the retiring modesty which decries, with the pleasing powerswhich ensure success--'"Here she sobbed, Billy blushed, and the clock struck nine."'May I then beg, madam--'"'Yes, yes, you shall hear it all; but my poor scattered faculties willnot be the clearer by your hurrying me. You know, perhaps,' continuedshe, 'that my maiden name was Rogers?' He of the blankets bowed, and sheresumed, 'It is now eighteen years since, that a young, unsuspecting, fondcreature, reared in all the care and fondness of doting parents, temptedher first step in life, and trusted her fate to another's keeping. I amthat unhappy person; the other, that monster in human guise that smiled butto betray, that won but to ruin and destroy, is he whom you know as SirHarry Boyle.'"Here she sobbed for some minutes, wiped her eyes, and resumed hernarrative. Beginning at the period of her marriage, she detailed a numberof circumstances in which poor Calvert, in all his anxiety to come aufond at matters, could never perceive bore upon the question in any way;but as she recounted them all with great force and precision, entreatinghim to bear in mind certain circumstances to which she should recur by andby, his attention was kept on the stretch, and it was only when the clockstruck ten that he was fully aware how his morning was passing, and whatsurmises his absence might originate."'May I interrupt you for a moment, dear madam? Was it nine or ten o'clockwhich struck last?'"'How should I know?' said she, frantically. 'What are hours and minutes toher who has passed long years of misery?'"'Very true, very true,' replied he, timidly, and rather fearing for theintellect of his fair companion.She continued. The narrative, however, so far from becoming clearer, grewgradually more confused and intricate; and as frequent references were madeby the lady to some previous statement, Calvert was more than once rebukedfor forgetfulness and inattention, where in reality nothing less thanshort-hand could have borne him through."'Was it in '93 I said that Sir Harry left me at Tuam?'"'Upon my life, madam, I am afraid to aver; but it strikes me--'"'Gracious powers! and this is he whom I fondly trusted to make thedepository of my woes! Cruel, cruel man!'"Here she sobbed considerably for several minutes, and spoke not. A loudcheer of 'Butler forever!' from the mob without now burst upon theirhearing, and recalled poor Calvert at once to the thought that the hourswere speeding fast and no prospect of the everlasting tale coming to anend."'I am deeply, most deeply grieved, my dear madam,' said the little man,sitting up in a pyramid of blankets; 'but hours, minutes, are most preciousto me this morning. I am about to be proposed as member for Kilkenny.'"At these words the lady straightened her figure out, threw her arms ateither side, and burst into a fit of laughter which poor Calvert knewat once to be hysterics. Here was a pretty situation! The bell-rope layagainst the opposite wall; and even if it did not, would he be exactlywarranted in pulling it?"'May the devil and all his angels take Sir Harry Boyle and his wholeconnection to the fifth generation!' was his sincere prayer as he sat likea Chinese juggler under his canopy."At length the violence of the paroxysm seemed to subside; the sobs becameless frequent, the kicking less forcible, and the lady's eyes closed, andshe appeared to have fallen asleep."'Now is the moment,' said Billy. 'If I could only get as far as mydressing-gown.' So saying, he worked himself down noiselessly to the footof his bed, looked fixedly at the fallen lids of the sleeping lady, andessayed one leg from the blanket. 'Now or never,' said he, pushing asidethe curtain and preparing for a spring. One more look he cast at hiscompanion, and then leaped forth; but just as he lit upon the floor sheagain roused herself, screaming with horror. Billy fell upon the bed, androlling himself in the bedclothes, vowed never to rise again till she wasout of the visible horizon."'What is all this? What do you mean, sir?' said the lady, reddening withindignation."'Nothing, upon my soul, madam; it was only my dressing-gown.'"'Your dressing-gown!' said she, with an emphasis worthy of Siddons; 'alikely story for Sir Harry to believe, sir! Fie, fie, sir!'"This last allusion seemed a settler; for the luckless Calvert heaved aprofound sigh, and sunk down as if all hope had left him. 'Butler forever!'roared the mob. 'Calvert forever!' cried a boy's voice from without. 'Threegroans for the runaway!' answered this announcement; and a very tenderinquiry of, 'Where is he?' was raised by some hundred mouths."'Madam,' said the almost frantic listener,--'madam, I must get up! I mustdress! I beg of you to permit me!'"'I have nothing to refuse, sir. Alas, disdain has long been my onlyportion! Get up, if you will.'"'But,' said the astonished man, who was well-nigh deranged at the coolnessof this reply,--'but how am I to do so if you sit there?'"'Sorry for any inconvenience I may cause you; but in the crowded state ofthe hotel I hope you see the impropriety of my walking about the passagesin this costume?'"'And, great God! madam, why did you come out in it?'"A cheer from the mob prevented her reply being audible. One o'clock tolledout from the great bell of the cathedral."'There's one o'clock, as I live!'"'I heard it,' said the lady."'The shouts are increasing. What is that I hear? "Butler is in!" Graciousmercy! is the election over?'"The lady stepped to the window, drew aside the curtain, and said, 'Indeed,it would appear so. The mob are cheering Mr. Butler.' A deafening shoutburst from the street. 'Perhaps you'd like to see the fun, so I'll notdetain you any longer. So, good-by, Mr. Calvert; and as your breakfast willbe cold, in all likelihood, come down to No. 4, for Sir Harry's a late man,and will be glad to see you.'"CHAPTER XI.AN ADVENTURE.As thus we lightened the road with chatting, the increasing concourse ofpeople, and the greater throng of carriages that filled the road, announcedthat we had nearly reached our destination."Considine," said my uncle, riding up to where we were, "I have just got afew lines from Davern. It seems Bodkin's people are afraid to come in; theyknow what they must expect, and if so, more than half of that barony islost to our opponent.""Then he has no chance whatever.""He never had, in my opinion," said Sir Harry."We'll see soon," said my uncle, cheerfully, and rode to the post.The remainder of the way was occupied in discussing the variouspossibilities of the election, into which I was rejoiced to find thatdefeat never entered.In the goodly days I speak of, a county contest was a very different thingindeed from the tame and insipid farce that now passes under that name:where a briefless barrister, bullied by both sides, sits as assessor; a fewdrunken voters, a radical O'Connellite grocer, a demagogue priest, a deputygrand-purple-something from the Trinity College lodge, with some half-dozenfollowers, shouting, "To the Devil with Peel!" or "Down with Dens!" formthe whole corp-de-ballet. No, no; in the times I refer to the voters weresome thousands in number, and the adverse parties took the field, far lessdependent for success upon previous pledge or promise made them than uponthe actual stratagem of the day. Each went forth, like a general to battle,surrounded by a numerous and well-chosen staff,--one party of friends,acting as commissariat, attended to the victualling of the voters, thatthey obtained a due, or rather undue allowance of liquor, and came properlydrunk to the poll; others, again, broke into skirmishing parties, andscattered over the country, cut off the enemy's supplies, breakingdown their post-chaises, upsetting their jaunting-cars, stealing theirpoll-books, and kidnapping their agents. Then there were secret-servicepeople, bribing the enemy and enticing them to desert; and lastly, therewas a species of sapper-and-miner force, who invented false documents,denied the identity of the opposite party's people, and when hard pushed,provided persons who took bribes from the enemy, and gave evidenceafterwards on a petition. Amidst all these encounters of wit and ingenuity,the personal friends of the candidate formed a species of rifle brigade,picking out the enemy's officers, and doing sore damage to their tacticsby shooting a proposer or wounding a seconder,--a considerable portion ofevery leading agent's fee being intended as compensation for the duels hemight, could, would, should, or ought to fight during the election. Such,in brief, was a contest in the olden time. And when it is taken intoconsideration that it usually lasted a fortnight or three weeks; that aconsiderable military force was always engaged (for our Irish law permitsthis), and which, when nothing pressing was doing, was regularly assailedby both parties; that far more dependence was placed in a bludgeon than apistol; and that the man who registered a vote without a cracked pate wasregarded as a kind of natural phenomenon,--some faint idea may be formedhow much such a scene must have contributed to the peace of the county, andthe happiness and welfare of all concerned in it.As we rode along, a loud cheer from a road that ran parallel to the one wewere pursuing attracted our attention, and we perceived that the cortge ofthe opposite party was hastening on to the hustings. I could distinguishthe Blake girls on horseback among a crowd of officers in undress, andsaw something like a bonnet in the carriage-and-four which headed theprocession, and which I judged to be that of Sir George Dashwood. My heartbeat strongly as I strained my eyes to see if Miss Dashwood was there; butI could not discern her, and it was with a sense of relief that I reflectedon the possibility of our not meeting under circumstances wherein ourfeelings and interests were so completely opposed. While I was engaged inmaking this survey, I had accidentally dropped behind my companions; myeyes were firmly fixed upon that carriage, and in the faint hope that itcontained the object of all my wishes, I forgot everything else. At lengththe cortge entered the town, and passing beneath a heavy stone gateway,was lost to my view. I was still lost in revery, when an under-agent of myuncle's rode up."Oh, Master Charles!" said he, "what's to be done? They've forgotten Mr.Holmes at Woodford, and we haven't a carriage, chaise, or even a car leftto send for him.""Have you told Mr. Considine?" inquired I."And sure you know yourself how little Mr. Considine thinks of a lawyer.It's small comfort he'd give me if I went to tell him. If it was a case ofpistols or a bullet mould he'd ride back the whole way himself for them.""Try Sir Harry Boyle, then.""He's making a speech this minute before the court-house."This had sufficed to show me how far behind my companions I had beenloitering, when a cheer from the distant road again turned my eyes in thatdirection; it was the Dashwood carriage returning after leaving Sir Georgeat the hustings. The head of the britska, before thrown open, was nowclosed, and I could not make out if any one were inside."Devil a doubt of it," said the agent, in answer to some question of afarmer who rode beside him; "will you stand to me?""Troth, to be sure I will.""Here goes, then," said he, gathering up his reins and turning his horsetowards the fence at the roadside; "follow me now, boys."The order was well obeyed; for when he had cleared the ditch, a dozenstout country fellows, well mounted, were beside him. Away they went, at ahunting pace, taking every leap before them, and heading towards the roadbefore us.Without thinking further of the matter, I was laughing at the droll effectthe line of frieze coats presented as they rode side by side over thestone-walls, when an observation near me aroused my attention."Ah, then, av they know anything of Tim Finucane, they'll give it uppeaceably; it's little he'd think of taking the coach from under the judgehimself.""What are they about, boys?" said I."Goin' to take the chaise-and-four forninst ye, yer honor," said the man.I waited not to hear more, but darting spurs into my horse's sides, clearedthe fence in one bound. My horse, a strong-knit half-breed, was as fast asa racer for a short distance; so that when the agent and his party had comeup with the carriage, I was only a few hundred yards behind. I shouted outwith all my might, but they either heard not or heeded not, for scarcelywas the first man over the fence into the road when the postilion on theleader was felled to the ground, and his place supplied by his slayer; theboy on the wheeler shared the same fate, and in an instant, so well managedwas the attack, the carriage was in possession of the assailants. Fourstout fellows had climbed into the box and the rumble, and six others wereclimbing to the interior, regardless of the aid of steps. By this time theDashwood party had got the alarm, and returned in full force, not, however,before the other had laid whip to the horses and set out in full gallop;and now commenced the most terrific race I ever witnessed.The four carriage-horses, which were the property of Sir George, wereEnglish thorough-breds of great value, and, totally unaccustomed to thetreatment they experienced, dashed forward at a pace that threatenedannihilation to the carriage at every bound. The pursuers, though wellmounted, were speedily distanced, but followed at a pace that in the endwas certain to overtake the carriage. As for myself, I rode on besidethe road at the full speed of my horse, shouting, cursing, imploring,execrating, and beseeching at turns, but all in vain; the yells and shoutsof the pursuers and pursued drowned all other sounds, except when thethundering crash of the horses' feet rose above all. The road, like mostwestern Irish roads until the present century, lay straight as an arrowfor miles, regardless of every opposing barrier, and in the instance inquestion, crossed a mountain at its very highest point. Towards thispinnacle the pace had been tremendous; but owing to the higher breeding ofthe cattle, the carriage party had still the advance, and when they reachedthe top they proclaimed the victory by a cheer of triumph and derision. Thecarriage disappeared beneath the crest of the mountain, and the pursuershalted as if disposed to relinquish the chase."Come on, boys; never give up," cried I, springing over into the road, andheading the party to which by every right I was opposed.It was no time for deliberation, and they followed me with a hearty cheerthat convinced me I was unknown. The next instant we were on the mountaintop, and beheld the carriage half way down beneath us, still galloping atfull stretch."We have them now," said a voice behind me; "they'll never turn LurraBridge, if we only press on."The speaker was right; the road at the mountain foot turned at a perfectright angle, and then crossed a lofty one-arched bridge over a mountaintorrent that ran deep and boisterously beneath. On we went, gaining atevery stride; for the fellows who rode postilion well knew what was beforethem, and slackened their pace to secure a safe turning. A yell of victoryarose from the pursuers, but was answered by the others with a cheer ofdefiance. The space was now scarcely two hundred yards between us, when thehead of the britska was flung down, and a figure that I at once recognizedas the redoubted Tim Finucane, one of the boldest and most reckless fellowsin the county, was seen standing on the seat, holding,--gracious Heavens!it was true,--holding in his arms the apparently lifeless figure of MissDashwood."Hold in!" shouted the ruffian, with a voice that rose high above all theother sounds. "Hold in! or by the Eternal, I'll throw her, body and bones,into the Lurra Gash!" for such was the torrent called that boiled andfoamed a few yards before us.[Illustration: THE RESCUE.]He had by this time got firmly planted on the hind seat, and held thedrooping form on one arm with all the ease of a giant's grasp."For the love of God!" said I, "pull up. I know him well; he'll do it to acertainty if you press on.""And we know you, too," said a ruffianly fellow, with a dark whiskermeeting beneath his chin, "and have some scores to settle ere we part--"But I heard no more. With one tremendous effort I dashed my horse forward.The carriage turned an angle of the road, for an instant was out of sight,another moment I was behind it."Stop!" I shouted, with a last effort, but in vain. The horses, maddenedand infuriated, sprang forward, and heedless of all efforts to turn themthe leaders sprang over the low parapet of the bridge, and hanging for asecond by the traces, fell with a crash into the swollen torrent beneath.By this time I was beside the carriage. Finucane had now clambered to thebox, and regardless of the death and ruin around, bent upon his murderousobject, he lifted the light and girlish form above his head, bent backwardsas if to give greater impulse to his effort, when, twining my lash aroundmy wrist, I levelled my heavy and loaded hunting-whip at his head. Theweighted ball of lead struck him exactly beneath his hat; he staggered, hishands relaxed, and he fell lifeless to the ground; the same instant I wasfelled to the earth by a blow from behind, and saw no more.CHAPTER XII.MICKEY FREE.Nearly three weeks followed the event I have just narrated ere I again wasrestored to consciousness. The blow by which I was felled--from what handcoming it was never after discovered--had brought on concussion of thebrain, and for several days my life was despaired of. As by slow steps Iadvanced towards recovery, I learned from Considine that Miss Dashwood,whose life was saved by my interference, had testified, in the warmestmanner, her gratitude, and that Sir George had, up to the period of hisleaving the country, never omitted a single day to ride over and inquirefor me."You know, of course," said the count, supposing such news was the mostlikely to interest me,--"you know we beat them?""No. Pray tell me all. They've not let me hear anything hitherto.""One day finished the whole affair. We polled man for man till past twoo'clock, when our fellows lost all patience and beat their tallies outof the town. The police came up, but they beat the police; then they gotsoldiers, but, begad, they were too strong for them, too. Sir Georgewitnessed it all, and knowing besides how little chance he had of success,deemed it best to give in; so that a little before five o'clock heresigned. I must say no man could behave better. He came across thehustings and shook hands with Godfrey; and as the news of the scrimmagewith his daughter had just arrived, said that he was sorry his prospect ofsuccess had not been greater, that in resigning he might testify how deeplyhe felt the debt the O'Malleys had laid him under.""And my uncle, how did he receive his advances?""Like his own honest self,--grasped his hand firmly; and upon my soul, Ithink he was half sorry that he gained the day. Do you know, he took amighty fancy to that blue-eyed daughter of the old general's. Faith,Charley, if he was some twenty years younger, I would not say but--Come,come, I didn't mean to hurt your feelings; but I have been staying here toolong. I'll send up Mickey to sit with you. Mind and don't be talking toomuch to him."So saying, the worthy count left the room fully impressed that in hintingat the possibility of my uncle's marrying again, he had said something toruffle my temper.For the next two or three weeks my life was one of the most tiresomemonotony. Strict injunctions had been given by the doctors to avoidexciting me; and consequently, every one that came in walked on tiptoe,spoke in whispers, and left me in five minutes. Reading was absolutelyforbidden; and with a sombre half-light to sit in, and chicken broth tosupport nature, I dragged out as dreary an existence as any gentleman westof Athlone.Whenever my uncle or Considine were not in the room, my companion was myown servant, Michael, or as he was better known, "Mickey Free." Now, hadMickey been left to his own free and unrestricted devices, the time wouldnot have hung so heavily; for among Mike's manifold gifts he was possessedof a very great flow of gossiping conversation. He knew all that wasdoing in the county, and never was barren in his information wherever hisimagination could come into play. Mickey was the best hurler in the barony,no mean performer on the violin, could dance the national bolero of "TatterJack Walsh" in a way that charmed more than one soft heart beneath a redwoolsey bodice, and had, withal, the peculiar free-and-easy devil-may-carekind of off-hand Irish way that never deserted him in the midst of hiswiliest and most subtle moments, giving to a very deep and cunning fellowall the apparent frankness and openness of a country lad.He had attached himself to me as a kind of sporting companion; and growingdaily more and more useful, had been gradually admitted to the honors ofthe kitchen and the prerogatives of cast clothes, without ever having beenactually engaged as a servant; and while thus no warrant officer, as, infact, he discharged all his duties well and punctually, was rated among theship's company, though no one could say at what precise period he changedhis caterpillar existence and became the gay butterfly with cords andtops, a striped vest, and a most knowing jerry hat who stalked aboutthe stable-yard and bullied the helpers. Such was Mike. He had made hisfortune, such as it was, and had a most becoming pride in the fact that hemade himself indispensable to an establishment which, before he enteredit, never knew the want of him. As for me, he was everything to me. Mikeinformed me what horse was wrong, why the chestnut mare couldn't go out,and why the black horse could. He knew the arrival of a new covey ofpartridge quicker than the "Morning Post" does of a noble family from theContinent, and could tell their whereabouts twice as accurately. Buthis talents took a wider range than field sports afford, and he was thefaithful chronicler of every wake, station, wedding, or christening formiles round; and as I took no small pleasure in those very nationalpastimes, the information was of great value to me. To conclude thisbrief sketch, Mike was a devout Catholic in the same sense that he wasenthusiastic about anything,--that is, he believed and obeyed exactly asfar as suited his own peculiar notions of comfort and happiness. Beyondthat, his scepticism stepped in and saved him from inconvenience; andthough he might have been somewhat puzzled to reduce his faith to a rubric,still it answered his purpose, and that was all he wanted. Such, in short,was my valet, Mickey Free, and who, had not heavy injunctions been laid onhim as to silence and discretion, would well have lightened my weary hours."Ah, then, Misther Charles!" said he, with a half-suppressed yawn at thelong period of probation his tongue had been undergoing in silence,--"ah,then, but ye were mighty near it!""Near what?" said I."Faith, then, myself doesn't well know. Some say it's purgathory; but it'shard to tell.""I thought you were too good a Catholic, Mickey, to show any doubts on thematter?""May be I am; may be I ain't," was the cautious reply."Wouldn't Father Roach explain any of your difficulties for you, if youwent over to him?""Faix, it's little I'd mind his explainings.""And why not?""Easy enough. If you ax ould Miles there, without, what does he be doingwith all the powther and shot, wouldn't he tell you he's shooting therooks, and the magpies, and some other varmint? But myself knows he sellsit to Widow Casey, at two-and-fourpence a pound; so belikes, Father Roachmay be shooting away at the poor souls in purgathory, that all this timeare enjoying the hoith of fine living in heaven, ye understand.""And you think that's the way of it, Mickey?""Troth, it's likely. Anyhow, I know its not the place they make it out.""Why, how do you mean?""Well, then, I'll tell you, Misther Charles; but you must not be sayinganything about it afther, for I don't like to talk about these kind ofthings."Having pledged myself to the requisite silence and secrecy, Mickey began:--"May be you heard tell of the way my father, rest his soul wherever he is,came to his end. Well, I needn't mind particulars, but, in short, he wasmurdered in Ballinasloe one night, when he was baitin' the whole town witha blackthorn stick he had; more by token, a piece of a scythe was stuck atthe end of it,--a nate weapon, and one he was mighty partial to; but thosemurdering thieves, the cattle-dealers, that never cared for diversion ofany kind, fell on him and broke his skull."Well, we had a very agreeable wake, and plenty of the best of everything,and to spare, and I thought it was all over; but somehow, though I paidFather Roach fifteen shillings, and made him mighty drunk, he always gaveme a black look wherever I met him, and when I took off my hat, he'd turnaway his head displeased like."'Murder and ages,' says I, 'what's this for?' But as I've a light heart,I bore up, and didn't think more about it. One day, however, I was cominghome from Athlone market, by myself on the road, when Father Roach overtookme. 'Devil a one a me 'ill take any notice of you now,' says I, 'and we'llsee what'll come out of it.' So the priest rid up and looked me straight inthe face."'Mickey,' says he,--'Mickey.'"'Father,' says I."'Is it that way you salute your clargy,' says he, 'with your caubeen onyour head?'"'Faix,' says I, 'it's little ye mind whether it's an or aff; for you nevertake the trouble to say, "By your leave," or "Damn your soul!" or any otherpoliteness when we meet.'"'You're an ungrateful creature,' says he; 'and if you only knew, you'd betrembling in your skin before me, this minute.'"'Devil a tremble,' says I, 'after walking six miles this way.'"'You're an obstinate, hard-hearted sinner,' says he; 'and it's no use intelling you.'"'Telling me what?' says I; for I was getting curious to make out what hemeant."'Mickey,' says he, changing his voice, and putting his head down close tome,--'Mickey, I saw your father last night.'"'The saints be merciful to us!' said I, 'did ye?'"'I did,' says he."'Tear an ages,' says I, 'did he tell you what he did with the newcorduroys he bought in the fair?'"'Oh, then, you are a could-hearted creature!' says he, 'and I'll not losetime with you.' With that he was going to ride away, when I took hold ofthe bridle."'Father, darling,' says I, 'God pardon me, but them breeches is goin'between me an' my night's rest; but tell me about my father?'"'Oh, then, he's in a melancholy state!'"'Whereabouts is he?' says I."'In purgathory,' says he; 'but he won't be there long.'"'Well,' says I, 'that's a comfort, anyhow.'"'I am glad you think so,' says he; 'but there's more of the otheropinion.'"'What's that?' says I."'That hell's worse.'"'Oh, melia-murther!' says I, 'is that it?'"'Ay, that's it.'"Well, I was so terrified and frightened, I said nothing for some time, buttrotted along beside the priest's horse."'Father,' says I, 'how long will it be before they send him where youknow?'"'It will not be long now,' says he, 'for they're tired entirely with him;they've no peace night or day,' says he. 'Mickey, your father is a mightyhard man.'"'True for you, Father Roach,' says I to myself; 'av he had only the ouldstick with the scythe in it, I wish them joy of his company.'"'Mickey,' says he, 'I see you're grieved, and I don't wonder; sure, it's agreat disgrace to a decent family.'"'Troth, it is,' says I; 'but my father always liked low company. Couldnothing be done for him now, Father Roach?' says I, looking up in thepriest's face."'I'm greatly afraid, Mickey, he was a bad man, a very bad man.'"'And ye think he'll go there?' says I."'Indeed, Mickey, I have my fears.'"'Upon my conscience,' says I, 'I believe you're right; he was always arestless crayture.'"'But it doesn't depind on him,' says the priest, crossly."'And, then, who then?' says I."'Upon yourself, Mickey Free,' says he, 'God pardon you for it, too!'"'Upon me?' says I."'Troth, no less,' says he; 'how many Masses was said for your father'ssoul; how many Aves; how many Paters? Answer me.'"'Devil a one of me knows!--may be twenty.'"'Twenty, twenty!--no, nor one.'"'And why not?' says I; 'what for wouldn't you be helping a poor craytureout of trouble, when it wouldn't cost you more nor a handful of prayers?'"'Mickey, I see,' says he, in a solemn tone, 'you're worse nor a haythen;but ye couldn't be other, ye never come to yer duties.'"'Well, Father,' says I, Looking very penitent, 'how many Masses would gethim out?'"'Now you talk like a sensible man,' says he. 'Now, Mickey, I've hopes foryou. Let me see,' here he went countin' upon his fingers, and numberin' tohimself for five minutes. 'Mickey,' says he, 'I've a batch coming out onTuesday week, and if you were to make great exertions, perhaps your fathercould come with them; that is, av they have made no objections.'"'And what for would they?' says I; 'he was always the hoith of company,and av singing's allowed in them parts--'"'God forgive you, Mickey, but yer in a benighted state,' says he, sighing."'Well,' says I, 'how'll we get him out on Tuesday week? For that'sbringing things to a focus.'"'Two Masses in the morning, fastin',' says Father Roach, half aloud, 'istwo, and two in the afternoon is four, and two at vespers is six,' says he;'six Masses a day for nine days is close by sixty Masses,--say sixty,' sayshe; 'and they'll cost you--mind, Mickey, and don't be telling it again, forit's only to yourself I'd make them so cheap--a matter of three pounds.'"'Three pounds!' says I; 'be-gorra ye might as well ax me to give you therock of Cashel.'"'I'm sorry for ye, Mickey,' says he, gatherin' up the reins to rideoff,--'I'm sorry for ye; and the time will come when the neglect of yourpoor father will be a sore stroke agin yourself.'"'Wait a bit, your reverence,' says I,--'wait a bit. Would forty shillingsget him out?'"'Av course it wouldn't,' says he."'May be,' says I, coaxing,--'may be, av you said that his son was a poorboy that lived by his indhustry, and the times was bad--'"'Not the least use,' says he."'Arrah, but it's hard-hearted they are,' thinks I. 'Well, see now, I'llgive you the money, but I can't afford it all at onst; but I'll pay fiveshillings a week. Will that do?'"'I'll do my endayvors,' says Father Roach; 'and I'll speak to them totreat him peaceably in the meantime.'"'Long life to yer reverence, and do. Well, here now, here's five hogs tobegin with; and, musha, but I never thought I'd be spending my loose changethat way.'"Father Roach put the six tinpinnies in the pocket of his black leatherbreeches, said something in Latin, bid me good-morning, and rode off."Well, to make my story short, I worked late and early to pay the fiveshillings a week, and I did do it for three weeks regular; then I broughtfour and fourpence; then it came down to one and tenpence halfpenny, thenninepence, and at last I had nothing at all to bring."'Mickey Free,' says the priest, 'ye must stir yourself. Your father ismighty displeased at the way you've been doing of late; and av ye kept yerword, he'd be near out by this time.'"'Troth,' says I, 'it's a very expensive place.'"'By coorse it is,' says he; 'sure all the quality of the land's there.But, Mickey, my man, with a little exertion, your father's business isdone. What are you jingling in your pocket there?'"'It's ten shillings, your reverence, I have to buy seed potatoes.'"'Hand it here, my son. Isn't it better your father would be enjoyinghimself in paradise, than if ye were to have all the potatoes in Ireland?'"'And how do ye know,' says I, 'he's so near out?'"'How do I know,--how do I know, is it? Didn't I see him?'"'See him! Tear an ages, was you down there again?'"'I was,' says he; 'I was down there for three quarters of an houryesterday evening, getting out Luke Kennedy's mother. Decent people theKennedy's; never spared expense.'"'And ye seen my father?' says I."'I did,' says he; 'he had an ould flannel waistcoat on, and a pipesticking out of the pocket av it.'"'That's him,' says I. 'Had he a hairy cap?'"'I didn't mind the cap,' says he; 'but av coorse he wouldn't have it onhis head in that place.'"'Thrue for you,' says I. 'Did he speak to you?'"'He did,' says Father Roach; 'he spoke very hard about the way he wastreated down there; that they was always jibin' and jeerin' him aboutdrink, and fightin', and the course he led up here, and that it was aqueer thing, for the matter of ten shillings, he was to be kept there solong.'"'Well,' says I, taking out the ten shillings and counting it with onehand, 'we must do our best, anyhow; and ye think this'll get him outsurely?'"'I know it will,' says he; 'for when Luke's mother was leaving the place,and yer father saw the door open, he made a rush at it, and, be-gorra,before it was shut he got his head and one shoulder outside av it,--sothat, ye see, a thrifle more'll do it.'"'Faix, and yer reverence,' says I, 'you've lightened my heart thismorning.' And I put my money back again in my pocket."'Why, what do you mean?' says he, growing very red, for he was angry."'Just this,' says I, 'that I've saved my money; for av it was my fatheryou seen, and that he got his head and one shoulder outside the door, oh,then, by the powers!' says I, 'the devil a jail or jailer from hell toConnaught id hould him. So, Father Roach, I wish you the top of themorning.' And I went away laughing; and from that day to this I never heardmore of purgathory; and ye see, Master Charles, I think I was right."Scarcely had Mike concluded when my door was suddenly burst open, and SirHarry Boyle, without assuming any of his usual precautions respectingsilence and quiet, rushed into the room, a broad grin upon his honestfeatures, and his eyes twinkling in a way that evidently showed mesomething had occurred to amuse him."By Jove, Charley, I mustn't keep it from you; it's too good a thing notto tell you. Do you remember that very essenced young gentleman whoaccompanied Sir George Dashwood from Dublin, as a kind of electioneeringfriend?""Do you mean Mr. Prettyman?""The very man; he was, you are aware, an under-secretary in some governmentdepartment. Well, it seems that he had come down among us poor savages asmuch from motives of learned research and scientific inquiry, as though wehad been South Sea Islanders; report had gifted us humble Galwayans withsome very peculiar traits, and this gifted individual resolved to recordthem. Whether the election week might have sufficed his appetite forwonders I know not; but he was peaceably taking his departure from the weston Saturday last, when Phil Macnamara met him, and pressed him to dine thatday with a few friends at his house. You know Phil; so that when I tell youSam Burke, of Greenmount, and Roger Doolan were of the party, I neednot say that the English traveller was not left to his own unassistedimagination for his facts. Such anecdotes of our habits and customs as theycrammed him with, it would appear, never were heard before; nothing wastoo hot or too heavy for the luckless cockney, who, when not sippinghis claret, was faithfully recording in his tablet the mems. for a verybrilliant and very original work on Ireland."Fine country, splendid country; glorious people,--gifted, brave,intelligent, but not happy,--alas! Mr. Macnamara, not happy. But we don'tknow you, gentlemen,--we don't indeed,--at the other side of the Channel.Our notions regarding you are far, very far from just.""I hope and trust," said old Burke, "you'll help them to a betterunderstanding ere long.""Such, my dear sir, will be the proudest task of my life. The facts I haveheard here this evening have made so profound an impression upon me that Iburn for the moment when I can make them known to the world at large. Tothink--just to think that a portion of this beautiful island should besteeped in poverty; that the people not only live upon the mere potatoes,but are absolutely obliged to wear the skins for raiment, as Mr. Doolan hasjust mentioned to me!""'Which accounts for our cultivation of lumpers,' added Mr. Doolan, 'theybeing the largest species of the root, and best adapted for wearingapparel.'"'I should deem myself culpable--indeed I should--did I not inform mycountrymen upon the real condition of this great country.'"'Why, after your great opportunities for judging,' said Phil, 'you oughtto speak out. You've seen us in a way, I may fairly affirm, few Englishmenhave, and heard more.'"'That's it,--that's the very thing, Mr. Macnamara. I've looked at you moreclosely; I've watched you more narrowly; I've witnessed what the Frenchcall your vie intime.'"'Begad you have,' said old Burke, with a grin, 'and profited by it to theutmost.'"'I've been a spectator of your election contests; I've partaken of yourhospitality; I've witnessed your popular and national sports; I'vebeen present at your weddings, your fairs, your wakes; but no,--I wasforgetting,--I never saw a wake.'"'Never saw a wake?' repeated each of the company in turn, as though thegentleman was uttering a sentiment of very dubious veracity."'Never,' said Mr. Prettyman, rather abashed at this proof of hisincapacity to instruct his English friends upon all matters of Irishinterest."'Well, then,' said Macnamara, 'with a blessing, we'll show you one.Lord forbid that we shouldn't do the honors of our poor country to anintelligent foreigner when he's good enough to come among us.'"'Peter,' said he, turning to the servant behind him, 'who's deadhereabouts?'"'Sorra one, yer honor. Since the scrimmage at Portumna the place ispeaceable.'"'Who died lately in the neighborhood?'"'The widow Macbride, yer honor.'"'Couldn't they take her up again, Peter? My friend here never saw a wake.'"'I'm afeered not; for it was the boys roasted her, and she wouldn't be adecent corpse for to show a stranger,' said Peter, in a whisper."Mr. Prettyman shuddered at these peaceful indications of the neighborhood,and said nothing."'Well, then, Peter, tell Jimmy Divine to take the old musket in mybedroom, and go over to the Clunagh bog,--he can't go wrong. There's twelvefamilies there that never pay a halfpenny rent; and when it's done, lethim give notice to the neighborhood, and we'll have a rousing wake.'"'You don't mean, Mr. Macnamara,--you don't mean to say--' stammered outthe cockney, with a face like a ghost."'I only mean to say,' said Phil, laughing, 'that you're keeping thedecanter very long at your right hand.'"Burke contrived to interpose before the Englishman could ask anyexplanation of what he had just heard,--and for some minutes he could onlywait in impatient anxiety,--when a loud report of a gun close beside thehouse attracted the attention of the guests. The next moment old Peterentered, his face radiant with smiles."'Well, what's that?' said Macnamara."''T was Jimmy, yer honor. As the evening was rainy, he said he'd take oneof the neighbors; and he hadn't to go far, for Andy Moore was going home,and he brought him down at once.'"'Did he shoot him?' said Mr. Prettyman, while cold perspiration broke overhis forehead. 'Did he murder the man?'"'Sorra murder,' said Peter, disdainfully. 'But why shouldn't he shoot himwhen the master bid him?'"I needn't tell you more, Charley; but in ten minutes after, feigning someexcuse to leave the room, the terrified cockney took flight, and offeringtwenty guineas for a horse to convey him to Athlone, he left Galway, fullyconvinced that they don't yet know us on the other side of the Channel."CHAPTER XIII.THE JOURNEY.The election concluded, the turmoil and excitement of the contest over, allwas fast resuming its accustomed routine around us, when one morning myuncle informed me that I was at length to leave my native county and enterupon the great world as a student of Trinity College, Dublin. Although longsince in expectation of this eventful change, it was with no slight feelingof emotion I contemplated the step which, removing me at once from all myearly friends and associations, was to surround me with new companions andnew influences, and place before me very different objects of ambition fromthose I had hitherto been regarding.My destiny had been long ago decided. The army had had its share of thefamily, who brought little more back with them from the wars than a shortallowance of members and shattered constitutions; the navy had proved, onmore than one occasion, that the fate of the O'Malleys did not incline tohanging; so that, in Irish estimation, but one alternative remained, andthat was the bar. Besides, as my uncle remarked, with great truth andforesight, "Charley will be tolerably independent of the public, at allevents; for even if they never send him a brief, there's law enough in thefamily to last his time,"--a rather novel reason, by-the-bye, for makinga man a lawyer, and which induced Sir Harry, with his usual clearness, toobserve to me:--"Upon my conscience, boy, you are in luck. If there had been a Bible in thehouse, I firmly believe he'd have made you a parson."Considine alone, of all my uncle's advisers, did not concur in thisdetermination respecting me. He set forth, with an eloquence that certainlyconverted me, that my head was better calculated for bearing hard knocksthan unravelling knotty points, that a shako would become it infinitelybetter than a wig; and declared, roundly, that a boy who began so well andhad such very pretty notions about shooting was positively thrown awayin the Four Courts. My uncle, however, was firm, and as old Sir Harrysupported him, the day was decided against us, Considine murmuring as heleft the room something that did not seem quite a brilliant anticipation ofthe success awaiting me in my legal career. As for myself, though only asilent spectator of the debate, all my wishes were with the count. From myearliest boyhood a military life had been my strongest desire; the roll ofthe drum, and the shrill fife that played through the little village,with its ragged troop of recruits following, had charms for me I cannotdescribe; and had a choice been allowed me, I would infinitely rather havebeen a sergeant in the dragoons than one of his Majesty's learned in thelaw. If, then, such had been the cherished feeling of many a year, how muchmore strongly were my aspirations heightened by the events of the last fewdays. The tone of superiority I had witnessed in Hammersley, whose conductto me at parting had placed him high in my esteem; the quiet contempt ofcivilians implied in a thousand sly ways; the exalted estimate of his ownprofession,--at once wounded my pride and stimulated my ambition; andlastly, more than all, the avowed preference that Lucy Dashwood evinced fora military life, were stronger allies than my own conviction needed to makeme long for the army. So completely did the thought possess me that I felt,if I were not a soldier, I cared not what became of me. Life had no otherobject of ambition for me than military renown, no other success forwhich I cared to struggle, or would value when obtained. "Aut Caesar autnullus," thought I; and when my uncle determined I should be a lawyer,I neither murmured nor objected, but hugged myself in the prophecy ofConsidine that hinted pretty broadly, "the devil a stupider fellow everopened a brief; but he'd have made a slashing light dragoon."The preliminaries were not long in arranging. It was settled that I shouldbe immediately despatched to Dublin to the care of Dr. Mooney, then ajunior fellow in the University, who would take me into his especialcharge; while Sir Harry was to furnish me with a letter to his old friend,Doctor Barret, whose advice and assistance he estimated at a very highprice. Provided with such documents I was informed that the gates ofknowledge were more than half ajar for me, without an effort upon mypart. One only portion of all the arrangements I heard with anything likepleasure; it was decided that my man Mickey was to accompany me to Dublin,and remain with me during my stay.It was upon a clear, sharp morning in January, of the year 18--, that Itook my place upon the box-seat of the old Galway mail and set out on myjourney. My heart was depressed, and my spirits were miserably low. I hadall that feeling of sadness which leave-taking inspires, and no sustainingprospect to cheer me in the distance. For the first time in my life, I hadseen a tear glisten in my poor uncle's eye, and heard his voice falter ashe said, "Farewell!" Notwithstanding the difference of age, we had beenperfectly companions together; and as I thought now over all the thousandkindnesses and affectionate instances of his love I had received, my heartgave way, and the tears coursed slowly down my cheeks. I turned to give onelast look at the tall chimneys and the old woods, my earliest friends; buta turn of the road had shut out the prospect, and thus I took my leave ofGalway.My friend Mickey, who sat behind with the guard, participated but little inmy feelings of regret. The potatoes in the metropolis could scarcely be aswet as the lumpers in Scariff; he had heard that whiskey was not dearer,and looked forward to the other delights of the capital with a longingheart. Meanwhile, resolved that no portion of his career should be lost, hewas lightening the road by anecdote and song, and held an audience of fourpeople, a very crusty-looking old guard included, in roars of laughter.Mike had contrived, with his usual savoir faire, to make himself veryagreeable to an extremely pretty-looking country girl, around whose waisthe had most lovingly passed his arm under pretence of keeping her fromfalling, and to whom, in the midst of all his attentions to the party atlarge, he devoted himself considerably, pressing his suit with all the aidof his native minstrelsy."Hould me tight, Miss Matilda, dear.""My name's Mary Brady, av ye plase.""Ay, and I do plase.'Oh, Mary Brady, you are my darlin',You are my looking-glass from night till morning;I'd rayther have ye without one farthen,Nor Shusey Gallagher and her house and garden.'May I never av I wouldn't then; and ye needn't be laughing.""Is his honor at home?"This speech was addressed to a gaping country fellow that leaned on hisspade to see the coach pass."Is his honor at home? I've something for him from Mr. Davern."Mickey well knew that few western gentlemen were without constantintercourse with the Athlone attorney. The poor countryman accordinglyhastened through the fence and pursued the coach with all speed for abovea mile, Mike pretending all the time to be in the greatest anxiety for hisovertaking them, until at last, as he stopped in despair, a hearty roar oflaughter told him that, in Mickey's parlance, he was "sould.""Taste it, my dear; devil a harm it'll do ye. It never paid the kingsixpence."Here he filled a little horn vessel from a black bottle he carried,accompanying the action with a song, the air to which, if any of myreaders feel disposed to sing it, I may observe, bore a resemblance to thewell-known, "A Fig for Saint Denis of France."POTTEEN, GOOD LUCK TO YE, DEAR.Av I was a monarch in state,Like Romulus or Julius Caysar,With the best of fine victuals to eat,And drink like great Nebuchadnezzar,A rasher of bacon I'd have,And potatoes the finest was seen, sir,And for drink, it's no claret I'd crave,But a keg of ould Mullens's potteen, sir,With the smell of the smoke on it still.They talk of the Romans of ould,Whom they say in their own times was frisky;But trust me, to keep out the cowld,The Romans at home here like whiskey.Sure it warms both the head and the heart,It's the soul of all readin' and writin';It teaches both science and art,And disposes for love or for fightin'.Oh, potteen, good luck to ye, dear.This very classic production, and the black bottle which accompanied it,completely established the singer's pre-eminence in the company; and Iheard sundry sounds resembling drinking, with frequent good wishes to theprovider of the feast,--"Long life to ye, Mr. Free," "Your health andinclinations, Mr. Free," etc.; to which Mr. Free responded by drinkingthose of the company, "av they were vartuous." The amicable relations thushappily established promised a very lasting reign, and would doubtless haveenjoyed such, had not a slight incident occurred which for a brief seasoninterrupted them. At the village where we stopped to breakfast, three veryvenerable figures presented themselves for places in the inside of thecoach; they were habited in black coats, breeches, and gaiters, wore hatsof a very ecclesiastic breadth in their brim, and had altogether thepeculiar air and bearing which distinguishes their calling, being no lessthan three Roman Catholic prelates on their way to Dublin to attend aconvocation. While Mickey and his friends, with the ready tact which everylow Irishman possesses, immediately perceived who and what these worshipfulindividuals were, another traveller who had just assumed his place on theoutside participated but little in the feelings of reverence so manifestlydisplayed, but gave a sneer of a very ominous kind as the skirt of thelast black coat disappeared within the coach. This latter individual was ashort, thick-set, bandy-legged man of about fifty, with an enormous nose,which, whatever its habitual coloring, on the morning in question was of abrilliant purple. He wore a blue coat with bright buttons, upon which someletters were inscribed; and around his neck was fastened a ribbon of thesame color, to which a medal was attached. This he displayed with somethingof ostentation whenever an opportunity occurred, and seemed altogether aperson who possessed a most satisfactory impression of his own importance.In fact, had not this feeling been participated in by others, Mr. BillyCrow would never have been deputed by No. 13,476 to carry their warrantdown to the west country, and establish the nucleus of an Orange Lodge inthe town of Foxleigh; such being, in brief, the reason why he, a very wellknown manufacturer of "leather continuations" in Dublin, had ventured uponthe perilous journey from which he was now returning. Billy was going onhis way to town rejoicing, for he had had most brilliant success: thebrethren had feasted and fted him; he had made several splendid orations,with the usual number of prophecies about the speedy downfall of Romanism,the inevitable return of Protestant ascendancy, the pleasing prospect thatwith increased effort and improved organization they should soon be ableto have everything their own way, and clear the Green Isle of the horriblevermin Saint Patrick forgot when banishing the others; and that if DanielO'Connell (whom might the Lord confound!) could only be hanged, and SirHarcourt Lees made Primate of all Ireland, there were still some hopes ofpeace and prosperity to the country.Mr. Crow had no sooner assumed his place upon the coach than he saw that hewas in the camp of the enemy. Happily for all parties, indeed, in Ireland,political differences have so completely stamped the externals of eachparty that he must be a man of small penetration who cannot, in the firstfive minutes he is thrown among strangers, calculate with considerablecertainty whether it will be more conducive to his happiness to sing,"Croppies Lie Down," or "The Battle of Ross." As for Billy Crow, long lifeto him! you might as well attempt to pass a turkey upon M. Audubon for agiraffe, as endeavor to impose a Papist upon him for a true follower ofKing William. He could have given you more generic distinctions to guideyou in the decision than ever did Cuvier to designate an antediluvianmammoth; so that no sooner had he seated himself upon the coach than hebuttoned up his great-coat, stuck his hands firmly in his side-pockets,pursed up his lips, and looked altogether like a man that, feeling himselfout of his element, resolves to "bide his time" in patience until chancemay throw him among more congenial associates. Mickey Free, who was himselfno mean proficient in reading a character, at one glance saw his man, andbegan hammering his brains to see if he could not overreach him. Thesmall portmanteau which contained Billy's wardrobe bore the conspicuousannouncement of his name; and as Mickey could read, this was one importantstep already gained.He accordingly took the first opportunity of seating himself beside him,and opened the conversation by some very polite observation upon theother's wearing apparel, which is always in the west considered a piece ofvery courteous attention. By degrees the dialogue prospered, and Mickeybegan to make some very important revelations about himself and his master,intimating that the "state of the country" was such that a man of his wayof thinking had no peace or quiet in it."That's him there, forenent ye," said Mickey, "and a better Protestantnever hated Mass. Ye understand.""What!" said Billy, unbuttoning the collar of his coat to get a fairer viewat his companion; "why, I thought you were--"Here he made some resemblance of the usual manner of blessing oneself."Me, devil a more nor yourself, Mr. Crow.""Why, do you know me, too?""Troth, more knows you than you think."Billy looked very much puzzled at all this; at last he said,--"And ye tell me that your master there's the right sort?""Thrue blue," said Mike, with a wink, "and so is his uncles.""And where are they, when they are at home?""In Galway, no less; but they're here now.""Where?""Here."At these words he gave a knock of his heel to the coach, as if to intimatetheir "whereabouts.""You don't mean in the coach, do ye?""To be sure I do; and troth you can't know much of the west, av ye don'tknow the three Mr. Trenches of Tallybash!--them's they.""You don't say so?""Faix, but I do.""May I never drink the 12th of July if I didn't think they were priests.""Priests!" said Mickey, in a roar of laughter,--"priests!""Just priests!""Be-gorra, though, ye had better keep that to yourself; for they're not themen to have that same said to them.""Of course I wouldn't offend them," said Mr. Crow; "faith, it's not mewould cast reflections upon such real out-and-outers as they are. And whereare they going now?""To Dublin straight; there's to be a grand lodge next week. But sure Mr.Crow knows better than me."Billy after this became silent. A moody revery seemed to steal over him;and he was evidently displeased with himself for his want of tact in notdiscovering the three Mr. Trenches of Tallybash, though he only caughtsight of their backs.Mickey Free interrupted not the frame of mind in which he saw convictionwas slowly working its way, but by gently humming in an undertone the loyalmelody of "Croppies Lie Down," fanned the flame he had so dexterouslykindled. At length they reached the small town of Kinnegad. While the coachchanged horses, Mr. Crow lost not a moment in descending from the top, andrushing into the little inn, disappeared for a few moments. When he againissued forth, he carried a smoking tumbler of whiskey punch, which hecontinued to stir with a spoon. As he approached the coach-door he tappedgently with his knuckles; upon which the reverend prelate of Maronia, orMesopotamia, I forget which, inquired what he wanted."I ask your pardon, gentlemen," said Billy, "but I thought I'd make bold toask you to take something warm this cold day.""Many thanks, my good friend; but we never do," said a bland voice fromwithin."I understand," said Billy, with a sly wink; "but there are circumstancesnow and then,--and one might for the honor of the cause, you know. Just putit to your lips, won't you?""Excuse me," said a very rosy-cheeked little prelate, "but nothing strongerthan water--""Botheration," thought Billy, as he regarded the speaker's nose. "But Ithought," said he, aloud, "that you would not refuse this."Here he made a peculiar manifestation in the air, which, whatever respectand reverence it might carry to the honest brethren of 13,476, seemed onlyto increase the wonder and astonishment of the bishops."What does he mean?" said one."Is he mad?" said another."Tear and ages," said Mr. Crow, getting quite impatient at the slowness ofhis friends' perception,--"tear and ages, I'm one of yourselves.""One of us," said the three in chorus,--"one of us?""Ay, to be sure," here he took a long pull at the punch,--"to be sure I am;here's 'No surrender,' your souls! whoop--" a loud yell accompanying thetoast as he drank it."Do you mean to insult us?" said Father P------. "Guard, take the fellow.""Are we to be outraged in this manner?" chorussed the priests."'July the 1st, in Oldbridge town,'" sang Billy, "and here it is, 'Theglorious, pious, and immortal memory of the great and good--'""Guard! Where is the guard?""'And good King William, that saved us from Popery--'""Coachman! Guard!" screamed Father ------."'Brass money--'""Policeman! policeman!" shouted the priests."'Brass money and wooden shoes;' devil may care who hears me!" said Billy,who, supposing that the three Mr. Trenches were skulking the avowal oftheir principles, resolved to assert the pre-eminence of the great causesingle-handed and alone.[Illustration: MR. CROW WELL PLUCKED.]"'Here's the Pope in the pillory, and the Devil pelting him with priests.'"At these words a kick from behind apprised the loyal champion that a veryragged auditory, who for some time past had not well understood the gist ofhis eloquence, had at length comprehended enough to be angry. Ce n'est quele premier pas qui cote, certainly, in an Irish row. "The merest urchinmay light the train; one handful of mud often ignites a shindy that ends ina most bloody battle."And here, no sooner did the vis-a-tergo impel Billy forward than a severerap of a closed fist in the eye drove him back, and in one instant hebecame the centre to a periphery of kicks, cuffs, pullings, and haulingsthat left the poor deputy-grand not only orange, but blue.He fought manfully, but numbers carried the day; and when the coach droveoff, which it did at last without him, the last thing visible to theoutsides was the figure of Mr. Crow,--whose hat, minus the crown, had beendriven over his head down upon his neck, where it remained like a dresscravat,--buffeting a mob of ragged vagabonds who had so completelymetamorphosed the unfortunate man with mud and bruises that a committee ofthe grand lodge might actually have been unable to identify him.As for Mickey and his friends behind, their mirth knew no bounds; andexcept the respectable insides, there was not an individual about the coachwho ceased to think of and laugh at the incident till we arrived in Dublinand drew up at the Hibernian in Dawson Street.CHAPTER XIV.DUBLIN.No sooner had I arrived in Dublin than my first care was to present myselfto Dr. Mooney, by whom I was received in the most cordial manner. In fact,in my utter ignorance of such persons, I had imagined a college fellow tobe a character necessarily severe and unbending; and as the only two verygreat people I had ever seen in my life were the Archbishop of Tuam and thechief-baron when on circuit, I pictured to myself that a universityfellow was, in all probability, a cross between the two, and feared himaccordingly.The doctor read over my uncle's letter attentively, invited me to partakeof his breakfast, and then entered upon something like an account of thelife before me; for which Sir Harry Boyle had, however, in some degreeprepared me."Your uncle, I find, wishes you to live in college,--perhaps it is better,too,--so that I must look out for chambers for you. Let me see: it will berather difficult, just now, to find them." Here he fell for some momentsinto a musing fit, and merely muttered a few broken sentences, as: "To besure, if other chambers could be had--but then--and after all, perhaps, ashe is young--besides, Frank will certainly be expelled before long, andthen he will have them all to himself. I say, O'Malley, I believe I mustquarter you for the present with a rather wild companion; but as your unclesays you're a prudent fellow,"--here he smiled very much, as if my unclehad not said any such thing,--"why, you must only take the better care ofyourself until we can make some better arrangement. My pupil, Frank Webber,is at this moment in want of a 'chum,' as the phrase is,--his last threehaving only been domesticated with him for as many weeks; so that until wefind you a more quiet resting-place, you may take up your abode with him."During breakfast, the doctor proceeded to inform me that my destinedcompanion was a young man of excellent family and good fortune who, withvery considerable talents and acquirements, preferred a life of rackety andcareless dissipation to prospects of great success in public life, whichhis connection and family might have secured for him. That he had beenoriginally entered at Oxford, which he was obliged to leave; then triedCambridge, from which he escaped expulsion by being rusticated,--thatis, having incurred a sentence of temporary banishment; and lastly, wasendeavoring, with what he himself believed to be a total reformation, tostumble on to a degree in the "silent sister.""This is his third year," said the doctor, "and he is only a freshman,having lost every examination, with abilities enough to sweep theuniversity of its prizes. But come over now, and I'll present you to him."I followed him down-stairs, across the court to an angle of the old squarewhere, up the first floor left, to use the college direction, stood thename of Mr. Webber, a large No. 2 being conspicuously painted in the middleof the door and not over it, as is usually the custom. As we reached thespot, the observations of my companion were lost to me in the tremendousnoise and uproar that resounded from within. It seemed as if a number ofpeople were fighting pretty much as a banditti in a melodrama do, withconsiderable more of confusion than requisite; a fiddle and a French hornalso lent their assistance to shouts and cries which, to say the best, werenot exactly the aids to study I expected in such a place.Three times was the bell pulled with a vigor that threatened its downfall,when at last, as the jingle of it rose above all other noises, suddenlyall became hushed and still; a momentary pause succeeded, and the door wasopened by a very respectable looking servant who, recognizing the doctor,at once introduced us into the apartment where Mr. Webber was sitting.In a large and very handsomely furnished room, where Brussels carpeting andsoftly cushioned sofas contrasted strangely with the meagre and comfortlesschambers of the doctor, sat a young man at a small breakfast-table besidethe fire. He was attired in a silk dressing-gown and black velvet slippers,and supported his forehead upon a hand of most lady-like whiteness, whosefingers were absolutely covered with rings of great beauty and price. Hislong silky brown hair fell in rich profusion upon the back of his neck andover his arm, and the whole air and attitude was one which a painter mighthave copied. So intent was he upon the volume before him that he neverraised his head at our approach, but continued to read aloud, totallyunaware of our presence."Dr. Mooney, sir," said the servant."Ton dapamey bominos, prosephe, crione Agamemnon" repeated the student,in an ecstasy, and not paying the slightest attention to the announcement."Dr. Mooney, sir," repeated the servant, in a louder tone, while the doctorlooked around on every side for an explanation of the late uproar, with aface of the most puzzled astonishment."Be dakiown para thina dolekoskion enkos" said Mr. Webber, finishing acup of coffee at a draught."Well, Webber, hard at work I see," said the doctor."Ah, Doctor, I beg pardon! Have you been long here?" said the most soft andinsinuating voice, while the speaker passed his taper fingers across hisbrow, as if to dissipate the traces of deep thought and study.While the doctor presented me to my future companion, I could perceive, inthe restless and searching look he threw around, that the fracas he had solately heard was still an unexplained and vexata questio in his mind."May I offer you a cup of coffee, Mr. O'Malley?" said the youth, with anair of almost timid bashfulness. "The doctor, I know, breakfasts at a veryearly hour.""I say, Webber," said the doctor, who could no longer restrain hiscuriosity, "what an awful row I heard here as I came up to the door. Ithought Bedlam was broke loose. What could it have been?""Ah, you heard it too, sir," said Mr. Webber, smiling most benignly."Hear it? To be sure I did. O'Malley and I could not hear ourselves talkingwith the uproar.""Yes, indeed, it is very provoking; but then, what's to be done? One can'tcomplain, under the circumstances.""Why, what do you mean?" said Mooney, anxiously."Nothing, sir; nothing. I'd much rather you'd not ask me; for after all,I'll change my chambers.""But why? Explain this at once. I insist upon it.""Can I depend upon the discretion of your young friend?" said Mr. Webber,gravely."Perfectly," said the doctor, now wound up to the greatest anxiety to learna secret."And you'll promise not to mention the thing except among your friends?""I do," said the doctor."Well, then," said he, in a low and confident whisper, "it's the dean.""The dean!" said Mooney, with a start. "The dean! Why, how can it be thedean?""Too true," said Mr. Webber, making a sign of drinking,--"too true, Doctor.And then, the moment he is so, he begins smashing the furniture. Never wasanything heard like it. As for me, as I am now become a reading man, I mustgo elsewhere."Now, it so chanced that the worthy dean, who albeit a man of mostabstemious habits, possessed a nose which, in color and development, was amost unfortunate witness to call to character, and as Mooney heard Webbernarrate circumstantially the frightful excesses of the great functionary, Isaw that something like conviction was stealing over him."You'll, of course, never speak of this except to your most intimatefriends," said Webber."Of course not," said the doctor, as he shook his hand warmly, and preparedto leave the room. "O'Malley, I leave you here," said he; "Webber and youcan talk over your arrangements."Webber followed the doctor to the door, whispered something in his ear, towhich the other replied, "Very well, I will write; but if your fathersends the money, I must insist--" The rest was lost in protestations andprofessions of the most fervent kind, amidst which the door was shut, andMr. Webber returned to the room.Short as was the interspace from the door without to the room within, itwas still ample enough to effect a very thorough and remarkable change inthe whole external appearance of Mr. Frank Webber; for scarcely had theoaken panel shut out the doctor, when he appeared no longer the shy, timid,and silvery-toned gentleman of five minutes before, but dashing boldlyforward, he seized a key-bugle that lay hid beneath a sofa-cushion and blewa tremendous blast.[Illustration: FRANK WEBBER AT HIS STUDIES.]"Come forth, ye demons of the lower world," said he, drawing a cloth froma large table, and discovering the figures of three young men coiled upbeneath. "Come forth, and fear not, most timorous freshmen that ye are,"said he, unlocking a pantry, and liberating two others. "Gentlemen, letme introduce to your acquaintance Mr. O'Malley. My chum, gentlemen. Mr.O'Malley, that is Harry Nesbitt, who has been in college since the days ofold Perpendicular, and numbers more cautions than any man who ever had hisname on the books. Here is my particular friend, Cecil Cavendish, the onlyman who could ever devil kidneys. Captain Power, Mr. O'Malley, a dashingdragoon, as you see; aide-de-camp to his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant,and love-maker-general to Merrion Square West. These," said he, pointing tothe late denizens of the pantry, "are jibs whose names are neither known tothe proctor nor the police-office; but with due regard to their educationand morals, we don't despair.""By no means," said Power; "but come, let us resume our game." At thesewords he took a folio atlas of maps from a small table, and displayedbeneath a pack of cards, dealt as if for whist. The two gentlemen to whomI was introduced by name returned to their places; the unknown two put ontheir boxing gloves, and all resumed the hilarity which Dr. Mooney's adventhad so suddenly interrupted."Where's Moore?" said Webber, as he once more seated himself at hisbreakfast."Making a spatch-cock, sir," said the servant.At the same instant, a little, dapper, jovial-looking personage appearedwith the dish in question."Mr. O'Malley, Mr. Moore, the gentleman who, by repeated remonstrances tothe board, has succeeded in getting eatable food for the inhabitants ofthis penitentiary, and has the honored reputation of reforming the commonsof college.""Anything to Godfrey O'Malley, may I ask, sir?" said Moore."His nephew," I replied."Which of you winged the gentleman the other day for not passing thedecanter, or something of that sort?""If you mean the affair with Mr. Bodkin, it was I.""Glorious, that; begad, I thought you were one of us. I say, Power, it washe pinked Bodkin.""Ah, indeed," said Power, not turning his head from his game, "a prettyshot, I heard,--two by honors,--and hit him fairly,--the odd trick.Hammersley mentioned the thing to me.""Oh, is he in town?" said I."No; he sailed for Portsmouth yesterday. He is to join the llth--game. Isay, Webber, you've lost the rubber.""Double or quit, and a dinner at Dunleary," said Webber. "We must showO'Malley,--confound the Mister!--something of the place.""Agreed."The whist was resumed; the boxers, now refreshed by a leg of thespatch-cock, returned to their gloves; Mr. Moore took up his violin; Mr.Webber his French horn; and I was left the only unemployed man in thecompany."I say, Power, you'd better bring the drag over here for us; we can all godown together.""I must inform you," said Cavendish, "that, thanks to your philanthropicefforts of last night, the passage from Grafton Street to Stephen'sGreen is impracticable." A tremendous roar of laughter followed thisannouncement; and though at the time the cause was unknown to me, I may aswell mention it here, as I subsequently learned it from my companions.Among the many peculiar tastes which distinguished Mr. Francis Webber wasan extraordinary fancy for street-begging. He had, over and over, won largesums upon his success in that difficult walk; and so perfect were hisdisguises,--both of dress, voice, and manner,--that he actually at one timesucceeded in obtaining charity from his very opponent in the wager. Hewrote ballads with the greatest facility, and sang them with infinitepathos and humor; and the old woman at the corner of College Green wascertain of an audience when the severity of the night would leave all otherminstrelsy deserted. As these feats of jonglerie usually terminated in arow, it was a most amusing part of the transaction to see the singer's parttaken by the mob against the college men, who, growing impatient to carryhim off to supper somewhere, would invariably be obliged to have a fightfor the booty.Now it chanced that a few evenings before, Mr. Webber was returning with apocket well lined with copper from a musical reunion he had held at thecorner of York Street, when the idea struck him to stop at the end ofGrafton Street, where a huge stone grating at that time exhibited--perhapsit exhibits still--the descent to one of the great main sewers of the city.The light was shining brightly from a pastrycook's shop, and showed thelarge bars of stone between which the muddy water was rushing rapidly downand plashing in the torrent that ran boisterously several feet beneath.To stop in the street of any crowded city is, under any circumstances, aninvitation to others to do likewise which is rarely unaccepted; but whenin addition to this you stand fixedly in one spot and regard with sternintensity any object near you, the chances are ten to one that you haveseveral companions in your curiosity before a minute expires.Now, Webber, who had at first stood still without any peculiar thought inview, no sooner perceived that he was joined by others than the idea ofmaking something out of it immediately occurred to him."What is it, agra?" inquired an old woman, very much in his own style ofdress, pulling at the hood of his cloak. "And can't you see for yourself,darling?" replied he, sharply, as he knelt down and looked most intenselyat the sewer."Are ye long there, avick?" inquired he of an imaginary individual below,and then waiting as if for a reply, said,"Two hours! Blessed Virgin, he's two hours in the drain!"By this time the crowd had reached entirely across the street, and thecrushing and squeezing to get near the important spot was awful."Where did he come from?" "Who is he?" "How did he get there?" werequestions on every side; and various surmises were afloat till Webber,rising from his knees, said, in a mysterious whisper, to those nearest him,"He's made his escape to-night out o' Newgate by the big drain, and losthis way; he was looking for the Liffey, and took the wrong turn."To an Irish mob what appeal could equal this? A culprit at any time hashis claim upon their sympathy; but let him be caught in the very act ofcheating the authorities and evading the law, and his popularity knowsno bounds. Webber knew this well, and as the mob thickened around himsustained an imaginary conversation that Savage Landor might have envied,imparting now and then such hints concerning the runaway as raised theirinterest to the highest pitch, and fifty different versions were related onall sides,--of the crime he was guilty of, the sentence that was passed onhim, and the day he was to suffer."Do you see the light, dear?" said Webber, as some ingeniously benevolentindividual had lowered down a candle with a string,--"do ye see the light?Oh, he's fainted, the creature!" A cry of horror burst forth from the crowdat these words, followed by a universal shout of, "Break open the street."Pickaxes, shovels, spades, and crowbars seemed absolutely the walkingaccompaniments of the crowd, so suddenly did they appear upon the field ofaction; and the work of exhumation was begun with a vigor that speedilycovered nearly half of the street with mud and paving-stones. Partiesrelieved each other at the task, and ere half an hour a hole capableof containing a mail-coach was yawning in one of the most frequentedthoroughfares of Dublin. Meanwhile, as no appearance of the culprit couldbe had, dreadful conjectures as to his fate began to gain ground. By thistime the authorities had received intimation of what was going forward, andattempted to disperse the crowd; but Webber, who still continued to conductthe prosecution, called on them to resist the police and save the poorcreature. And now began a most terrific fray: the stones, forming a readyweapon, were hurled at the unprepared constables, who on their side foughtmanfully, but against superior numbers; so that at last it was only by theaid of a military force the mob could be dispersed, and a riot which hadassumed a very serious character got under. Meanwhile Webber had reachedhis chambers, changed his costume, and was relating over a supper-table thenarrative of his philanthropy to a very admiring circle of his friends.Such was my chum, Frank Webber; and as this was the first anecdote I hadheard of him, I relate it here that my readers may be in possession of thegrounds upon which my opinion of that celebrated character was founded,while yet our acquaintance was in its infancy.CHAPTER XV.CAPTAIN POWER.Within a few weeks after my arrival in town I had become a matriculatedstudent of the university, and the possessor of chambers within its wallsin conjunction with the sage and prudent gentleman I have introduced to myreaders in the last chapter. Had my intentions on entering college been ofthe most studious and regular kind, the companion into whose society Iwas then immediately thrown would have quickly dissipated them. He votedmorning chapels a bore, Greek lectures a humbug, examinations a farce,and pronounced the statute-book, with its attendant train of finesand punishment, an "unclean thing." With all my country habits andpredilections fresh upon me, that I was an easily-won disciple to his codeneed not be wondered at; and indeed ere many days had passed over, mythorough indifference to all college rules and regulations had given me ahigh place in the esteem of Webber and his friends. As for myself, I wasmost agreeably surprised to find that what I had looked forward to as avery melancholy banishment, was likely to prove a most agreeable sojourn.Under Webber's directions there was no hour of the day that hung heavilyupon our hands. We rose about eleven and breakfasted, after which succeededfencing, sparring, billiards, or tennis in the park; about three, got onhorseback, and either cantered in the Phoenix or about the squares tillvisiting time; after which, made our calls, and then dressed fordinner, which we never thought of taking at commons, but had it fromMorrison's,--we both being reported sick in the dean's list, and therebyexempt from the routine fare of the fellows' table. In the evening ouroccupations became still more pressing; there were balls, suppers, whistparties, rows at the theatre, shindies in the street, devilled drumsticksat Hayes's, select oyster parties at the Carlingford,--in fact, every knownmethod of remaining up all night, and appearing both pale and penitent thefollowing morning.Webber had a large acquaintance in Dublin, and soon made me known to themall. Among others, the officers of the --th Light Dragoons, in whichregiment Power was captain, were his particular friends; and we hadfrequent invitations to dine at their mess. There it was first thatmilitary life presented itself to me in its most attractive possible form,and heightened the passion I had already so strongly conceived forthe army. Power, above all others, took my fancy. He was a gay,dashing-looking, handsome fellow of about eight-and-twenty, who had alreadyseen some service, having joined while his regiment was in Portugal; was inheart and soul a soldier; and had that species of pride and enthusiasm inall that regarded a military career that forms no small part of the charmin the character of a young officer.I sat near him the second day we dined at the mess, and was much pleased atmany slight attentions in his manner towards me."I called on you to-day, Mr. O'Malley," said he, "in company with a friendwho is most anxious to see you.""Indeed," said I, "I did not hear of it.""We left no cards, either of us, as we were determined to make you out onanother day; my companion has most urgent reasons for seeing you. I see youare puzzled," said he; "and although I promised to keep his secret, I mustblab. It was Sir George Dashwood was with me; he told us of your mostromantic adventure in the west,--and faith there is no doubt you saved thelady's life.""Was she worth the trouble of it?" said the old major, whose conjugalexperiences imparted a very crusty tone to the question."I think," said I, "I need only tell her name to convince you of it.""Here's a bumper to her," said Power, filling his glass; "and every trueman will follow my example."When the hip-hipping which followed the toast was over, I found myselfenjoying no small share of the attention of the party as the deliverer ofLucy Dashwood."Sir George is cudgelling his brain to show his gratitude to you," saidPower."What a pity, for the sake of his peace of mind, that you're not in thearmy," said another; "it's so easy to show a man a delicate regard by aquick promotion.""A devil of a pity for his own sake, too," said Power, again; "they'regoing to make a lawyer of as strapping a fellow as ever carried asabretasche.""A lawyer!" cried out half a dozen together, pretty much with the same toneand emphasis as though he had said a twopenny postman; "the devil theyare.""Cut the service at once; you'll get no promotion in it," said the colonel;"a fellow with a black eye like you would look much better at the head ofa squadron than of a string of witnesses. Trust me, you'd shine more inconducting a picket than a prosecution.""But if I can't?" said I."Then take my plan," said Power, "and make it cut you.""Yours?" said two or three in a breath,--"yours?""Ay, mine; did you never know that I was bred to the bar? Come, come, ifit was only for O'Malley's use and benefit, as we say in the parchments, Imust tell you the story."The claret was pushed briskly round, chairs drawn up to fill any vacantspaces, and Power began his story."As I am not over long-winded, don't be scared at my beginning myhistory somewhat far back. I began life that most unlucky of all earthlycontrivances for supplying casualties in case anything may befall the heirof the house,--a species of domestic jury-mast, only lugged out in a galeof wind,--a younger son. My brother Tom, a thick-skulled, pudding-headeddog, that had no taste for anything save his dinner, took it into his wisehead one morning that he would go into the army, and although I had beenoriginally destined for a soldier, no sooner was his choice made thanall regard for my taste and inclination was forgotten; and as the familyinterest was only enough for one, it was decided that I should be put inwhat is called a 'learned profession,' and let push my fortune. 'Takeyour choice, Dick,' said my father, with a most benign smile,--'take yourchoice, boy: will you be a lawyer, a parson, or a doctor?'"Had he said, 'Will you be put in the stocks, the pillory, or publiclywhipped?' I could not have looked more blank than at the question."As a decent Protestant, he should have grudged me to the Church; as aphilanthropist, he might have scrupled at making me a physician; but as hehad lost deeply by law-suits, there looked something very like a lurkingmalice in sending me to the bar. Now, so far, I concurred with him; forhaving no gift for enduring either sermons or senna, I thought I'd make abad administrator of either, and as I was ever regarded in the family asrather of a shrewd and quick turn, with a very natural taste for roguery, Ibegan to believe he was right, and that Nature intended me for the circuit."From the hour my vocation was pronounced, it had been happy for the familythat they could have got rid of me. A certain ambition to rise in myprofession laid hold on me, and I meditated all day and night how I was toget on. Every trick, every subtle invention to cheat the enemy that I couldread of, I treasured up carefully, being fully impressed with the notionthat roguery meant law, and equity was only another name for odd and even."My days were spent haranguing special juries of housemaids andlaundresses, cross-examining the cook, charging the under-butler, andpassing sentence of death upon the pantry boy, who, I may add, wasinvariably hanged when the court rose."If the mutton were overdone, or the turkey burned, I drew up an indictmentagainst old Margaret, and against the kitchen-maid as accomplice, and thefamily hungered while I harangued; and, in fact, into such disrepute did Ibring the legal profession, by the score of annoyance of which I madeit the vehicle, that my father got a kind of holy horror of law courts,judges, and crown solicitors, and absented himself from the assizes thesame year, for which, being a high sheriff, he paid a penalty of fivehundred pounds."The next day I was sent off in disgrace to Dublin to begin my career incollege, and eat the usual quartos and folios of beef and mutton whichqualify a man for the woolsack."Years rolled over, in which, after an ineffectual effort to get throughcollege, the only examination I ever got being a jubilee for the king'sbirthday, I was at length called to the Irish bar, and saluted by myfriends as Counsellor Power. The whole thing was so like a joke to me thatit kept me in laughter for three terms; and in fact it was the best thingcould happen me, for I had nothing else to do. The hall of the Four Courtswas a very pleasant lounge; plenty of agreeable fellows that never earnedsixpence or were likely to do so. Then the circuits were so many countryexcursions, that supplied fun of one kind or other, but no profit. As forme, I was what was called a good junior. I knew how to look after thewaiters, to inspect the decanting of the wine and the airing of the claret,and was always attentive to the father of the circuit,--the crossest oldvillain that ever was a king's counsel. These eminent qualities, and mybeing able to sing a song in honor of our own bar, were recommendationsenough to make me a favorite, and I was one."Now, the reputation I obtained was pleasant enough at first, but I beganto wonder that I never got a brief. Somehow, if it rained civil bills ordeclarations, devil a one would fall upon my head; and it seemed as ifthe only object I had in life was to accompany the circuit, a kind ofdeputy-assistant commissary-general, never expected to come into action.To be sure, I was not alone in misfortune; there were several promisingyouths, who cut great figures in Trinity, in the same predicament, the onlydifference being, that they attributed to jealousy what I suspected wasforgetfulness, for I don't think a single attorney in Dublin knew one ofus."Two years passed over, and then I walked the hall with a bag filled withnewspapers to look like briefs, and was regularly called by two or threecriers from one court to the other. It never took. Even when I used toseduce a country friend to visit the courts, and get him into an animatedconversation in a corner between two pillars, devil a one would believe himto be a client, and I was fairly nonplussed."'How is a man ever to distinguish himself in such a walk as this?' was myeternal question to myself every morning, as I put on my wig. 'My face isas well known here as Lord Manners's.' Every one says, 'How are you, Dick?''How goes it, Power?' But except Holmes, that said one morning as he passedme, 'Eh, always busy?' no one alludes to the possibility of my havinganything to do."'If I could only get a footing,' thought I, 'Lord, how I'd astonish them!As the song says:--"Perhaps a recruitMight chance to shooGreat General Buonapart."So,' said I to myself, 'I'll make these halls ring for it some day orother, if the occasion ever present itself.' But, faith, it seemed as ifsome cunning solicitor overheard me and told his associates, for theyavoided me like a leprosy. The home circuit I had adopted for some timepast, for the very palpable reason that being near town it was leastcostly, and it had all the advantages of any other for me in getting menothing to do. Well, one morning we were in Philipstown; I was lying awakein bed, thinking how long it would be before I'd sum up resolution to cutthe bar, where certainly my prospects were not the most cheering, when someone tapped gently at my door."'Come in,' said I."The waiter opened gently, and held out his hand with a large roll of papertied round with a piece of red tape."'Counsellor,' said he, 'handsel.'"'What do you mean?' said I, jumping out of bed. 'What is it, you villain?'"'A brief.'"'A brief. So I see; but it's for Counsellor Kinshella, below stairs.' Thatwas the first name written on it."'Bethershin,' said he, 'Mr. M'Grath bid me give it to you carefully.'"By this time I had opened the envelope and read my own name at full lengthas junior counsel in the important case of Monaghan v. M'Shean, to betried in the Record Court at Ballinasloe. 'That will do,' said I, flingingit on the bed with a careless air, as if it were a very every-day matterwith me."'But Counsellor, darlin', give us a thrifle to dhrink your health withyour first cause, and the Lord send you plenty of them!'"'My first,' said I, with a smile of most ineffable compassion at hissimplicity; 'I'm worn out with them. Do you know, Peter, I was thinkingseriously of leaving the bar, when you came into the room? Upon myconscience, it's in earnest I am.'"Peter believed me, I think, for I saw him give a very peculiar look as hepocketed his half-crown and left the room."The door was scarcely closed when I gave way to the free transport of myecstasy; there it lay at last, the long looked-for, long wished-for objectof all my happiness, and though I well knew that a junior counsel has aboutas much to do in the conducting of a case as a rusty handspike has in anaval engagement, yet I suffered not such thoughts to mar the current of myhappiness. There was my name in conjunction with the two mighty leaders onthe circuit; and though they each pocketed a hundred, I doubt very much ifthey received their briefs with one half the satisfaction. My joy at lengtha little subdued, I opened the roll of paper and began carefully to peruseabout fifty pages of narrative regarding a watercourse that once had turneda mill; but, from some reasons doubtless known to itself or its friends,would do so no longer, and thus set two respectable neighbors atloggerheads, and involved them in a record that had been now heard threeseveral times."Quite forgetting the subordinate part I was destined to fill, I openedthe case in a most flowery oration, in which I descanted upon the benefitsaccruing to mankind from water-communication since the days of Noah;remarking upon the antiquity of mills, and especially of millers, andconsumed half an hour in a preamble of generalities that I hoped would makea very considerable impression upon the court. Just at the critical momentwhen I was about to enter more particularly into the case, three or fourof the great unbriefed came rattling into my room, and broke in upon theoration."'I say, Power,' said one, 'come and have an hour's skating on the canal;the courts are filled, and we sha'n't be missed.'"'Skate, my dear friend,' said I, in a most dolorous tone, 'out of thequestion; see, I am chained to a devilish knotty case with Kinshella andMills.'"'Confound your humbugging,' said another, 'that may do very well in Dublinfor the attorneys, but not with us.'"'I don't well understand you,' I replied; 'there is the brief. Hennesyexpects me to report upon it this evening, and I am so hurried.'"Here a very chorus of laughing broke forth, in which, after several vainefforts to resist, I was forced to join, and kept it up with the others."When our mirth was over, my friends scrutinized the red-tape-tied packet,and pronounced it a real brief, with a degree of surprise that certainlyaugured little for their familiarity with such objects of natural history."When they had left the room, I leisurely examined the all-importantdocument, spreading it out before me upon the table, and surveying it asa newly-anointed sovereign might be supposed to contemplate a map of hisdominions."'At last,' said I to myself,--'at last, and here is the footstep to thewoolsack.' For more than an hour I sat motionless, my eyes fixed uponthe outspread paper, lost in a very maze of revery. The ambition whichdisappointments had crushed, and delay had chilled, came suddenly back, andall my day-dreams of legal success, my cherished aspirations after silkgowns and patents of precedence, rushed once more upon me, and I wasresolved to do or die. Alas, a very little reflection showed me that thelatter was perfectly practicable; but that, as a junior counsel, fiveminutes of very common-place recitation was all my province, and with themain business of the day I had about as much to do as the call-boy of aplayhouse has with the success of a tragedy."'My Lord, this is an action brought by Timothy Higgin,' etc., and down Igo, no more to be remembered and thought of than if I had never existed.How different it would be if I were the leader! Zounds, how I would worrythe witnesses, browbeat the evidence, cajole the jury, and soften thejudges! If the Lord were, in His mercy, to remove old Mills and Kinshellabefore Tuesday, who knows but my fortune might be made? This suppositiononce started, set me speculating upon all the possible chances that mightcut off two king's counsel in three days, and left me fairly convinced thatmy own elevation was certain, were they only removed from my path."For two whole days the thought never left my mind; and on the evening ofthe second day, I sat moodily over my pint of port, in the Clonbrock Arms,with my friend Timothy Casey, Captain in the North Cork Militia, for mycompanion."'Dick,' said Tim, 'take off your wine, man. When does this confoundedtrial come on?'"'To-morrow,' said I, with a deep groan."'Well, well, and if it does, what matter?' he said; 'you'll do wellenough, never be afraid.'"'Alas!' said I, 'you don't understand the cause of my depression.' I hereentered upon an account of my sorrows, which lasted for above an hour, andonly concluded just as a tremendous noise in the street without announcedan arrival. For several minutes such was the excitement in the house, suchrunning hither and thither, such confusion, and such hubbub, that we couldnot make out who had arrived."At last a door opened quite near us, and we saw the waiter assisting avery portly-looking gentleman off with his great-coat, assuring him thewhile that if he would only walk into the coffee-room for ten minutes, thefire in his apartment should be got ready. The stranger accordingly enteredand seated himself at the fireplace, having never noticed that Casey andmyself, the only persons there, were in the room."'I say, Phil, who is he?' inquired Casey of the waiter."'Counsellor Mills, Captain,' said the waiter, and left the room."'That's your friend,' said Casey."'I see,' said I; 'and I wish with all my heart he was at home with hispretty wife, in Leeson Street.'"'Is she good-looking?' inquired Tim."'Devil a better,' said I; 'and he's as jealous as old Nick.'"'Hem,' said Tim, 'mind your cue, and I'll give him a start.' Here hesuddenly changed his whispering tone for one in a louder key, and resumed:'I say, Power, it will make some work for you lawyers. But who can she be?that's the question.' Here he took a much crumpled letter from his pocket,and pretended to read: '"A great sensation was created in the neighborhoodof Merrion Square, yesterday, by the sudden disappearance from her house ofthe handsome Mrs. ------." Confound it!--what's the name? What a hand hewrites! Hill, or Miles, or something like that,--"the lady of an eminentbarrister, now on circuit. The gay Lothario is, they say, the Hon. George------."' I was so thunderstruck at the rashness of the stroke, I could saynothing; while the old gentleman started as if he had sat down on a pin.Casey, meanwhile, went on."'Hell and fury!' said the king's counsel, rushing over, 'what is it you'resaying?'"'You appear warm, old gentleman,' said Casey, putting up the letter andrising from the table."'Show me that letter!--show me that infernal letter, sir, this instant!'"'Show you my letter,' said Casey; 'cool, that, anyhow. You are certainly agood one.'"'Do you know me, sir? Answer me that,' said the lawyer, bursting withpassion."'Not at present,' said Tim, quietly; 'but I hope to do so in the morningin explanation of your language and conduct.' A tremendous ringing of thebell here summoned the waiter to the room."'Who is that--' inquired the lawyer. The epithet he judged it safe toleave unsaid, as he pointed to my friend Casey."'Captain Casey, sir, the commanding officer here.'"'Just so,' said Casey. 'And very much, at your service any hour after fivein the morning.'"'Then you refuse, sir, to explain the paragraph I have just heard youread?'"'Well done, old gentleman; so you have been listening to a privateconversation I held with my friend here. In that case we had better retireto our room.' So saying, he ordered the waiter to send a fresh bottleand glasses to No. 14, and taking my arm, very politely wished Mr. Millsgood-night, and left the coffee-room."Before we had reached the top of the stairs the house was once more incommotion. The new arrival had ordered out fresh horses, and was hurryingevery one in his impatience to get away. In ten minutes the chaise rolledoff from the door; and Casey, putting his head out of the window, wishedhim a pleasant journey; while turning to me, he said,--"'There's one of them out of the way for you, if we are even obliged tofight the other.'"The port was soon despatched, and with it went all the scruples ofconscience I had at first felt for the cruel ruse we had just practised.Scarcely was the other bottle called for when we heard the landlord callingout in a stentorian voice,--"'Two horses for Goran Bridge to meet Counsellor Kinshella.'"'That's the other fellow?' said Casey."'It is,' said I."'Then we must be stirring,' said he. 'Waiter, chaise and pair in fiveminutes,--d'ye hear? Power, my boy, I don't want you; stay here and studyyour brief. It's little trouble Counsellor Kinshella will give you in themorning.'"All he would tell me of his plans was that he didn't mean any seriousbodily harm to the counsellor, but that certainly he was not likely to beheard of for twenty-four hours."'Meanwhile, Power, go in and win, my boy,' said he; 'such another walkover may never occur.'"I must not make my story longer. The next morning the great record ofMonaghan v. M'Shean was called on; and as the senior counsel were notpresent, the attorney wished a postponement. I, however, was firm; toldthe court I was quite prepared, and with such an air of assurance that Iactually puzzled the attorney. The case was accordingly opened by me in avery brilliant speech, and the witnesses called; but such was my unluckyignorance of the whole matter that I actually broke down the testimony ofour own, and fought like a Trojan, for the credit and character of theperjurers against us! The judge rubbed his eyes; the jury looked amazed;and the whole bar laughed outright. However, on I went, blundering,floundering, and foundering at every step; and at half-past four, amidstthe greatest and most uproarious mirth of the whole court, heard the jurydeliver a verdict against us, just as old Kinshella rushed into the courtcovered with mud and spattered with clay. He had been sent for twenty milesto make a will for Mr. Daly, of Daly's Mount, who was supposed to be atthe point of death, but who, on his arrival, threatened to shoot him forcausing an alarm to his family by such an imputation."The rest is soon told. They moved for a new trial, and I moved out of theprofession. I cut the bar, for it cut me. I joined the gallant 14th as avolunteer; and here I am without a single regret, I must confess, that Ididn't succeed in the great record of Monaghan v. M'Shean."Once more the claret went briskly round, and while we canvassed Power'sstory, many an anecdote of military life was told, as every instantincreased the charm of that career I longed for."Another cooper, Major," said Power."With all my heart," said the rosy little officer, as he touched the bellbehind him; "and now let's have a song.""Yes, Power," said three or four together; "let us have 'The IrishDragoon,' if it's only to convert your friend O'Malley there.""Here goes, then," said Dick, taking off a bumper as he began the followingchant to the air of "Love is the Soul of a gay Irishman":--THE IRISH DRAGOON.Oh, love is the soul of an Irish dragoonIn battle, in bivouac, or in saloon,From the tip of his spur to his bright sabretasche.With his soldierly gait and his bearing so high,His gay laughing look and his light speaking eye,He frowns at his rival, he ogles his wench,He springs in his saddle and chasses the French,With his jingling spur and his bright sabretasche.His spirits are high, and he little knows care,Whether sipping his claret or charging a square,With his jingling spur and his bright sabretasche.As ready to sing or to skirmish he's found,To take off his wine or to take up his ground;When the bugle may call him, how little he fearsTo charge forth in column and beat the Mounseers,With his jingling spur and his bright sabretasche.When the battle is over, he gayly rides backTo cheer every soul in the night bivouac,With his jingling spur and his bright sabretasche.Oh, there you may see him in full glory crowned,As he sits 'midst his friends on the hardly won ground,And hear with what feeling the toast he will give,As he drinks to the land where all Irishmen live,With his jingling spur and his bright sabretasche.It was late when we broke up; but among all the recollections of thatpleasant evening none clung to me so forcibly, none sank so deeply in myheart, as the gay and careless tone of Power's manly voice; and as I fellasleep towards morning, the words of "The Irish Dragoon" were floatingthrough my mind and followed me in my dreams.CHAPTER XVI.THE VICE-PROVOST.I had now been for some weeks a resident within the walls of theuniversity, and yet had never presented my letter of introduction to Dr.Barret. Somehow, my thoughts and occupations had left me little leisure toreflect upon my college course, and I had not felt the necessity suggestedby my friend Sir Harry, of having a supporter in the very learned andgifted individual to whom I was accredited. How long I might have continuedin this state of indifference it is hard to say, when chance brought aboutmy acquaintance with the doctor.Were I not inditing a true history in this narrative of my life, to theevents and characters of which so many are living witnesses, I shouldcertainly fear to attempt anything like a description of this veryremarkable man; so liable would any sketch, however faint and imperfect, beto the accusation of caricature, when all was so singular and so eccentric.Dr. Barret was, at the time I speak of, close upon seventy years of age,scarcely five feet in height, and even that diminutive stature lessenedby a stoop. His face was thin, pointed, and russet-colored; his nose soaquiline as nearly to meet his projecting chin, and his small gray eyes,red and bleary, peered beneath his well-worn cap with a glance of mingledfear and suspicion. His dress was a suit of the rustiest black, threadbare,and patched in several places, while a pair of large brown leatherslippers, far too big for his feet, imparted a sliding motion to his walkthat added an air of indescribable meanness to his appearance; a gown thathad been worn for twenty years, browned and coated with the learned dust ofthe Fagel, covered his rusty habiliments, and completed the equipments ofa figure that it was somewhat difficult for the young student to recognizeas the vice-provost of the university. Such was he in externals. Within, agreater or more profound scholar never graced the walls of the college;a distinguished Grecian, learned in all the refinements of a hundreddialects; a deep Orientalist, cunning in all the varieties of Easternlanguages, and able to reason with a Moonshee, or chat with a Persianambassador. With a mind that never ceased acquiring, he possessed a memoryridiculous for its retentiveness, even of trifles; no character in history,no event in chronology was unknown to him, and he was referred to by hiscontemporaries for information in doubtful and disputed cases, as menconsult a lexicon or dictionary. With an intellect thus stored with deepand far-sought knowledge, in the affairs of the world he was a child.Without the walls of the college, for above forty years, he had notventured half as many times, and knew absolutely nothing of the busy,active world that fussed and fumed so near him; his farthest excursion wasto the Bank of Ireland, to which he made occasional visits to fund theample income of his office, and add to the wealth which already hadacquired for him a well-merited repute of being the richest man in college.His little intercourse with the world had left him, in all his habits andmanners, in every respect exactly as when he entered college nearly halfa century before; and as he had literally risen from the ranks in theuniversity, all the peculiarities of voice, accent, and pronunciation whichdistinguished him as a youth, adhered to him in old age. This was singularenough, and formed a very ludicrous contrast with the learned and deep-readtone of his conversation; but another peculiarity, still more striking,belonged to him. When he became a fellow, he was obliged, by the rules ofthe college, to take holy orders as a sine qua non to his holding hisfellowship. This he did, as he would have assumed a red hood or blue one,as bachelor of laws or doctor of medicine, and thought no more of it;but frequently, in his moments of passionate excitement, the venerablecharacter with which he was invested was quite forgotten, and he wouldutter some sudden and terrific oath, more productive of mirth to hisauditors than was seemly, and for which, once spoken, the poor doctor feltthe greatest shame and contrition. These oaths were no less singular thanforcible; and many a trick was practised, and many a plan devised, that thelearned vice-provost might be entrapped into his favorite exclamation of,"May the devil admire me!" which no place or presence could restrain.My servant, Mike, who had not been long in making himself acquainted withall the originals about him, was the cause of my first meeting the doctor,before whom I received a summons to appear on the very serious charge oftreating with disrespect the heads of the college.The circumstances were shortly these: Mike had, among the other gossip ofthe place, heard frequent tales of the immense wealth and great parsimonyof the doctor, and of his anxiety to amass money on all occasions, and theavidity with which even the smallest trifle was added to his gains. Heaccordingly resolved to amuse himself at the expense of this trait, andproceeded thus. Boring a hole in a halfpenny, he attached a long string toit, and having dropped it on the doctor's step stationed himself on theopposite side of the court, concealed from view by the angle of theCommons' wall. He waited patiently for the chapel bell, at the first tollof which the door opened, and the doctor issued forth. Scarcely was hisfoot upon the step, when he saw the piece of money, and as quickly stoopedto seize it; but just as his finger had nearly touched it, it evaded hisgrasp and slowly retreated. He tried again, but with the like success. Atlast, thinking he had miscalculated the distance, he knelt leisurely down,and put forth his hand, but lo! it again escaped him; on which, slowlyrising from his posture, he shambled on towards the chapel, where, meetingthe senior lecturer at the door, he cried out, "H------ to my soul, Wall,but I saw the halfpenny walk away!"For the sake of the grave character whom he addressed, I need not recounthow such a speech was received; suffice it to say, that Mike had been seenby a college porter, who reported him as my servant.I was in the very act of relating the anecdote to a large party atbreakfast in my rooms, when a summons arrived, requiring my immediateattendance at the board, then sitting in solemn conclave at the examinationhall.I accordingly assumed my academic costume as speedily as possible, andescorted by that most august functionary, Mr. M'Alister, presented myselfbefore the seniors.The members of the board, with the provost at their head, were seated at along oak table covered with books, papers, etc., and from the silence theymaintained as I walked up the hall, I augured that a very solemn scene wasbefore me."Mr. O'Malley," said the dean, reading my name from a paper he held in hishand, "you have been summoned here at the desire of the vice-provost, whosequestions you will reply to."I bowed. A silence of a few minutes followed, when, at length, the learneddoctor, hitching up his nether garments with both hands, put his old andbleary eyes close to my face, while he croaked out, with an accent that nohackney-coachman could have exceeded in vulgarity,--"Eh, O'Malley, you're quartus, I believe; a'n't you?""I believe not. I think I am the only person of that name now on thebooks.""That's thrue; but there were three O'Malleys before you. Godfrey O'Malley,that construed Calve Neroni to Nero the Calvinist,--ha! ha! ha!--wascautioned in 1788.""My uncle, I believe, sir.""More than likely, from what I hear of you,--Ex uno, etc. I see your nameevery day on the punishment roll. Late hours, never at chapel, seldom atmorning lecture. Here ye are, sixteen shillings, wearing a red coat.""Never knew any harm in that, Doctor.""Ay, but d'ye see me, now? 'Grave raiment,' says the statute. And then, yekeep numerous beasts of prey, dangerous in their habits, and unseemly tobehold.""A bull terrier, sir, and two game-cocks, are, I assure you, the onlyanimals in my household.""Well. I'll fine you for it.""I believe, Doctor," said the dean, interrupting in an undertone, "that youcannot impose a penalty in this matter.""Ay, but I can. 'Singing-birds,' says the statute, 'are forbidden withinthe wall.'""And then, ye dazzled my eyes at Commons with a bit of looking-glass, onFriday. I saw you. May the devil!--ahem! As I was saying, that's castingreflections on the heads of the college; and your servant it was,Michaelis Liber, Mickey Free,--may the flames of!--ahem!--an insolentvarlet! called me a sweep.""You, Doctor; impossible!" said I, with pretended horror."Ay, but d'ye see me, now? It's thrue, for I looked about me at the time,and there wasn't another sweep in the place but myself. Hell to!--Imean--God forgive me for swearing! but I'll fine you a pound for this."As I saw the doctor was getting on at such a pace, I resolved,notwithstanding the august presence of the board, to try the efficacy ofSir Harry's letter of introduction, which I had taken in my pocket in theevent of its being wanted."I beg your pardon, sir, if the time be an unsuitable one; but may I takethe opportunity of presenting this letter to you?""Ha! I know the hand--Boyle's. Boyle secundus. Hem, ha, ay! 'My youngfriend; and assist him by your advice.' To be sure! Oh, of course. Eh, tellme, young man, did Boyle say nothing to you about the copy of Erasmus,bound in vellum, that I sold him in Trinity term, 1782?""I rather think not, sir," said I, doubtfully."Well, then, he might. He owes me two-and-fourpence of the balance.""Oh, I beg pardon, sir; I now remember he desired me to repay you that sum;but he had just sealed the letter when he recollected it.""Better late than never," said the doctor, smiling graciously. "Where's themoney? Ay! half-a-crown. I haven't twopence--never mind. Go away, youngman; the case is dismissed. Vehementer miror quare hue venisti. You'remore fit for anything than a college life. Keep good hours; mind the terms;and dismiss Michaelis Liber. Ha, ha, ha! May the devil!--hem!--that isdo--" So saying, the little doctor's hand pushed me from the hall, his mindevidently relieved of all the griefs from which he had been suffering, bythe recovery of his long-lost two-and-four-pence.Such was my first and last interview with the vice-provost, and it made animpression upon me that all the intervening years have neither dimmed norerased.CHAPTER XVII.TRINITY COLLEGE.--A LECTURE.I had not been many weeks a resident of Old Trinity ere the flatteringreputation my chum, Mr. Francis Webber, had acquired, extended also tomyself; and by universal consent, we were acknowledged the most riotous,ill-conducted, disorderly men on the books of the university. Were thelamps of the squares extinguished, and the college left in total darkness,we were summoned before the dean; was the vice-provost serenaded witha chorus of trombones and French horns, to our taste in music was theattention ascribed; did a sudden alarm of fire disturb the congregationat morning chapel, Messrs. Webber and O'Malley were brought before theboard,--and I must do them the justice to say that the most triflingcircumstantial evidence was ever sufficient to bring a conviction. Readingmen avoided the building where we resided as they would have done theplague. Our doors, like those of a certain classic precinct commemorated bya Latin writer, lay open night and day, while mustached dragoons, knowinglydressed four-in-hand men, fox-hunters in pink, issuing forth to theDubber or returning splashed from a run with the Kildare hounds, wereeverlastingly seen passing and repassing. Within, the noise and confusionresembled rather the mess-room of a regiment towards eleven at nightthan the chambers of a college student; while, with the double object ofaffecting to be in ill-health, and to avoid the reflections that daylightoccasionally inspires, the shutters were never opened, but lamps andcandles kept always burning. Such was No. 2, Old Square, in the goodly daysI write of. All the terrors of fines and punishments fell scathless on thehead of my worthy chum. In fact, like a well-known political character,whose pleasure and amusement it has been for some years past to drivethrough acts of Parliament and deride the powers of the law, so did Mr.Webber tread his way, serpenting through the statute-book, ever grazing,but rarely trespassing upon some forbidden ground which might involve thegreat punishment of expulsion. So expert, too, had he become in his specialpleadings, so dexterous in the law of the university, that it was no easymatter to bring crime home to him; and even when this was done, his pleasof mitigation rarely failed of success.There was a sweetness of demeanor, a mild, subdued tone about him, thatconstantly puzzled the worthy heads of the college how the accusationsever brought against him could be founded on truth; that the pale,delicate-looking student, whose harsh, hacking cough terrified the hearers,could be the boisterous performer upon a key-bugle, or the terrificassailant of watchmen, was something too absurd for belief. And when Mr.Webber, with his hand upon his heart, and in his most dulcet accents,assured them that the hours he was not engaged in reading for the medalwere passed in the soothing society of a few select and intimate friendsof literary tastes and refined minds, who, knowing the delicacy of hishealth,--here he would cough,--were kind enough to sit up with him for anhour or so in the evening, the delusion was perfect; and the story of thedean's riotous habits having got abroad, the charge was usually suppressed.Like most idle men, Webber never had a moment to spare. Except read, therewas nothing he did not do; training a hack for a race in the Phoenix,arranging a rowing-match, getting up a mock duel between two white-featheracquaintances, were his almost daily avocations. Besides that, he was atthe head of many organized societies, instituted for various benevolentpurposes. One was called "The Association for Discountenancing Watchmen;"another, "The Board of Works," whose object was principally devoted to theembellishment of the university, in which, to do them justice, their laborswere unceasing, and what with the assistance of some black paint, a ladder,and a few pounds of gunpowder, they certainly contrived to effect manyimportant changes. Upon an examination morning, some hundred luckless"jibs" might be seen perambulating the courts, in the vain effort todiscover their tutors' chambers, the names having undergone an alterationthat left all trace of their original proprietors unattainable: DoctorFrancis Mooney having become Doctor Full Moon; Doctor Hare being, by thechange of two letters, Doctor Ape; Romney Robinson, Romulus and Remus, etc.While, upon occasions like these, there could be but little doubt of MasterFrank's intentions, upon many others, so subtle were his inventions, sowell-contrived his plots, it became a matter of considerable difficulty tosay whether the mishap which befell some luckless acquaintance were theresult of design or mere accident; and not unfrequently well-disposedindividuals were found condoling with "Poor Frank" upon his ignorance ofsome college rule or etiquette, his breach of which had been long anddeliberately planned. Of this latter description was a circumstance whichoccurred about this time, and which some who may throw an eye over thesepages will perhaps remember.The dean, having heard (and, indeed, the preparations were not intended tosecure secrecy) that Webber destined to entertain a party of his friendsat dinner on a certain day, sent a peremptory order for his appearance atCommons, his name being erased from the sick list, and a pretty strong hintconveyed to him that any evasion upon his part would be certainly followedby an inquiry into the real reasons for his absence. What was to be done?That was the very day he had destined for his dinner. To be sure, themajority of his guests were college men, who would understand thedifficulty at once; but still there were some others, officers of the 14th,with whom he was constantly dining, and whom he could not so easilyput off. The affair was difficult, but still Webber was the man for adifficulty; in fact, he rather liked one. A very brief considerationaccordingly sufficed, and he sat down and wrote to his friends at the RoyalBarracks thus:--Saturday.DEAR POWER,--I have a better plan for Tuesday than that Ihad proposed. Lunch here at three (we'll call it dinner), in the hallwith the great guns. I can't say much for the grub; but thecompany--glorious!After that we'll start for Lucan in the drag; takeour coffee, strawberries, etc., and return to No. 2 for supper at ten.Advertise your fellows of this change, and believe me,Most unchangeably yours, FRANK WEBBER.Accordingly, as three o'clock struck, six dashing-looking light dragoonswere seen slowly sauntering up the middle of the dining-hall, escortedby Webber, who, in full academic costume, was leisurely ciceroning hisfriends, and expatiating upon the excellences of the very remarkableportraits which graced the walls.The porters looked on with some surprise at the singular hour selectedfor sight-seeing; but what was their astonishment to find that the party,having arrived at the end of the hall, instead of turning back again, verycomposedly unbuckled their belts, and having disposed of their sabres in acorner, took their places at the Fellows' table, and sat down amidst thecollective wisdom of Greek lecturers and Regius professors, as though theyhad been mere mortals like themselves.Scarcely was the long Latin grace concluded, when Webber, leaning forward,enjoined his friends, in a very audible whisper, that if they intended todine no time was to be lost."We have but little ceremony here, gentlemen, and all we ask is a fairstart," said he, as he drew over the soup, and proceeded to help himself.The advice was not thrown away; for each man, with an alacrity a campaignusually teaches, made himself master of some neighboring dish, a very quickinterchange of good things speedily following the appropriation. It wasin vain that the senior lecturer looked aghast, that the professor ofastronomy frowned. The whole table, indeed, were thunderstruck, even to thepoor vice-provost himself, who, albeit given to the comforts of the table,could not lift a morsel to his mouth, but muttered between his teeth, "Maythe devil admire me, but they're dragoons!" The first shock of surpriseover, the porters proceeded to inform them that except Fellows of theUniversity or Fellow-commoners, none were admitted to the table. Webberhowever assured them that it was a mistake, there being nothing in thestatute to exclude the 14th Light Dragoons, as he was prepared to prove.Meanwhile dinner proceeded, Power and his party performing with greatself-satisfaction upon the sirloins and saddles about them, regrettingonly, from time to time, that there was a most unaccountable absence ofwine, and suggesting the propriety of napkins whenever they should dinethere again. Whatever chagrin these unexpected guests caused among theirentertainers of the upper table, in the lower part of the hall the laughterwas loud and unceasing; and long before the hour concluded, the Fellowstook their departure, leaving to Master Frank Webber the task of doing thehonors alone and unassisted. When summoned before the board for the offenceon the following morning, Webber excused himself by throwing the blame uponhis friends, with whom, he said, nothing short of a personal quarrel--athing for a reading man not to be thought of--could have preventedintruding in the manner related. Nothing less than his tact could havesaved him on this occasion, and at last he carried the day; while by anact of the board the 14th Light Dragoons were pronounced the most insolentcorps in the service.An adventure of his, however, got wind about this time, and served toenlighten many persons as to his real character, who had hitherto been mostlenient in their expressions about him. Our worthy tutor, with a zeal forour welfare far more praiseworthy than successful, was in the habit ofsummoning to his chambers, on certain mornings of the week, his variouspupils, whom he lectured in the books for the approaching examinations.Now, as these sances were held at six o'clock in winter as well as summer,in a cold fireless chamber,--the lecturer lying snug amidst his blankets,while we stood shivering around the walls,--the ardor of learning mustindeed have proved strong that prompted a regular attendance. As to Frank,he would have as soon thought of attending chapel as of presenting himselfon such an occasion. Not so with me. I had not yet grown hackneyed enoughto fly in the face of authority, and I frequently left the whist-table, orbroke off in a song, to hurry over to the doctor's chambers and spout Homerand Hesiod. I suffered on in patience, till at last the bore became soinsupportable that I told my sorrows to my friend, who listened to me out,and promised me succor.It so chanced that upon some evening in each week Dr. Mooney was in thehabit of visiting some friends who resided a short distance from town,and spending the night at their house. He, of course, did not lecture thefollowing morning,--a paper placard, announcing no lecture, being affixedto the door on such occasions. Frank waited patiently till he perceived thedoctor affixing this announcement upon his door one evening; and no soonerhad he left the college than he withdrew the paper and departed.On the next morning he rose early, and concealing himself on the staircase,waited the arrival of the venerable damsel who acted as servant to thedoctor. No sooner had she opened the door and groped her way into thesitting-room than Frank crept forward, and stealing gently into thebedroom, sprang into the bed and wrapped himself up in the blankets. Thegreat bell boomed forth at six o'clock, and soon after the sounds of thefeet were heard upon the stairs. One by one they came along, and graduallythe room was filled with cold and shivering wretches, more than halfasleep, and trying to arouse themselves into an approach to attention."Who's there?" said Frank, mimicking the doctor's voice, as he yawned threeor four times in succession and turned in the bed."Collisson, O'Malley, Nesbitt," etc., said a number of voices, anxious tohave all the merit such a penance could confer."Where's Webber?""Absent, sir," chorussed the whole party."Sorry for it," said the mock doctor. "Webber is a man of first-ratecapacity; and were he only to apply, I am not certain to what eminence hisabilities might raise him. Come, Collisson, any three angles of a triangleare equal to--are equal to--what are they equal to?" Here he yawned asthough he would dislocate his jaw."Any three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles," saidCollisson, in the usual sing-song tone of a freshman.As he proceeded to prove the proposition, his monotonous tone seemed tohave lulled the doctor into a doze, for in a few minutes a deep, long-drawnsnore announced from the closed curtains that he listened no longer. Aftera little time, however, a short snort from the sleeper awoke him suddenly,and he called out, "Go on, I'm waiting. Do you think I can arouse at thishour of the morning for nothing but to listen to your bungling? Can no onegive me a free translation of the passage?"This digression from mathematics to classics did not surprise the hearers,though it somewhat confused them, no one being precisely aware what theline in question might be."Try it, Nesbitt,--you, O'Malley. Silent all? Really this is too bad!" Anindistinct muttering here from the crowd was followed by an announcementfrom the doctor that the speaker was an ass, and his head a turnip! "Notone of you capable of translating a chorus from Euripides,--'Ou, ou, papai,papai,' etc.; which, after all, means no more than, 'Oh, whilleleu, murder,why did you die!' etc. What are you laughing at, gentlemen? May I ask, doesit become a set of ignorant, ill-informed savages--yes, savages, I repeatthe word--to behave in this manner? Webber is the only man I have withcommon intellect,--the only man among you capable of distinguishinghimself. But as for you, I'll bring you before the board; I'll write toyour friends; I'll stop your college indulgences; I'll confine you to thewalls; I'll be damned, eh--"This lapse confused him. He stammered, stuttered, endeavored to recoverhimself; but by this time we had approached the bed, just at the momentwhen Master Frank, well knowing what he might expect if detected, hadbolted from the blankets and rushed from the room. In an instant we were inpursuit; but he regained his chambers, and double-locked the door before wecould overtake him, leaving us to ponder over the insolent tirade we had sopatiently submitted to.That morning the affair got wind all over college. As for us, we werescarcely so much laughed at as the doctor; the world wisely remembering,if such were the nature of our morning's orisons, we might nearly asprofitably have remained snug in our quarters.Such was our life in Old Trinity; and strange enough it is that one shouldfeel tempted to the confession, but I really must acknowledge these were,after all, happy times, and I look back upon them with mingled pleasure andsadness. The noble lord who so pathetically lamented that the devil was notso strong in him as he used to be forty years before, has an echo in myregrets that the student is not as young in me as when these scenes wereenacting of which I write.CHAPTER XVIII.THE INVITATION.--THE WAGER.I was sitting at breakfast with Webber, a few mornings after the messdinner I have spoken of, when Power came in hastily."Ha, the very man!" said he. "I say, O'Malley, here's an invitation for youfrom Sir George, to dine on Friday. He desired me to say a thousand civilthings about his not having made you out, regrets that he was not at homewhen you called yesterday, and all that. By Jove, I know nothing like thefavor you stand in; and as for Miss Dashwood, faith! the fair Lucy blushed,and tore her glove in most approved style, when the old general began hislaudation of you.""Pooh, nonsense," said I; "that silly affair in the west.""Oh, very probably; there's reason the less for you looking so excessivelyconscious. But I must tell you, in all fairness, that you have no chance;nothing short of a dragoon will go down.""Be assured," said I, somewhat nettled, "my pretensions do not aspire tothe fair Miss Dashwood.""Tant mieux et tant pis, mon cher. I wish to Heaven mine did; and, bySaint Patrick, if I only played the knight-errant half as gallantlyas yourself, I would not relinquish my claims to the Secretary at Warhimself.""What the devil brought the old general down to your wild regions?"inquired Webber."To contest the county.""A bright thought, truly. When a man was looking for a seat, why not try aplace where the law is occasionally heard of?""I'm sure I can give you no information on that head; nor have I ever heardhow Sir George came to learn that such a place as Galway existed.""I believe I can enlighten you," said Power. "Lady Dashwood--rest hersoul!--came west of the Shannon; she had a large property somewhere inMayo, and owned some hundred acres of swamp, with some thousand starvingtenantry thereupon, that people dignified as an estate in Connaught. Thisfirst suggested to him the notion of setting up for the county, probablysupposing that the people who never paid in rent might like to do so ingratitude. How he was undeceived, O'Malley there can inform us. Indeed, Ibelieve the worthy general, who was confoundedly hard up when he married,expected to have got a great fortune, and little anticipated the threechancery suits he succeeded to, nor the fourteen rent-charges to his wife'srelatives that made up the bulk of the dower. It was an unlucky hit for himwhen he fell in with the old 'maid' at Bath; and had she lived, he musthave gone to the colonies. But the Lord took her one day, and MajorDashwood was himself again. The Duke of York, the story goes, saw him atHounslow during a review, was much struck with his air and appearance, madesome inquiries, found him to be of excellent family and irreproachableconduct, made him an aide-de-camp, and, in fact, made his fortune. I do notbelieve that, while doing so kind, he could by possibility have done a morepopular thing. Every man in the army rejoiced at his good fortune; so that,after all, though he has had some hard rubs, he has come well through,the only vestige of his unfortunate matrimonial connection being acorrespondence kept up by a maiden sister of his late wife's with him. Sheinsists upon claiming the ties of kindred upon about twenty family erasduring the year, when she regularly writes a most loving and ill-spelledepistle, containing the latest information from Mayo, with all particularsof the Macan family, of which she is a worthy member. To her constant hintsof the acceptable nature of certain small remittances, the poor general isnever inattentive; but to the pleasing prospect of a visit in the fleshfrom Miss Judy Macan, the good man is dead. In fact, nothing short of beingbroke by general court-martial could complete his sensations of horror atsuch a stroke of fortune; and I am not certain, if choice were allowed him,that he would not prefer the latter.""Then he has never yet seen her?" said Webber."Never," replied Power; "and he hopes to leave Ireland without thatblessing, the prospect of which, however remote and unlikely, has, I knowwell, more than once terrified him since his arrival.""I say, Power, and has your worthy general sent me a card for his ball?""Not through me, Master Frank.""Well, now, I call that devilish shabby, do you know. He asks O'Malleythere from my chambers, and never notices the other man, the superior inthe firm. Eh, O'Malley, what say you?""Why, I didn't know you were acquainted.""And who said we were? It was his fault, though, entirely, that we werenot. I am, as I have ever been, the most easy fellow in the world onthat score, never give myself airs to military people, endure anything,everything, and you see the result; hard, ain't it?""But, Webber, Sir George must really be excused in this matter. He hasa daughter, a most attractive, lovely daughter, just at that budding,unsuspecting age when the heart is most susceptible of impressions; andwhere, let me ask, could she run such a risk as in the chance of a casualmeeting with the redoubted lady-killer, Master Frank Webber? If he has notsought you out, then here be his apology.""A very strong case, certainly," said Frank; "but, still, had he confidedhis critical position to my honor and secrecy, he might have depended onme; now, having taken the other line--""Well, what then?""Why, he must abide the consequences. I'll make fierce love to Louisa;isn't that the name?""Lucy, so please you.""Well, be it so,--to Lucy,--talk the little girl into a most deplorableattachment for me.""But, how, may I ask, and when?""I'll begin at the ball, man.""Why, I thought you said you were not going?""There you mistake seriously. I merely said that I had not been invited.""Then, of course," said I, "Webber, you can't think of going, in any case,on my account.""My very dear friend, I go entirely upon my own. I not only shall go, butI intend to have most particular notice and attention paid me. I shall beprime favorite with Sir George, kiss Lucy--""Come, come, this is too strong.""What do you bet I don't? There, now, I'll give you a pony apiece, I do. Doyou say done?""That you kiss Miss Dashwood, and are not kicked down-stairs for yourpains; are those the terms of the wager?" inquired Power."With all my heart. That I kiss Miss Dashwood, and am not kickeddown-stairs for my pains.""Then, I say, done.""And with you, too, O'Malley?""I thank you," said I, coldly; "I am not disposed to make such a return forSir George Dashwood's hospitality as to make an insult to his family thesubject of a bet.""Why, man, what are you dreaming of? Miss Dashwood will not refuse mychaste salute. Come, Power, I'll give you the other pony.""Agreed," said he. "At the same time, understand me distinctly, that I holdmyself perfectly eligible to winning the wager by my own interference; forif you do kiss her, by Jove! I'll perform the remainder of the compact.""So I understand the agreement," said Webber, arranging his curls beforethe looking-glass. "Well, now, who's for Howth? The drag will be here inhalf an hour.""Not I," said Power; "I must return to the barracks.""Nor I," said I, "for I shall take this opportunity of leaving my card atSir George Dashwood's.""I have won my fifty, however," said Power, as we walked out in the courts."I am not quite certain--""Why, the devil, he would not risk a broken neck for that sum; besides, ifhe did, he loses the bet.""He's a devilish keen fellow.""Let him be. In any case I am determined to be on my guard here."So chatting, we strolled along to the Royal Hospital, when, having droppedmy pasteboard, I returned to the college.CHAPTER XIXTHE BALL.I have often dressed for a storming party with less of trepidation than Ifelt on the evening of Sir George Dashwood's ball. Since the eventful dayof the election I had never seen Miss Dashwood; therefore, as to whatprecise position I might occupy in her favor was a matter of great doubt inmy mind, and great import to my happiness. That I myself loved her, wasa matter of which all the badinage of my friends regarding her mademe painfully conscious; but that, in our relative positions, such anattachment was all but hopeless, I could not disguise from myself. Young asI was, I well knew to what a heritage of debt, lawsuit, and difficulty Iwas born to succeed. In my own resources and means of advancement I had noconfidence whatever, had even the profession to which I was destined beenmore of my choice. I daily felt that it demanded greater exertions, if notfar greater abilities, than I could command, to make success at all likely;and then, even if such a result were in store, years, at least, must elapsebefore it could happen; and where would she then be, and where should I?Where the ardent affection I now felt and gloried in,--perhaps all the morefor its desperate hopelessness,--when the sanguine and buoyant spirit tocombat with difficulties which youth suggests, and which, later, manhoodrefuses, should have passed away? And even if all these survived the toiland labor of anxious days and painful nights, what of her? Alas, I nowreflected that, although only of my own age, her manner to me had taken allthat tone of superiority and patronage which an elder assumes towardsone younger, and which, in the spirit of protection it proceeds upon,essentially bars up every inlet to a dearer or warmer feeling,--at least,when the lady plays the former part. "What, then, is to be done?" thoughtI. "Forget her?--but how? How shall I renounce all my plans, and unweavethe web of life I have been spreading around me for many a day, withoutthat one golden thread that lent it more than half its brilliancy and allits attraction? But then the alternative is even worse, if I encourageexpectations and nurture hopes never to be realized. Well, we meetto-night, after a long and eventful absence; let my future fate be ruled bythe results of this meeting. If Lucy Dashwood does care for me, if I candetect in her manner enough to show me that my affection may meet a return,the whole effort of my life shall be to make her mine; if not, if myown feelings be all that I have to depend upon to extort a reciprocalaffection, then shall I take my last look of her, and with it the first andbrightest dream of happiness my life has hitherto presented."*       *       *       *       *It need not be wondered at if the brilliant coup d'oeil of the ball-room,as I entered, struck me with astonishment, accustomed as I had hithertobeen to nothing more magnificent than an evening party of squires andtheir squiresses or the annual garrison ball at the barracks. The glare ofwax-lights, the well-furnished saloons, the glitter of uniforms, and theblaze of plumed and jewelled dames, with the clang of military music, was aspecies of enchanted atmosphere which, breathing for the first time, rarelyfails to intoxicate. Never before had I seen so much beauty. Lovely faces,dressed in all the seductive flattery of smiles, were on every side; and asI walked from room to room, I felt how much more fatal to a man's peace andheart's ease the whispered words and silent glances of those fair damsels,than all the loud gayety and boisterous freedom of our country belles, whosought to take the heart by storm and escalade.As yet I had seen neither Sir George nor his daughter, and while I lookedon every side for Lucy Dashwood, it was with a beating and anxious heartI longed to see how she would bear comparison with the blaze of beautyaround.Just at this moment a very gorgeously dressed hussar stepped from a doorwaybeside me, as if to make a passage for some one, and the next moment sheappeared leaning upon the arm of another lady. One look was all that I hadtime for, when she recognized me."Ah, Mr. O'Malley, how happy--has Sir George--has my father seen you?""I have only arrived this moment; I trust he is quite well?""Oh, yes, thank you--""I beg your pardon with all humility, Miss Dashwood," said the hussar, in atone of the most knightly courtesy, "but they are waiting for us.""But, Captain Fortescue, you must excuse me one moment more. Mr. Lechmere,will you do me the kindness to find out Sir George? Mr. O'Malley--Mr.Lechmere." Here she said something in French to her companion, but sorapidly that I could not detect what it was, but merely heard the reply,"Pas mal!"--which, as the lady continued to canvass me most deliberatelythrough her eye-glass, I supposed referred to me. "And now, CaptainFortescue--" And with a look of most courteous kindness to me shedisappeared in the crowd.The gentleman to whose guidance I was entrusted was one of theaides-de-camp, and was not long in finding Sir George. No sooner had thegood old general heard my name, than he held out both his hands and shookmine most heartily."At last, O'Malley; at last I am able to thank you for the greatestservice ever man rendered me. He saved Lucy, my Lord; rescued her undercircumstances where anything short of his courage and determination musthave cost her her life.""Ah, very pretty indeed," said a stiff old gentleman addressed, as hebowed a most superbly powdered scalp before me; "most happy to make youracquaintance.""Who is he?" added he, in nearly as loud a tone to Sir George."Mr. O'Malley, of O'Malley Castle.""True, I forgot; why is he not in uniform?""Because, unfortunately, my Lord, we don't own him; he's not in the army.""Ha! ha! thought he was.""You dance, O'Malley, I suppose? I'm sure you'd rather be over there thanhearing all my protestations of gratitude, sincere and heartfelt as theyreally are.""Lechmere, introduce my friend, Mr. O'Malley; get him a partner."I had not followed my new acquaintance many steps, when Power came up tome. "I say, Charley," cried he, "I have been tormented to death by half theladies in the room to present you to them, and have been in quest of youthis half-hour. Your brilliant exploit in savage land has made you aregular preux chevalier; and if you don't trade on that adventure to yourmost lasting profit, you deserve to be--a lawyer. Come along here! LadyMuckleman, the adjutant-general's lady and chief, has four Scotch daughtersyou are to dance with; then I am to introduce you in all form to the Deanof Something's niece,--she is a good-looking girl, and has two livings ina safe county. Then there's the town-major's wife; and, in fact, I haveseveral engagements from this to supper-time.""A thousand thanks for all your kindness in prospective, but I think,perhaps, it were right I should ask Miss Dashwood to dance, if only as amatter of form,--you understand?""And if Miss Dashwood should say, 'With pleasure, sir,' only as a matter ofform,--you understand?" said a silvery voice beside me. I turned, and sawLucy Dashwood, who, having overheard my free-and-easy suggestion, repliedto me in this manner.I here blundered out my excuses. What I said, and what I did not say, I donot now remember; but certainly, it was her turn now to blush, and her armtrembled within mine as I led her to the top of the room. In the littleopportunity which our quadrille presented for conversation, I could nothelp remarking that, after the surprise of her first meeting with me, MissDashwood's manner became gradually more and more reserved, and that therewas an evident struggle between her wish to appear grateful for what hadoccurred, with a sense of the necessity of not incurring a greater degreeof intimacy. Such was my impression, at least, and such the conclusion Idrew from a certain quiet tone in her manner that went further to wound myfeelings and mar my happiness than any other line of conduct towards mecould possibly have effected.Our quadrille over, I was about to conduct her to a seat, when Sir Georgecame hurriedly up, his face greatly flushed, and betraying every semblanceof high excitement."Dear Papa, has anything occurred? Pray what is it?" inquired she.He smiled faintly, and replied, "Nothing very serious, my dear, thatI should alarm you in this way; but certainly, a more disagreeablecontretemps could scarcely occur.""Do tell me: what can it be?""Read this," said he, presenting a very dirty-looking note which bore themark of a red wafer most infernally plain upon its outside.Miss Dashwood unfolded the billet, and after a moment's silence, instead ofparticipating, as he expected, in her father's feeling of distress, burstout a-laughing, while she said: "Why, really, Papa, I do not see why thisshould put you out much, after all. Aunt may be somewhat of a character, asher note evinces, but after a few days--""Nonsense, child; there's nothing in this world I have such a dread of asthat confounded woman,--and to come at such a time.""When does she speak of paying her visit?""I knew you had not read the note," said Sir George, hastily; "she's cominghere to-night,--is on her way this instant, perhaps. What is to be done? Ifshe forces her way in here, I shall go deranged outright; O'Malley, my boy,read this note, and you will not feel surprised if I appear in the humoryou see me."I took the billet from the hands of Miss Dashwood, and read as follows:--DEAR BROTHER,--When this reaches your hand, I'll not be faroff. I'm on my way up to town, to be under Dr. Dease for the ouldcomplaint. Cowley mistakes my case entirely; he says it's nothingbut religion and wind. Father Magrath, who understands a gooddeal about females, thinks otherwise; but God knows who's right.Expect me to tea, and, with love to Lucy,Believe me, yours in haste,JUDITH MACAN.Let the sheets be well aired in my room; and if you have a spare bed,perhaps we could prevail upon Father Magrath to stop too.I scarcely could contain my laughter till I got to the end of this veryfree-and-easy epistle; when at last I burst forth in a hearty fit, in whichI was joined by Miss Dashwood.From the account Power had given me in the morning, I had no difficulty inguessing that the writer was the maiden sister of the late Lady Dashwood;and for whose relationship Sir George had ever testified the greatestdread, even at the distance of two hundred miles; and for whom, in anynearer intimacy, he was in no wise prepared."I say, Lucy," said he, "there's only one thing to be done: if this horridwoman does arrive, let her be shown to her room; and for the few days ofher stay in town, we'll neither see nor be seen by any one."Without waiting for a reply, Sir George was turning away to give thenecessary instructions, when the door of the drawing-room was flung open,and the servant announced, in his loudest voice, "Miss Macan." Never shallI forget the poor general's look of horror as the words reached him; for asyet, he was too far to catch even a glimpse of its fair owner. As for me, Iwas already so much interested in seeing what she was like, that I made myway through the crowd towards the door. It is no common occurrence that candistract the various occupations of a crowded ball-room, where, amidst thecrash of music and the din of conversation, goes on the soft, low voiceof insinuating flattery, or the light flirtation of a first acquaintance;every clique, every coterie, every little group of three or four has itsown separate and private interests, forming a little world of its own, andcaring for and heeding nothing that goes on around; and even when somestriking character or illustrious personage makes his entre, theattention he attracts is so momentary, that the buzz of conversation isscarcely, if at all, interrupted, and the business of pleasure continuesto flow on. Not so now, however. No sooner had the servant pronounced themagical name of Miss Macan, than all seemed to stand still. The spell thusexercised over the luckless general seemed to have extended to his company;for it was with difficulty that any one could continue his train ofconversation, while every eye was directed towards the door. About twosteps in advance of the servant, who still stood door in hand, was a tall,elderly lady, dressed in an antique brocade silk, with enormous flowersgaudily embroidered upon it. Her hair was powdered and turned back in thefashion of fifty years before; while her high-pointed and heeled shoescompleted a costume that had not been seen for nearly a century. Her short,skinny arms were bare and partly covered by a falling flower of old pointlace, while on her hands she wore black silk mittens; a pair of greenspectacles scarcely dimmed the lustre of a most piercing pair of eyes, towhose effect a very palpable touch of rouge on the cheeks certainly addedbrilliancy. There stood this most singular apparition, holding before hera fan about the size of a modern tea-tray; while at each repetition of hername by the servant, she curtesied deeply, bestowing the while upon the gaycrowd before her a very curious look of maidenly modesty at her solitaryand unprotected position.[Illustration: MISS JUDY MACAN.]As no one had ever heard of the fair Judith, save one or two of SirGeorge's most intimate friends, the greater part of the company weredisposed to regard Miss Macan as some one who had mistaken the character ofthe invitation, and had come in a fancy dress. But this delusion was butmomentary, as Sir George, armed with the courage of despair, forced his waythrough the crowd, and taking her hand affectionately, bid her welcome toDublin. The fair Judy, at this, threw her arms about his neck, and salutedhim with a hearty smack that was heard all over the room."Where's Lucy, Brother? Let me embrace my little darling," said the lady,in an accent that told more of Miss Macan than a three-volume biographycould have done. "There she is, I'm sure; kiss me, my honey."This office Miss Dashwood performed with an effort at courtesy reallyadmirable; while, taking her aunt's arm, she led her to a sofa.It needed all the poor general's tact to get over the sensation of thismost malapropos addition to his party; but by degrees the various groupsrenewed their occupations, although many a smile, and more than onesarcastic glance at the sofa, betrayed that the maiden aunt had not escapedcriticism.Power, whose propensity for fun very considerably out-stripped his sense ofdecorum to his commanding officer, had already made his way towards MissDashwood, and succeeded in obtaining a formal introduction to Miss Macan."I hope you will do me the favor to dance next set with me, Miss Macan?""Really, Captain, it's very polite of you, but you must excuse me. I wasnever anything great in quadrilles; but if a reel or a jig--""Oh, dear Aunt, don't think of it, I beg of you.""Or even Sir Roger de Coverley," resumed Miss Macan."I assure you, quite equally impossible.""Then I'm certain you waltz," said Power."What do you take me for, young man? I hope I know better. I wish FatherMagrath heard you ask me that question, and for all your laced jacket--""Dearest Aunt, Captain Power didn't mean to offend you; I'm certain he--""Well, why did he dare to [sob, sob]--did he see anything light about me,that he [sob, sob, sob]--oh, dear! oh, dear! is it for this I came upfrom my little peaceful place in the west [sob, sob, sob]?--General,George, dear; Lucy, my love, I'm taken bad. Oh, dear! oh, dear! is thereany whiskey negus?"Whatever sympathy Miss Macan's sufferings might have excited in the crowdabout her before, this last question totally routed them, and a most heartyfit of laughter broke forth from more than one of the bystanders.At length, however, she was comforted, and her pacification completelyeffected by Sir George setting her down to a whist-table. From this momentI lost sight of her for above two hours. Meanwhile I had little opportunityof following up my intimacy with Miss Dashwood, and as I rather suspectedthat, on more than one occasion, she seemed to avoid our meeting, I tookespecial care on my part, to spare her the annoyance.For one instant only had I any opportunity of addressing her, and thenthere was such an evident embarrassment in her manner that I readilyperceived how she felt circumstanced, and that the sense of gratitude toone whose further advances she might have feared, rendered her constrainedand awkward. "Too true," said I, "she avoids me. My being here is only asource of discomfort and pain to her; therefore, I'll take my leave, andwhatever it may cost me, never to return." With this intention, resolvingto wish Sir George a very good night, I sought him out for some minutes. Atlength I saw him in a corner, conversing with the old nobleman to whom hehad presented me early in the evening."True, upon my honor, Sir George," said he; "I saw it myself, and she didit just as dexterously as the oldest blackleg in Paris.""Why, you don't mean to say that she cheated?""Yes, but I do, though,--turned the ace every time. Lady Herbert said tome, 'Very extraordinary it is,--four by honors again.' So I looked, andthen I perceived it,--a very old trick it is; but she did it beautifully.What's her name?""Some western name; I forget it," said the poor general, ready to die withshame."Clever old woman, very!" said the old lord, taking a pinch of snuff; "butrevokes too often."Supper was announced at this critical moment, and before I had furtherthought of my determination to escape, I felt myself hurried along in thecrowd towards the staircase. The party immediately in front of me werePower and Miss Macan, who now appeared reconciled, and certainly testifiedmost openly their mutual feelings of good-will."I say, Charley," whispered Power, as I came along, "it is capitalfun,--never met anything equal to her; but the poor general will neverlive through it, and I'm certain of ten day's arrest for this night'sproceeding.""Any news of Webber?" I inquired."Oh, yes, I fancy I can tell something of him; for I heard of some onepresenting himself, and being refused the entre, so that Master Frankhas lost his money. Sit near us, I pray you, at supper. We must take careof the dear aunt for the niece's sake, eh?"Not seeing the force of this reasoning, I soon separated myself from them,and secured a corner at a side-table. Every supper on such an occasion asthis is the same scene of solid white muslin, faded flowers, flushed faces,torn gloves, blushes, blanc-mange, cold chicken, jelly, sponge cakes,spooney young gentlemen doing the attentive, and watchful mammascalculating what precise degree of propinquity in the crush is safe orseasonable for their daughters to the mustached and unmarrying loversbeside them. There are always the same set of gratified elders, like thebenchers in King's Inn, marched up to the head of the table, to eat, drink,and be happy, removed from the more profane looks and soft speeches of theyounger part of the creation. Then there are the hoi polloi of outcasts,younger sons of younger brothers, tutors, governesses, portionless cousins,and curates, all formed in phalanx round the side-tables, whose primitivehabits and simple tastes are evinced by their all eating off the same plateand drinking from nearly the same wine-glass,--too happy if some better-offacquaintance at the long table invites them to "wine," though the ceremonyon their part is limited to the pantomime of drinking. To this miserabletiers etat I belonged, and bore my fate with unconcern; for, alas, myspirits were depressed and my heart heavy. Lucy's treatment of me was everymoment before me, contrasted with her gay and courteous demeanor to allsave myself, and I longed for the moment to get away.Never had I seen her looking so beautiful; her brilliant eyes were lit withpleasure, and her smile was enchantment itself. What would I not have givenfor one moment's explanation, as I took my leave forever!--one brief avowalof my unalterable, devoted love; for which I sought not nor expectedreturn, but merely that I might not be forgotten.Such were my thoughts, when a dialogue quite near me aroused me from myrevery. I was not long in detecting the speakers, who, with their backsturned to us, were seated at the great table discussing a very liberalallowance of pigeon-pie, a flask of champagne standing between them."Don't now! don't I tell ye; it's little ye know Galway, or ye wouldn'tthink to make up to me, squeezing my foot.""Upon my soul, you're an angel, a regular angel. I never saw a woman suitmy fancy before.""Oh, behave now. Father Magrath says--""Who's he?""The priest; no less.""Oh, confound him!""Confound Father Magrath, young man?""Well, then, Judy, don't be angry; I only meant that a dragoon knows rathermore of these matters than a priest.""Well, then, I'm not so sure of that. But anyhow, I'd have you to rememberit ain't a Widow Malone you have beside you.""Never heard of the lady," said Power."Sure, it's a song,--poor creature,--it's a song they made about her in theNorth Cork, when they were quartered down in our county.""I wish to Heaven you'd sing it.""What will you give me, then, if I do?""Anything,--everything; my heart, my life.""I wouldn't give a trauneen for all of them. Give me that old green ring onyour finger, then.""It's yours," said Power, placing it gracefully upon Miss Macan's finger;"and now for your promise.""May be my brother might not like it.""He'd be delighted," said Power; "he dotes on music.""Does he now?""On my honor, he does.""Well, mind you get up a good chorus, for the song has one, and here itis.""Miss Macan's song!" said Power, tapping the table with his knife."Miss Macan's song!" was re-echoed on all sides; and before the lucklessgeneral could interfere, she had begun. How to explain the air I know not,for I never heard its name; but at the end of each verse a species of echofollowed the last word that rendered it irresistibly ridiculous.THE WIDOW MALONE.Did ye hear of the Widow Malone,Ohone!Who lived in the town of Athlone,Alone?Oh, she melted the heartsOf the swains in them parts,So lovely the Widow Malone,Ohone!So lovely the Widow Malone.Of lovers she had a full score,Or more;And fortunes they all had galore,In store;From the minister downTo the clerk of the crown,All were courting the Widow Malone,Ohone!All were courting the Widow Malone.But so modest was Mrs. Malone,'T was knownNo one ever could see her alone,Ohone!Let them ogle and sigh,They could ne'er catch her eye,So bashful the Widow Malone,Ohone!So bashful the Widow Malone.Till one Mister O'Brien from Clare,How quare!It's little for blushin' they careDown there;Put his arm round her waist,Gave ten kisses at laste,"Oh," says he, "you're my Molly Malone,My own;Oh," says he, "you're my Molly Malone."And the widow they all thought so shy,My eye!Ne'er thought of a simper or sigh,For why?But "Lucius," says she,"Since you've made now so free,You may marry your Mary Malone,Ohone!You may marry your Mary Malone."There's a moral contained in my song,Not wrong;And one comfort it's not very long,But strong;If for widows you die,Larn to kiss, not to sigh,For they're all like sweet Mistress Malone,Ohone!Oh, they're very like Mistress Malone.Never did song create such a sensation as Miss Macan's; and certainlyher desires as to the chorus were followed to the letter, for "The WidowMalone, ohone!" resounded from one end of the table to the other, amidstone universal shout of laughter. None could resist the ludicrous effect ofher melody; and even poor Sir George, sinking under the disgrace of hisrelationship, which she had contrived to make public by frequent allusionsto her "dear brother the general," yielded at last, and joined in the mirtharound him."I insist upon a copy of 'The Widow,' Miss Macan," said Power."To be sure; give me a call to-morrow,--let me see,--about two. FatherMagrath won't be at home," said she, with a coquettish look."Where, pray, may I pay my respects?""No. 22 South Anne Street,--very respectable lodgings. I'll write theaddress in your pocket-book."Power produced a card and pencil, while Miss Macan wrote a few lines,saying, as she handed it:--"There, now, don't read it here before the people; they'll think it mightyindelicate in me to make an appointment."Power pocketed the card, and the next minute Miss Macan's carriage wasannounced.Sir George Dashwood, who little flattered himself that his fair guesthad any intention of departure, became now most considerately attentive,reminded her of the necessity of muffling against the night air, hoped shewould escape cold, and wished her a most cordial good-night, with a promiseof seeing her early the following day.Notwithstanding Power's ambition to engross the attention of the lady, SirGeorge himself saw her to her carriage, and only returned to the room as agroup was collecting around the gallant captain, to whom he was relatingsome capital traits of his late conquest,--for such he dreamed she was."Doubt it who will," said he, "she has invited me to call on her to-morrow,written her address on my card, told me the hour she is certain of beingalone. See here!" At these words he pulled forth the card, and handed it toLechmere.Scarcely were the eyes of the other thrown upon the writing, when he said,"So, this isn't it, Power.""To be sure it is, man," said Power. "Anne Street is devilish seedy, butthat's the quarter.""Why, confound it, man!" said the other; "there's not a word of that here.""Read it out," said Power. "Proclaim aloud my victory."Thus urged, Lechmere read:--DEAR P.,--Please pay to my credit,--and soon, mark ye!--the two ponieslost this evening. I have done myself the pleasure of enjoying yourball, kissed the lady, quizzed the papa, and walked into the cunningFred Power.               Yours,FRANK WEBBER."The Widow Malone, ohone!" is at your service.Had a thunderbolt fallen at his feet, his astonishment could not haveequalled the result of this revelation. He stamped, swore, raved, laughed,and almost went deranged. The joke was soon spread through the room, andfrom Sir George to poor Lucy, now covered with blushes at her part in thetransaction, all was laughter and astonishment."Who is he? That is the question," said Sir George, who, with all theridicule of the affair hanging over him, felt no common relief at thediscovery of the imposition."A friend of O'Malley's," said Power, delighted, in his defeat, to involveanother with himself."Indeed!" said the general, regarding me with a look of a very mingledcast."Quite true, sir," said I, replying to the accusation that his mannerimplied; "but equally so, that I neither knew of his plot nor recognizedhim when here.""I am perfectly sure of it, my boy," said the general; "and, after all, itwas an excellent joke,--carried a little too far, it's true; eh, Lucy?"But Lucy either heard not, or affected not to hear; and after some littlefurther assurance that he felt not the least annoyed, the general turned toconverse with some other friends; while I, burning with indignation againstWebber, took a cold farewell of Miss Dashwood, and retired.CHAPTER XX.THE LAST NIGHT IN TRINITY.How I might have met Master Webber after his impersonation of Miss Macan, Icannot possibly figure to myself. Fortunately, indeed, for all parties, heleft town early the next morning; and it was some weeks ere he returned.In the meanwhile I became a daily visitor at the general's, dined thereusually three or four times a week, rode out with Lucy constantly, andaccompanied her every evening either to the theatre or into society. SirGeorge, possibly from my youth, seemed to pay little attention to anintimacy which he perceived every hour growing closer, and frequently gavehis daughter into my charge in our morning excursions on horseback. As forme, my happiness was all but perfect. I loved, and already began to hopethat I was not regarded with indifference; for although Lucy's manner neverabsolutely evinced any decided preference towards me, yet many slight andcasual circumstances served to show me that my attentions to her wereneither unnoticed nor uncared for. Among the many gay and dashingcompanions of our rides, I remarked that, however anxious for such adistinction, none ever seemed to make any way in her good graces; and I hadalready gone far in my self-deception that I was destined for good fortune,when a circumstance which occurred one morning at length served to open myeyes to the truth, and blast by one fatal breath the whole harvest of myhopes.We were about to set out one morning on a long ride, when Sir George'spresence was required by the arrival of an officer who had been sent fromthe Horse Guards on official business. After half an hour's delay, ColonelCameron, the officer in question, was introduced, and entered intoconversation with our party. He had only landed in England from thePeninsula a few days before, and had abundant information of the stirringevents enacting there. At the conclusion of an anecdote,--I forgetwhat,--he turned suddenly round to Miss Dashwood, who was standing besideme, and said in a low voice:--"And now, Miss Dashwood, I am reminded of a commission I promised a veryold brother officer to perform. Can I have one moment's conversation withyou in the window?"As he spoke, I perceived that he crumpled beneath his glove something likea letter."To me?" said Lucy, with a look of surprise that sadly puzzled me whetherto ascribe it to coquetry or innocence,--"to me?""To you," said the colonel, bowing; "and I am sadly deceived by my friendHammersley--""Captain Hammersley?" said she, blushing deeply as she spoke.I heard no more. She turned towards the window with the colonel, and all Isaw was that he handed her a letter, which, having hastily broken open andthrown her eyes over, she grew at first deadly pale, then red, and whileher eyes filled with tears, I heard her say, "How like him! How trulygenerous this is!" I listened for no more; my brain was wheeling round andmy senses reeling. I turned and left the room; in another moment I was onmy horse, galloping from the spot, despair, in all its blackness, in myheart, and in my broken-hearted misery, wishing for death.I was miles away from Dublin ere I remembered well what had occurred, andeven then not over clearly. The fact that Lucy Dashwood, whom I imaginedto be my own in heart, loved another, was all that I really knew. Thatone thought was all my mind was capable of, and in it my misery, mywretchedness were centred.Of all the grief my life has known, I have had no moments like the longhours of that dreary night. My sorrow, in turn, took every shape andassumed every guise. Now I remembered how the Dashwoods had courted myintimacy and encouraged my visits,--how Lucy herself had evinced in athousand ways that she felt a preference for me. I called to mind the manyunequivocal proofs I had given her that my feeling at least was no commonone; and yet, how had she sported with my affections, and jested with myhappiness! That she loved Hammersley I had now a palpable proof. That thisaffection must have been mutual, and prosecuted at the very moment I wasnot only professing my own love for her, but actually receiving all but anavowal of its return,--oh, it was too, too base! and in my deepest heart Icursed my folly, and vowed never to see her more.It was late on the next day ere I retraced my steps towards town, my heartsad and heavy, careless what became of me for the future, and ponderingwhether I should not at once give up my college career and return to myuncle. When I reached my chambers, all was silent and comfortless; Webberhad not returned; my servant was from home; and I felt myself more thanever wretched in the solitude of what had been so oft the scene of noisyand festive gayety. I sat some hours in a half-musing state, every saddepressing thought that blighted hopes can conjure up rising in turn beforeme. A loud knocking at the door at length aroused me. I got up and openedit. No one was there. I looked around as well as the coming gloom ofevening would permit, but saw nothing. I listened, and heard, at somedistance off, my friend Power's manly voice as he sang,--"Oh, love is the soul of an Irish dragoon!"I hallooed out, "Power!""Eh, O'Malley, is that you?" inquired he. "Why, then, it seems it requiredsome deliberation whether you opened your door or not. Why, man, you canhave no great gift of prophecy, or you wouldn't have kept me so longthere.""And have you been so?""Only twenty minutes; for as I saw the key in the lock, I had determined tosucceed if noise would do it.""How strange! I never heard it.""Glorious sleeper you must be; but come, my dear fellow, you don't appearaltogether awake yet.""I have not been quite well these few days.""Oh, indeed! The Dashwoods thought there must have been something of thatkind the matter by your brisk retreat. They sent me after you yesterday;but wherever you went, Heaven knows. I never could come up with you; sothat your great news has been keeping these twenty-four hours longer thanneed be.""I am not aware what you allude to.""Well, you are not over likely to be the wiser when you hear it, if you canassume no more intelligent look than that. Why, man, there's great luck instore for you.""As how, pray? Come, Power, out with it; though I can't pledge myself tofeel half as grateful for my good fortune as I should do. What is it?""You know Cameron?""I have seen him," said I, reddening."Well, old Camy, as we used to call him, has brought over, among his othernews, your gazette.""My gazette! What do you mean?""Confound your uncommon stupidity this evening! I mean, man, that you areone of us,--gazetted to the 14th Light,--the best fellows for love, war,and whiskey that ever sported a sabretasche.'Oh, love is the soul of an Irish dragoon!'By Jove, I am as delighted to have rescued you from the black harness ofthe King's Bench as though you had been a prisoner there! Know, then,friend Charley, that on Wednesday we proceed to Fermoy, join some scoreof gallant fellows,--all food for powder,--and, with the aid of a rottentransport and the stormy winds that blow, will be bronzing our beautifulfaces in Portugal before the month's out. But come, now, let's see aboutsupper. Some of ours are coming over here at eleven, and I promised them adevilled bone; and as it's your last night among these classic precincts,let us have a shindy of it."While I despatched Mike to Morrison's to provide supper, I heard from Powerthat Sir George Dashwood had interested himself so strongly for me that Ihad obtained my cornetcy in the 14th; that, fearful lest any disappointmentmight arise, he had never mentioned the matter to me, but that he hadpreviously obtained my uncle's promise to concur in the arrangement if hisnegotiation succeeded. It had so done, and now the long-sought-for objectof many days was within my grasp. But, alas, the circumstance which lent itall its fascinations was a vanished dream; and what but two days before hadrendered my happiness perfect, I listened to listlessly and almost withoutinterest. Indeed, my first impulse at finding that I owed my promotion toSir George was to return a positive refusal of the cornetcy; but then Iremembered how deeply such conduct would hurt my poor uncle, to whom Inever could give an adequate explanation. So I heard Power in silence tothe end, thanked him sincerely for his own good-natured kindness in thematter, which already, by the interest he had taken in me, went far to healthe wounds that my own solitary musings were deepening in my heart. Ateighteen, fortunately, consolations are attainable that become moredifficult at eight-and-twenty, and impossible at eight-and-thirty.While Power continued to dilate upon the delights of a soldier's life--atheme which many a boyish dream had long since made hallowed to mythoughts--I gradually felt my enthusiasm rising, and a certain throbbing atmy heart betrayed to me that, sad and dispirited as I felt, there was stillwithin that buoyant spirit which youth possesses as its privilege, andwhich answers to the call of enterprise as the war-horse to the trumpet.That a career worthy of manhood, great, glorious, and inspiriting, openedbefore me, coming so soon after the late downfall of my hopes, was initself a source of such true pleasure that ere long I listened to myfriend, and heard his narrative with breathless interest. A lingering senseof pique, too, had its share in all this. I longed to come forward in somemanly and dashing part, where my youth might not be ever remembered againstme, and when, having brought myself to the test, I might no longer belooked upon and treated as a boy.We were joined at length by the other officers of the 14th, and, to thenumber of twelve, sat down to supper.It was to be my last night in Old Trinity, and we resolved that thefarewell should be a solemn one. Mansfield, one of the wildest youngfellows in the regiment, had vowed that the leave-taking should becommemorated by some very decisive and open expressions of our feelings,and had already made some progress in arrangements for blowing up the greatbell, which had more than once obtruded upon our morning convivialities;but he was overruled by his more discreet associates, and we at lengthassumed our places at table, in the midst of which stood a hecatombof all my college equipments, cap, gown, bands, etc. A funeral pile ofclassics was arrayed upon the hearth, surmounted by my "Book on theCellar," and a punishment-roll waved its length, like a banner, over thedoomed heroes of Greece and Rome.It is seldom that any very determined attempt to be gay par excellencehas a perfect success, but certainly upon this evening ours had. Songs,good stories, speeches, toasts, high visions of the campaign before us, thewild excitement which such a meeting cannot be free from, gradually, asthe wine passed from hand to hand, seized upon all, and about four in themorning, such was the uproar we caused, and so terrific the noise of ourproceedings, that the accumulated force of porters, sent one by one todemand admission, was now a formidable body at the door, and Mike at lastcame in to assure us that the bursar,--the most dread official of allcollegians,--was without, and insisted, with a threat of his heaviestdispleasure in case of refusal, that the door should be opened.A committee of the whole house immediately sat upon the question; and itwas at length resolved, nemine contradicente, that the request should becomplied with. A fresh bowl of punch, in honor of our expected guest, wasimmediately concocted, a new broil put on the gridiron, and having seatedourselves with as great a semblance of decorum as four bottles a man admitsof, Curtis the junior captain, being most drunk, was deputed to receive thebursar at the door, and introduce him to our august presence.Mike's instructions were, that immediately on Dr. Stone the bursarentering, the door was to be slammed to, and none of his followersadmitted. This done, the doctor was to be ushered in and left to our politeattentions.A fresh thundering from without scarcely left time for furtherdeliberation; and at last Curtis moved towards the door in execution of hismission."Is there any one there?" said Mike, in a tone of most unsophisticatedinnocence, to a rapping that, having lasted three quarters of an hour,threatened now to break in the panel. "Is there any one there?""Open the door this instant,--the senior bursar desires you,--thisinstant.""Sure it's night, and we're all in bed," said Mike."Mr. Webber, Mr. O'Malley," said the bursar, now boiling with indignation,"I summon you, in the name of the board, to admit me.""Let the gemman in," hiccoughed Curtis; and at the same instant theheavy bars were withdrawn, and the door opened, but so sparingly as withdifficulty to permit the passage of the burly figure of the bursar.Forcing his way through, and regardless of what became of the rest, hepushed on vigorously through the antechamber, and before Curtis couldperform his functions of usher, stood in the midst of us. What were hisfeelings at the scene before him, Heaven knows. The number of figures inuniform at once betrayed how little his jurisdiction extended to the greatmass of the company, and he immediately turned towards me."Mr. Webber--""O'Malley, if you please, Mr. Bursar," said I, bowing with, mostceremonious politeness."No matter, sir; arcades ambo, I believe.""Both archdeacons," said Melville, translating, with a look of witheringcontempt upon the speaker.The doctor continued, addressing me,--"May I ask, sir, if you believe yourself possessed of any privilege forconverting this university into a common tavern?""I wish to Heaven he did," said Curtis; "capital tap your old commons wouldmake.""Really, Mr. Bursar," replied I, modestly, "I had begun to flatter myselfthat our little innocent gayety had inspired you with the idea of joiningour party.""I humbly move that the old cove in the gown do take the chair," sangout one. "All who are of this opinion say, 'Ay.'" A perfect yell of ayesfollowed this. "All who are of the contrary say, 'No.' The ayes have it."Before the luckless doctor had a moment for thought, his legs were liftedfrom under him, and he was jerked, rather than placed, upon a chair, andput sitting upon the table."Mr. O'Malley, your expulsion within twenty-four hours--""Hip, hip, hurra, hurra, hurra!" drowned the rest, while Power, taking offthe doctor's cap, replaced it by a foraging cap, very much to the amusementof the party."There is no penalty the law permits of that I shall not--""Help the doctor," said Melville, placing a glass of punch in hisunconscious hand."Now for a 'Viva la Compagnie!'" said Telford, seating himself at thepiano, and playing the first bars of that well-known air, to which, in ourmeetings, we were accustomed to improvise a doggerel in turn."I drink to the graces, Law, Physic, Divinity,Viva la Compagnie!And here's to the worthy old Bursar of Trinity,Viva la Compagnie!""Viva, viva la va!" etc., were chorussed with a shout that shook the oldwalls, while Power took up the strain:"Though with lace caps and gowns they look so like asses,Viva la Compagnie!"They'd rather have punch than the springs of Parnassus,Viva la Compagnie!What a nose the old gentleman has, by the way,Viva la Compagnie!Since he smelt out the Devil from Botany Bay,[1]Viva la Compagnie![Footnote:1 Botany Bay was the slang name given by college men to a newsquare rather remotely situated from the remainder of the college.]Words cannot give even the faintest idea of the poor bursar's feelingswhile these demoniacal orgies were enacting around him. Held fast in hischair by Lechmere and another, he glowered on the riotous mob around like amaniac, and astonishment that such liberties could be taken with one in hissituation seemed to have surpassed even his rage and resentment; and everynow and then a stray thought would flash across his mind that we weremad,--a sentiment which, unfortunately, our conduct was but too wellcalculated to inspire."So you're the morning lecturer, old gentleman, and have just dropped inhere in the way of business; pleasant life you must have of it," saidCasey, now by far the most tipsy man present."If you think, Mr. O'Malley, that the events of this evening are to endhere--""Very far from it, Doctor," said Power; "I'll draw up a little account ofthe affair for 'Saunders.' They shall hear of it in every corner and nookof the kingdom.""The bursar of Trinity shall be a proverb for a good fellow that loveth hislush," hiccoughed out Fegan."And if you believe that such conduct is academical," said the doctor, witha withering sneer."Perhaps not," lisped Melville, tightening his belt; "but it's devilishconvivial,--eh, Doctor?""Is that like him?" said Moreton, producing a caricature which he had justsketched."Capital,--very good,--perfect. M'Cleary shall have it in his window bynoon to-day," said Power.At this instant some of the combustibles disposed among the rejectedhabiliments of my late vocation caught fire, and squibs, crackers, anddetonating shots went off on all sides. The bursar, who had not been deafto several hints and friendly suggestions about setting fire to him,blowing him up, etc., with one vigorous spring burst from his antagonists,and clearing the table at a bound, reached the floor. Before he could beseized, he had gained the door, opened it, and was away. We gave chase,yelling like so many devils. But wine and punch, songs and speeches, haddone their work, and more than one among the pursuers measured his lengthupon the pavement; while the terrified bursar, with the speed of terror,held on his way, and gained his chambers by about twenty yards in advanceof Power and Melville, whose pursuit only ended when the oaken panel of thedoor shut them out from their victim. One loud cheer beneath his windowserved for our farewell to our friend, and we returned to my rooms. Bythis time a regiment of those classic functionaries ycleped porters hadassembled around the door, and seemed bent upon giving battle in honorof their maltreated ruler; but Power explained to them, in a neat speechreplete with Latin quotations, that their cause was a weak one, that wewere more than their match, and finally proposed to them to finish thepunch-bowl, to which we were really incompetent,--a motion that metimmediate acceptance; and old Duncan, with his helmet in one hand and agoblet in the other, wished me many happy days and every luck in this lifeas I stepped from the massive archway, and took my last farewell of OldTrinity.Should any kind reader feel interested as to the ulterior course assumed bythe bursar, I have only to say that the terrors of the "Board" were neverfulminated against me, harmless and innocent as I should have esteemedthem. The threat of giving publicity to the entire proceedings by thepapers, and the dread of figuring in a sixpenny caricature in M'Cleary'swindow, were too much for the worthy doctor, and he took the wiser courseunder the circumstances, and held his peace about the matter. I, too, havedone so for many a year, and only now recall the scene among the wildtransactions of early days and boyish follies.CHAPTER XXITHE PHOENIX PARK.What a glorious thing it is when our first waking thoughts not only dispelsome dark, depressing dream, but arouse us to the consciousness of a newand bright career suddenly opening before us, buoyant in hope, rich inpromise for the future! Life has nothing better than this. The bold springby which the mind clears the depth that separates misery from happiness isecstasy itself; and then what a world of bright visions come teeming beforeus,--what plans we form; what promises we make to ourselves in our ownhearts; how prolific is the dullest imagination; how excursive the tamestfancy, at such a moment! In a few short and fleeting seconds, the events ofa whole life are planned and pictured before us. Dreams of happinessand visions of bliss, of which all our after-years are insufficient toeradicate the prestige, come in myriads about us; and from that narrowaperture through which this new hope pierces into our heart, a flood oflight is poured that illumines our path to the very verge of the grave. Howmany a success in after-days is reckoned but as one step in that ladder ofambition some boyish review has framed, perhaps, after all, destined to bethe first and only one! With what triumph we hail some goal attained, someobject of our wishes gained, less for its present benefit, than as theaccomplishment of some youthful prophecy, when picturing to our hearts allthat we would have in life, we whispered within us the flattery of success.Who is there who has not had some such moment; and who would exchangeit, with all the delusive and deceptive influences by which it comessurrounded, for the greatest actual happiness he has partaken of? Alas,alas, it is only in the boundless expanse of such imaginations, unreal andfictitious as they are, that we are truly blessed! Our choicest blessingsin life come even so associated with some sources of care that the cup ofenjoyment is not pure but dregged in bitterness.To such a world of bright anticipation did I awake on the morning after theevents I have detailed in the last chapter. The first thing my eyes fellupon was an official letter from the Horse Guards:--"The commander of the forces desires that Mr. O'Malley will reporthimself, immediately on the receipt of this letter, at the headquartersof the regiment to which he is gazetted."Few and simple as the lines were, how brimful of pleasure they sounded tomy ears. The regiment to which I was gazetted! And so I was a soldier atlast! The first wish of my boyhood was then really accomplished. And myuncle, what will he say; what will he think?"A letter, sir, by the post," said Mike, at the moment.I seized it eagerly; it came from home, but was in Considine's handwriting.How my heart failed me as I turned to look at the seal. "Thank God!" saidI, aloud, on perceiving that it was a red one. I now tore it open andread:--My Dear Charley,--Godfrey, being laid up with the gout, hasdesired me to write to you by this day's post. Your appointment tothe 14th, notwithstanding all his prejudices about the army, hasgiven him sincere pleasure. I believe, between ourselves, that yourcollege career, of which he has heard something, convinced him thatyour forte did not lie in the classics; you know I said so always, butnobody minded me. Your new prospects are all that your best friendscould wish for you: you begin early; your corps is a crack one; youare ordered for service. What could you have more?Your uncle hopes, if you can get a few days' leave, that you willcome down here before you join, and I hope so too; for he is unusuallylow-spirited, and talks about his never seeing you again, andall that sort of thing.I have written to Merivale, your colonel, on this subject, as wellas generally on your behalf. We were cornets together forty yearsago. A strict fellow you'll find him, but a trump on service. Ifyou can't manage the leave, write a long letter home at all events.And so, God bless you, and all success!Yours sincerely,W. Considine.I had thought of writing you a long letter of advice for your newcareer; and, indeed, half accomplished one. After all, however, Ican tell you little that your own good sense will not teach you as yougo on; and experience is ever better than precept. I know of butone rule in life which admits of scarcely any exception, and havingfollowed it upwards of sixty years, approve of it only the more:Never quarrel when you can help it; but meet any man,--yourtailor, your hairdresser,--if he wishes to have you out.W. C.I had scarcely come to the end of this very characteristic epistle, whentwo more letters were placed upon my table. One was from Sir GeorgeDashwood, inviting me to dinner to meet some of my "brother officers."How my heart beat at the expression. The other was a short note, marked"Private," from my late tutor, Dr. Mooney, saying, "that if I made asuitable apology to the bursar for the late affair at my room, he mightprobably be induced to abandon any further step; otherwise--" then followedinnumerable threats about fine, penalties, expulsion, etc., that fell mostharmlessly upon my ears. I accepted the invitation; declined the apology;and having ordered my horse, cantered off to the barracks to consult myfriend Power as to all the minor details of my career.As the dinner hour grew near, my thoughts became again fixed upon MissDashwood; and a thousand misgivings crossed my mind as to whether I shouldhave nerve enough to meet her, without disclosing in my manner the alteredstate of my feelings; a possibility which I now dreaded fully as much as Ihad longed some days before to avow my affection for her, however slightits prospect of return. All my valiant resolves and well-contrived plansfor appearing unmoved and indifferent in her presence, with which I storedmy mind while dressing and when on the way to dinner, were, however,needless, for it was a party exclusively of men; and as the coffee wasserved in the dining-room, no move was made to the drawing-room by any ofthe company. "Quite as well as it is!" was my muttered opinion, as I gotinto my cab at the door. "All is at an end as regards me in her esteem, andI must not spend my days sighing for a young lady that cares for another."Very reasonable, very proper resolutions these; but, alas! I went home tobed, only to think half the night long of the fair Lucy, and dream of herthe remainder of it.When morning dawned my first thought was, Shall I see her once more? ShallI leave her forever thus abruptly? Or, rather, shall I not unburden mybosom of its secret, confess my love, and say farewell? I felt such acourse much more in unison with my wishes than the day before; and as Powerhad told me that before a week we should present ourselves at Fermoy, Iknew that no time was to be lost.My determination was taken. I ordered my horse, and early as it was, rodeout to the Royal Hospital. My heart beat so strongly as I rode up to thedoor that I half resolved to return. I rang the bell. Sir George was intown. Miss Dashwood had just gone, five minutes before, to spend some daysat Carton. "It is fate!" thought I as I turned from the spot and walkedslowly beside my horse towards Dublin.In the few days that intervened before my leaving town, my time wasoccupied from morning to night; the various details of my uniform, outfit,etc., were undertaken for me by Power. My horses were sent for to Galway;and I myself, with innumerable persons to see, and a mass of business totransact, contrived at least three times a day to ride out to the RoyalHospital, always to make some trifling inquiry for Sir George, and alwaysto hear repeated that Miss Dashwood had not returned.Thus passed five of my last six days in Dublin; and as the morning ofthe last opened, it was with a sorrowing spirit that I felt my hour ofdeparture approach without one only opportunity of seeing Lucy, even tosay good-by. While Mike was packing in one corner, and I in another wasconcluding a long letter to my poor uncle, my door opened and Webberentered."Eh, O'Malley, I'm only in time to say adieu, it seems. To my surprise thismorning I found you had cut the 'Silent Sister.' I feared I should be toolate to catch one glimpse of you ere you started for the wars.""You are quite right, Master Frank, and I scarcely expected to have seenyou. Your last brilliant achievement at Sir George's very nearly involvedme in a serious scrape.""A mere trifle. How confoundedly silly Power must have looked, eh? Shouldlike so much to have seen his face. He booked up next day,--very properfellow. By-the-bye, O'Malley, I rather like the little girl; she isdecidedly pretty, and her foot,--did you remark her foot?--capital.""Yes, she's very good-looking," said I, carelessly."I'm thinking of cultivating her a little," said Webber, pulling up hiscravat and adjusting his hair at the glass. "She's spoiled by all thetinsel vaporing of her hussar and aide-de-camp acquaintances; but somethingmay be done for her, eh?""With your most able assistance and kind intentions.""That's what I mean exactly. Sorry you're going,--devilish sorry. Youserved out Stone gloriously: perhaps it's as well, though,--you know they'dhave expelled you; but still something might turn up. Soldiering is abad style of thing, eh? How the old general did take his sister-in-law'spresence to heart! But he must forgive and forget, for I am going to bevery great friends with him and Lucy. Where are you going now?""I am about to try a new horse before troops," said I. "He's stanch enoughwith the cry of the fox-pack in his ears; but I don't know how he'll standa peal of artillery.""Well, come along," said Webber; "I'll ride with you." So saying, wemounted and set off to the Park, where two regiments of cavalry and somehorse artillery were ordered for inspection.The review was over when we reached the exercising ground, and we slowlywalked our horses towards the end of the Park, intending to return toDublin by the road. We had not proceeded far, when, some hundred yards inadvance, we perceived an officer riding with a lady, followed by an orderlydragoon."There he goes," said Webber; "I wonder if he'd ask me to dinner, if I wereto throw myself in his way?""Who do you mean?" said I."Sir George Dashwood, to be sure, and, la voil, Miss Lucy. The littledarling rides well, too; how squarely she sits her horse. O'Malley, I've aweakness there; upon my soul I have.""Very possible," said I; "I am aware of another friend of mineparticipating in the sentiment.""One Charles O'Malley, of his Majesty's--""Nonsense, man; no, no. I mean a very different person, and, for all I cansee, with some reason to hope for success.""Oh, as to that, we flatter ourselves the thing does not present any veryconsiderable difficulties.""As how, pray?""Why, of course, like all such matters, a very decisive determination tobe, to do, and to suffer, as Lindley Murray says, carries the day. Tell hershe's an angel every day for three weeks. She may laugh a little at first,but she'll believe it in the end. Tell her that you have not the slightestprospect of obtaining her affections, but still persist in loving her.That, finally, you must die from the effects of despair, etc., but ratherlike the notion of it than otherwise. That you know she has no fortune;that you haven't a sixpence; and who should marry, if people whose positionin the world was similar did not?""But halt; pray, how are you to get time and place for all such interestingconversations?""Time and place! Good Heavens, what a question! Is not every hour of thetwenty-four the fittest? Is not every place the most suitable? A suddenpause in the organ of St. Patrick's did, it is true, catch me once in adeclaration of love, but the choir came in to my aid and drowned the lady'sanswer. My dear O'Malley, what could prevent you this instant, if you areso disposed, from doing the amiable to the darling Lucy there?""With the father for an umpire in case we disagreed," said I."Not at all. I should soon get rid of him.""Impossible, my dear friend.""Come now, just for the sake of convincing your obstinacy. If you liketo say good-by to the little girl without a witness, I'll take off thehe-dragon.""You don't mean--""I do, man; I do mean it." So saying, he drew a crimson silk handkerchieffrom his pocket, and fastened it round his waist like an officer's sash.This done, and telling me to keep in their wake for some minutes, he turnedfrom me, and was soon concealed by a copse of white-thorn near us.I had not gone above a hundred yards farther when I heard Sir George'svoice calling for the orderly. I looked and saw Webber at a considerabledistance in front, curvetting and playing all species of antics. Thedistance between the general and myself was now so short that I overheardthe following dialogue with his sentry:--"He's not in uniform, then?""No, sir; he has a round hat.""A round hat!""His sash--""A sword and sash. This is too bad. I'm determined to find him out.""How d'ye do, General?" cried Webber, as he rode towards the trees."Stop, sir!" shouted Sir George."Good-day, Sir George," replied Webber, retiring."Stay where you are, Lucy," said the general as, dashing spurs into hishorse, he sprang forward at a gallop, incensed beyond endurance that hismost strict orders should be so openly and insultingly transgressed.Webber led on to a deep hollow, where the road passed between two smoothslopes, covered with furze-trees, and from which it emerged afterwards inthe thickest and most intricate part of the Park. Sir George dashed boldlyafter, and in less than half a minute both were lost to my view, leaving mein breathless amazement at Master Frank's ingenuity, and some puzzle as tomy own future movements."Now then, or never!" said I, as I pushed boldly forward, and in an instantwas alongside of Miss Dashwood. Her astonishment at seeing me so suddenlyincreased the confusion from which I felt myself suffering, and for someminutes I could scarcely speak. At last I plucked up courage a little, andsaid:--"Miss Dashwood, I have looked most anxiously, for the last four days, forthe moment which chance has now given me. I wished, before I parted foreverwith those to whom I owe already so much, that I should at least speak mygratitude ere I said good-by.""But when do you think of going?""To-morrow. Captain Power, under whose command I am, has received orders toembark immediately for Portugal."I thought--perhaps it was but a thought--that her cheek grew somewhat paleras I spoke; but she remained silent; and I, scarcely knowing what I hadsaid, or whether I had finished, spoke not either."Papa, I'm sure, is not aware," said she, after a long pause, "of yourintention of leaving so soon, for only last night he spoke of some lettershe meant to give you to some friends in the Peninsula; besides, I know,"here she smiled faintly,--"that he destined some excellent advice for yourears, as to your new path in life, for he has an immense opinion of thevalue of such to a young officer.""I am, indeed, most grateful to Sir George, and truly never did any onestand more in need of counsel than I do." This was said half musingly, andnot intended to be heard."Then, pray, consult papa," said she, eagerly; "he is much attached to you,and will, I am certain, do all in his power--""Alas! I fear not, Miss Dashwood.""Why, what can you mean. Has anything so serious occurred?""No, no; I'm but misleading you, and exciting your sympathy with falsepretences. Should I tell you all the truth, you would not pardon, perhapsnot hear me.""You have, indeed, puzzled me; but if there is anything in which myfather--""Less him than his daughter," said I, fixing my eyes full upon her as Ispoke. "Yes, Lucy, I feel I must confess it, cost what it may; I love you.Stay, hear me out; I know the fruitlessness, the utter despair, that awaitssuch a sentiment. My own heart tells me that I am not, cannot be, loved inreturn; yet would I rather cherish in its core my affection, slighted andunblessed, such as it is, than own another heart. I ask for nothing, I hopefor nothing; I merely entreat that, for my truth, I may meet belief, andfor my heart's worship of her whom alone I can love, compassion. I see thatyou at least pity me. Nay, one word more; I have one favor more to ask,--itis my last, my only one. Do not, when time and distance may have separatedus, perhaps forever, think that the expressions I now use are prompted bya mere sudden ebullition of boyish feeling; do not attribute to thecircumstance of my youth alone the warmth of the attachment I profess,--forI swear to you, by every hope that I have, that in my heart of hearts mylove to you is the source and spring of every action in my life, of everyaspiration in my heart; and when I cease to love you, I shall cease tofeel.""And now, farewell,--farewell forever!" I pressed her hand to my lips, gaveone long, last look, turned my horse rapidly away, and ere a minute was farout of sight of where I had left her.CHAPTER XXII.THE ROAD.Power was detained in town by some orders from the adjutant-general, sothat I started for Cork the next morning with no other companion than myservant Mike. For the first few stages upon the road, my own thoughtssufficiently occupied me to render me insensible or indifferent to allelse. My opening career, the prospects my new life as a soldier held out,my hopes of distinction, my love of Lucy with all its train of doubts andfears, passed in review before me, and I took no note of time till far pastnoon. I now looked to the back part of the coach, where Mike's voice hadbeen, as usual, in the ascendant for some time, and perceived that he wassurrounded by an eager auditory of four raw recruits, who, under the careof a sergeant, were proceeding to Cork to be enrolled in their regiment.The sergeant, whose minutes of wakefulness were only those when the coachstopped to change horses, and when he got down to mix a "summat hot," paidlittle attention to his followers, leaving them perfectly free in all theirmovements, to listen to Mike's eloquence and profit by his suggestions,should they deem fit. Master Michael's services to his new acquaintances,I began to perceive, were not exactly of the same nature as Dibdin isreported to have rendered to our navy in the late war. Far from it. Histheme was no contemptuous disdain for danger; no patriotic enthusiasmto fight for home and country; no proud consciousness of British valor,mingled with the appropriate hatred of our mutual enemies,--on thecontrary, Mike's eloquence was enlisted for the defendant. He detailed,and in no unimpressive way either, the hardships of a soldier's life,--itsdangers, its vicissitudes, its chances, its possible penalties, itsinevitably small rewards; and, in fact, so completely did he work on thefeelings of his hearers that I perceived more than one glance exchangedbetween the victims that certainly betokened anything save the resolve tofight for King George. It was at the close of a long and most powerfulappeal upon the superiority of any other line in life, petty larceny andsmall felony inclusive, that he concluded with the following quotation:--"Thrue for ye, boys!'With your red scarlet coat,You're as proud as a goat,And your long cap and feather.'But, by the piper that played before Moses! it's more whipping norgingerbread is going on among them, av ye knew but all, and heerd themisfortune that happened to my father.""And was he a sodger?" inquired one."Troth was he, more sorrow to him; and wasn't he a'most whipped one day fordoing what he was bid?""Musha, but that was hard!""To be sure it was hard; but faix, when my father seen that they didn'tknow their own minds, he thought, anyhow, he knew his, so he ran away,--anddevil a bit of him they ever cotch afther. May be ye might like to hear thestory; and there's instruction in it for yez, too."A general request to this end being preferred by the company, Mike took ashrewd look at the sergeant, to be sure that he was still sleeping, settledhis coat comfortably across his knees, and began:--Well, it's a good many years ago my father 'listed in the North Cork, justto oblige Mr. Barry, the landlord there. For,' says he, 'Phil,' says he,'it's not a soldier ye'll be at all, but my own man, to brush my clothesand go errands, and the like o' that; and the king, long life to him! willhelp to pay ye for your trouble. Ye understand me?' Well, my father agreed,and Mr. Barry was as good as his word. Never a guard did my father mount,nor as much as a drill had he, nor a roll-call, nor anything at all, saveand except wait on the captain, his master, just as pleasant as need be,and no inconvenience in life."Well, for three years this went on as I am telling, and the regiment wasordered down to Bantry, because of a report that the 'boys' was risingdown there; and the second evening there was a night party patrolling withCaptain Barry for six hours in the rain, and the captain, God be marcifulto him! tuk could and died. More by token, they said it was drink, butmy father says it wasn't: 'for' says he, 'after he tuk eight tumblerscomfortable,' my father mixed the ninth, and the captain waived his handthis way, as much as to say he'd have no more. 'Is it that ye mean?' saysmy father; and the captain nodded. 'Musha, but it's sorry I am,' says myfather, 'to see you this way; for ye must be bad entirely to leave off inthe beginning of the evening.' And thrue for him, the captain was dead inthe morning."A sorrowful day it was for my father when he died. It was the finestplace in the world; little to do, plenty of divarsion, and a kind man hewas,--when he was drunk. Well, then, when the captain was buried and allwas over, my father hoped they'd be for letting him away, as he said,'Sure, I'm no use in life to anybody, save the man that's gone, for hisways are all I know, and I never was a sodger.' But, upon my conscience,they had other thoughts in their heads, for they ordered him into the ranksto be drilled just like the recruits they took the day before."'Musha, isn't this hard?' said my father. 'Here I am, an ould vitrin thatought to be discharged on a pension with two-and-sixpence a day, obligedto go capering about the barrack-yard, practising the goose-step, or someother nonsense not becoming my age nor my habits.' But so it was. Well,this went on for some time, and sure, if they were hard on my father,hadn't he his revenge; for he nigh broke their hearts with his stupidity.Oh, nothing in life could equal him! Devil a thing, no matter how easy, hecould learn at all; and so far from caring for being in confinement, it wasthat he liked best. Every sergeant in the regiment had a trial of him, butall to no good; and he seemed striving so hard to learn all the while thatthey were loath to punish him, the ould rogue!"This was going on for some time, when, one day, news came in that abody of the rebels, as they called them, was coming down from the Gap ofMulnavick to storm the town and burn all before them. The whole regimentwas of coorse under arms, and great preparations was made for a battle.Meanwhile patrols were ordered to scour the roads, and sentries posted atevery turn of the way and every rising ground to give warning when the boyscame in sight; and my father was placed at the Bridge of Drumsnag, in thewildest and bleakest part of the whole country, with nothing but furzemountains on every side, and a straight road going over the top of them."'This is pleasant,' says my father, as soon as they left him there aloneby himself, with no human creature to speak to, nor a whiskey-shop withinten miles of him; 'cowld comfort,' says he, 'on a winter's day; and faix,but I have a mind to give ye the slip.'"Well, he put his gun down on the bridge, and he lit his pipe, and he satdown under an ould tree and began to ruminate upon his affairs."'Oh, then, it's wishing it well I am,' says he, 'for sodgering; and badluck to the hammer that struck the shilling that 'listed me, that's all,'for he was mighty low in his heart."Just then a noise came rattling down near him. He listened, and beforehe could get on his legs, down comes' the general, ould Cohoon, with anorderly after him."'Who goes there?' says my father."'The round,' says the general, looking about all the time to see where wasthe sentry, for my father was snug under the tree."'What round?' says my father."'The grand round,' says the general, more puzzled than afore."'Pass on, grand round, and God save you kindly!' says my father, puttinghis pipe in his mouth again, for he thought all was over."'D--n your soul, where are you?' says the general, for sorrow bit of myfather could he see yet."'It's here I am,' says he, 'and a cowld place I have of it; and if itwasn't for the pipe I'd be lost entirely.'"The words wasn't well out of his mouth when the general began laughing,till ye'd think he'd fall off his horse; and the dragoon behind him--moreby token, they say it wasn't right for him--laughed as loud as himself."'Yer a droll sentry,' says the general, as soon as he could speak."'Be-gorra, it's little fun there's left in me,' says my father, 'with thisdrilling, and parading, and blackguarding about the roads all night.'"'And is this the way you salute your officer?' says the general."'Just so,' says my father; 'devil a more politeness ever they taught me.'"'What regiment do you belong to?' says the general."'The North Cork, bad luck to them!' says my father, with a sigh."'They ought to be proud of ye,' says the general."'I'm sorry for it,' says my father, sorrowfully, 'for may be they'll keepme the longer.'"'Well, my good fellow,' says the general, 'I haven't more time to wastehere; but let me teach you something before I go. Whenever your officerpasses, it's your duty to present to him.'"'Arrah, it's jokin' ye are,' says my father."'No, I'm in earnest,' says he, 'as ye might learn, to your cost, if Ibrought you to a court-martial.'"'Well, there's no knowing,' says my father, 'what they'd be up to; butsure, if that's all, I'll do it, with all "the veins," whenever yer comingthis way again.'"The general began to laugh again here; but said,--'I'm coming back in the evening,' says he, 'and mind you don't forget yourrespect to your officer.'"'Never fear, sir,' says my father; 'and many thanks to you for yourkindness for telling me.'"Away went the general, and the orderly after him, and in ten minutes theywere out of sight."The night was falling fast, and one half of the mountain was quite darkalready, when my father began to think they were forgetting him entirely.He looked one way, and he looked another, but sorra bit of a sergeant'sguard was coming to relieve him. There he was, fresh and fasting, anddaren't go for the bare life. 'I'll give you a quarter of an hour more,'says my father, 'till the light leaves that rock up there; after that,'says he, 'by the Mass! I'll be off, av it cost me what it may.'"Well, sure enough, his courage was not needed this time; for what didhe see at the same moment but a shadow of something coming down the roadopposite the bridge. He looked again; and then he made out the generalhimself, that was walking his horse down the steep part of the mountain,followed by the orderly. My father immediately took up his musket off thewall, settled his belts, shook the ashes out of his pipe and put it intohis pocket, making himself as smart and neat-looking as he could be,determining, when ould Cohoon came up, to ask him for leave to go home, atleast for the night. Well, by this time the general was turning a sharppart of the cliff that looks down upon the bridge, from where you mightlook five miles round on every side. 'He sees me,' says my father; 'butI'll be just as quick as himself.' No sooner said than done; for comingforward to the parapet of the bridge, he up with his musket to hisshoulder, and presented it straight at the general. It wasn't well there,when the officer pulled up his horse quite short, and shouted out, 'Sentry!sentry!'"'Anan?' says my father, still covering him."'Down with your musket you rascal. Don't you see it's the grand round?'"'To be sure I do,' says my father, never changing for a minute."'The ruffian will shoot me,' says the general."'Devil a fear,' says my father, 'av it doesn't go off of itself.'"'What do you mean by that, you villian?' says the general, scarcely ableto speak with fright, for every turn he gave on his horse, my fatherfollowed with the gun,--what do you mean?'"'Sure, ain't I presenting?' says my father. 'Blood an ages! do you want meto fire next?'"With that the general drew a pistol from his holster, and took deliberateaim at my father; and there they both stood for five minutes, looking ateach other, the orderly all the while breaking his heart laughing behind arock; for, ye see, the general knew av he retreated that my father mightfire on purpose, and av he came on, that he might fire by chance,--andsorra bit he knew what was best to be done."'Are ye going to pass the evening up there, grand round?' says my father;'for it's tired I'm getting houldin' this so long.'"'Port arms!' shouted the general, as if on parade."'Sure I can't, till yer past,' says my father, angrily; 'and my handstrembling already.'"'By Heavens! I shall be shot,' says the general."'Be-gorra, it's what I'm afraid of,' says my father; and the words wasn'tout of his mouth before off went the musket, bang!--and down fell thegeneral, smack on the ground, senseless. Well the orderly ran out at this,and took him up and examined his wound; but it wasn't a wound at all, onlythe wadding of the gun. For my father--God be kind to him!--ye see, coulddo nothing right; and so he bit off the wrong end of the cartridge when heput it in the gun, and, by reason, there was no bullet in it. Well, fromthat day after they never got a sight of him; for the instant that thegeneral dropped, he sprang over the bridge-wall and got away; andwhat, between living in a lime-kiln for two months, eating nothing butblackberries and sloes, and other disguises, he never returned to the army,but ever after took to a civil situation, and drive a hearse for manyyears."How far Mike's narrative might have contributed to the support of histheory, I am unable to pronounce; for his auditory were, at some distancefrom Cork, made to descend from their lofty position and join a larger bodyof recruits, all proceeding to the same destination, under a strong escortof infantry. For ourselves, we reached the "beautiful city" in due time,and took up our quarters at the Old George Hotel.CHAPTER XXIII.CORK.The undress rehearsal of a new piece, with its dirty-booted actors, itscloaked and hooded actresses en papillote, bears about the same relationto the gala, wax-lit, and bespangled ballet, as the raw young gentlemanof yesterday to the epauletted, belted, and sabretasched dragoon, whosetransformation is due to a few hours of head-quarters, and a few interviewswith the adjutant.So, at least, I felt it; and it was with a very perfect concurrence in hisMajesty's taste in a uniform, and a most entire approval of the regimentaltailor, that I strutted down George's Street a few days after my arrival inCork. The transports had not as yet come round; there was a great doubt oftheir doing so for a week or so longer; and I found myself as thedashing cornet, the centre of a thousand polite attentions and most kindcivilities.The officer under whose orders I was placed for the time was a great friendof Sir George Dashwood's, and paid me, in consequence, much attention.Major Dalrymple had been on the staff from the commencement of his militarycareer, had served in the commissariat for some time, was much on foreignstations; but never, by any of the many casualties of his life, had he seenwhat could be called service. His ideas of the soldier's profession were,therefore, what might almost be as readily picked up by a commission in thebattle-axe guards, as one in his Majesty's Fiftieth. He was now a speciesof district paymaster, employed in a thousand ways, either inspectingrecruits, examining accounts, revising sick certificates, or receivingcontracts for mess beef. Whether the nature of his manifold occupations hadenlarged the sphere of his talents and ambition, or whether the abilitieshad suggested the variety of his duties, I know not, but truly the majorwas a man of all work. No sooner did a young ensign join his regiment atCork, than Major Dalrymple's card was left at his quarters; the next daycame the major himself; the third brought an invitation to dinner; on thefourth he was told to drop in, in the evening; and from thenceforward,he was the ami de la maison, in company with numerous others asnewly-fledged and inexperienced as himself.One singular feature of the society at the house was that although themajor was as well known as the flag on Spike Island, yet somehow, noofficer above the rank of an ensign was ever to be met with there. Itwas not that he had not a large acquaintance; in fact, the "How are you,Major?" "How goes it, Dalrymple?" that kept everlastingly going on ashe walked the streets, proved the reverse; but strange enough, hispredilections leaned towards the newly gazetted, far before the bronzedand seared campaigners who had seen the world, and knew more about it. Thereasons for this line of conduct were twofold. In the first place, therewas not an article of outfit, from a stock to a sword-belt, that he couldnot and did not supply to the young officer,--from the gorget of theinfantry to the shako of the grenadier, all came within his province;not that he actually kept a magasin of these articles, but he had socompletely interwoven his interests with those of numerous shopkeepers inCork that he rarely entered a shop over whose door Dalrymple & Co. mightnot have figured on the sign-board. His stables were filled with a perfectinfirmary of superannuated chargers, fattened and conditioned up to amiracle, and groomed to perfection. He could get you--only you--aboutthree dozen of sherry to take out with you as sea-store; he knew of such aservant; he chanced upon such a camp-furniture yesterday in his walks; infact, why want for anything? His resources were inexhaustible; his kindnessunbounded.Then money was no object,--hang it, you could pay when you liked; whatsignified it? In other words, a bill at thirty-one days, cashed anddiscounted by a friend of the major's, would always do. While such were theunlimited advantages his acquaintance conferred, the sphere of his benefitstook another range. The major had two daughters; Matilda and Fanny were aswell known in the army as Lord Fitzroy Somerset, or Picton, from the Isleof Wight to Halifax, from Cape Coast to Chatham, from Belfast to theBermudas. Where was the subaltern who had not knelt at the shrine of oneor the other, if not of both, and vowed eternal love until a change ofquarters? In plain words, the major's solicitude for the service was such,that, not content with providing the young officer with all the necessaryoutfit of his profession, he longed also to supply him with a comforter forhis woes, a charmer for his solitary hours, in the person of one of hisamiable daughters. Unluckily, however, the necessity for a wife is notenforced by "general orders," as is the cut of your coat, or the length ofyour sabre; consequently, the major's success in the home department of hisdiplomacy was not destined for the same happy results that awaited it whenengaged about drill trousers and camp kettles, and the Misses Dalrympleremained misses through every clime and every campaign. And yet, why wasit so? It is hard to say. What would men have? Matilda was a dark-haired,dark-eyed, romantic-looking girl, with a tall figure and a slender waist,with more poetry in her head than would have turned any ordinary brain;always unhappy, in need of consolation, never meeting with the kindredspirit that understood her, destined to walk the world alone, her fairthoughts smothered in the recesses of her own heart. Devilish hard to standthis, when you began in a kind of platonic friendship on both sides. Morethan one poor fellow nearly succumbed, particularly when she came to quoteCowley, and told him, with tears in her eyes,--"There are hearts that live and love alone," etc.I'm assured that this coup-de-grace rarely failed in being followed bya downright avowal of open love, which, somehow, what between the routecoming, what with waiting for leave from home, etc., never got further thana most tender scene, and exchange of love tokens; and, in fact, such becameso often the termination, that Power swears Matty had to make a firmresolve about cutting off any more hair, fearing a premature baldnessduring the recruiting season.Now, Fanny had selected another arm of the service. Her hair was fair; hereyes blue, laughing, languishing,--mischief-loving blue, with long lashes,and a look in them that was wont to leave its impression rather longer thanyou exactly knew of; then, her figure was petite, but perfect; her feetCanova might have copied; and her hand was a study for Titian; her voice,too, was soft and musical, but full of that gait de coeur that neverfails to charm. While her sister's style was il penserono, hers wasl'allegro; every imaginable thing, place, or person supplied food for hermirth, and her sister's lovers all came in for their share. She huntedwith Smith Barry's hounds; she yachted with the Cove Club; she coursed,practised at a mark with a pistol, and played chicken hazard with allthe cavalry,--for, let it be remarked as a physiological fact, Matilda'sadmirers were almost invariably taken from the infantry, while Fanny'sadorers were as regularly dragoons. Whether the former be the romanticarm of the service, and the latter be more adapted to dull realities, orwhether the phenomenon had any other explanation, I leave to the curious.Now, this arrangement, proceeding upon that principle which has wroughtsuch wonders in Manchester and Sheffield,--the division of labor,--was amost wise and equitable one, each having her one separate and distinctfield of action, interference was impossible; not but that when, as in thepresent instance, cavalry was in the ascendant, Fanny would willingly sparea dragoon or two to her sister, who likewise would repay the debt whenoccasion offered.The mamma--for it is time I should say something of the head of thefamily--was an excessively fat, coarse-looking, dark-skinned personage, ofsome fifty years, with a voice like a boatswain in a quinsy. Heaven cantell, perhaps, why the worthy major allied his fortunes with hers, for shewas evidently of a very inferior rank in society, could never have beenaught than downright ugly, and I never heard that she brought him anymoney. "Spoiled five," the national amusement of her age and sex in Cork,scandal, the changes in the army list, the failures in speculation of herluckless husband, the forlorn fortunes of the girls, her daughters, kepther in occupation, and her days were passed in one perpetual, unceasingcurrent of dissatisfaction and ill-temper with all around, that formed aheavy counterpoise to the fascinations of the young ladies. The repeatedjiltings to which they had been subject had blunted any delicacy upon thescore of their marriage; and if the newly-introduced cornet or ensign wasnot coming forward, as became him, at the end of the requisite numberof days, he was sure of receiving a very palpable admonition from Mrs.Dalrymple. Hints, at first dimly shadowed, that Matilda was not in spiritsthis morning; that Fanny, poor child, had a headache,--directed especiallyat the culprit in question,--grew gradually into those little motherlyfondnesses in mamma, that, like the fascination of the rattlesnake, onlylure on to ruin. The doomed man was pressed to dinner when all others werepermitted to take their leave; he was treated like one of the family, Godhelp him! After dinner, the major would keep him an hour over his wine,discussing the misery of an ill-assorted marriage; detailing his ownhappiness in marrying a woman like the Tonga Islander I have mentioned;hinting that girls should be brought up, not only to become companions totheir husbands, but with ideas fitting their station; if his auditor werea military man, that none but an old officer (like him) could know how toeducate girls (like his); and that feeling he possessed two such treasures,his whole aim in life was to guard and keep them,--a difficult task, whenproposals of the most flattering kind were coming constantly before him.Then followed a fresh bottle, during which the major would consult hisyoung friend upon a very delicate affair,--no less than a proposition forthe hand of Miss Matilda, or Fanny, whichever he was supposed to be softupon. This was generally a coup-de-matre; should he still resist, he washanded over to Mrs. Dalrymple, with a strong indictment against him, andrarely did he escape a heavy sentence. Now, is it not strange that tworeally pretty girls, with fully enough of amiable and pleasing qualitiesto have excited the attention and won the affections of many a man, shouldhave gone on for years,--for, alas! they did so in every climate, underevery sun,--to waste their sweetness in this miserable career of intrigueand man-trap, and yet nothing come of it? But so it was. The first questiona newly-landed regiment was asked, if coming from where they resided, was,"Well, how are the girls?" "Oh, gloriously. Matty is there." "Ah, indeed!poor thing." "Has Fan sported a new habit?" "Is it the old gray with thehussar braiding? Confound it, that was seedy when I saw them in Corfu. AndMother Dal as fat and vulgar as ever?" "Dawson of ours was the last,and was called up for sentence when we were ordered away; of course,he bolted," etc. Such was the invariable style of question and answerconcerning them; and although some few, either from good feeling orfastidiousness, relished but little the mode in which it had becomehabitual to treat them, I grieve to say that, generally, they werepronounced fair game for every species of flirtation and love-makingwithout any "intentions" for the future. I should not have trespassed sofar upon my readers' patience, were I not, in recounting these traits ofmy friends above, narrating matters of history. How many are there who maycast their eyes upon these pages, that will say, "Poor Matilda! I knew herat Gibraltar. Little Fanny was the life and soul of us all in Quebec.""Mr. O'Malley," said the adjutant, as I presented myself in the afternoonof my arrival in Cork to a short, punchy, little red-faced gentleman, in ashort jacket and ducks, "you are, I perceive, appointed to the 14th;you will have the goodness to appear on parade to-morrow morning. Theriding-school hours are----. The morning drill is----; evening drill----.Mr. Minchin, you are a 14th man, I believe? No, I beg pardon! a carbineer;but no matter. Mr. O'Malley, Mr. Minchin; Captain Dounie, Mr. O'Malley.You'll dine with us to-day, and to-morrow you shall be entered at themess.""Yours are at Santarem, I believe?" said an old, weather-beaten lookingofficer with one arm."I'm ashamed to say, I know nothing whatever of them; I received my gazetteunexpectedly enough.""Ever in Cork before, Mr. O'Malley?""Never," said I."Glorious place," lisped a white-eyelashed, knocker-kneed ensign; "splendidgals, eh?""Ah, Brunton," said Minchin, "you may boast a little; but we poor devils--""Know the Dals?" said the hero of the lisp, addressing me."I haven't that honor," I replied, scarcely able to guess whether what healluded to were objects of the picturesque or a private family."Introduce him, then, at once," said the adjutant; "we'll all go in theevening. What will the old squaw think?""Not I," said Minchin. "She wrote to the Duke of York about my helpingMatilda at supper, and not having any honorable intentions afterwards.""We dine at 'The George' to-day, Mr. O'Malley, sharp seven. Until then--"So saying, the little man bustled back to his accounts, and I took my leavewith the rest, to stroll about the town till dinner-time.CHAPTER XXIV.THE ADJUTANT'S DINNER.The adjutant's dinner was as professional an affair as need be. A circuitor a learned society could not have been more exclusively devoted totheir own separate and immediate topics than were we. Pipeclay in all itsvarieties came on the tapis; the last regulation cap, the new button,the promotions, the general orders, the colonel and the colonel's wife,stoppages, and the mess fund were all well and ably discussed; and strangeenough, while the conversation took this wide range, not a chance allusion,not one stray hint ever wandered to the brave fellows who were covering thearmy with glory in the Peninsula, nor one souvenir of him that, was eventhen enjoying a fame as a leader second to none in Europe. This surprisedme not a little at the time; but I have since that learned how littleinterest the real services of an army possess for the ears of certainofficials, who, stationed at home quarters, pass their inglorious lives inthe details of drill, parade, mess-room gossip, and barrack scandal. Such,in fact, were the dons of the present dinner. We had a commissary-general,an inspecting brigade-major of something, a physician to the forces, theadjutant himself, and Major Dalrymple; the hoi polloi consisting of theraw ensign, a newly-fledged cornet (Mr. Sparks), and myself.The commissary told some very pointless stories about his own department;the doctor read a dissertation upon Walcheren fever; the adjutant got verystupidly tipsy; and Major Dalrymple succeeded in engaging the three juniorsof the party to tea, having previously pledged us to purchase nothingwhatever of outfit without his advice, he well knowing (which he did) howyoung fellows like us were cheated, and resolving to be a father to us(which he certainly tried to be).As we rose from the table, about ten o'clock, I felt how soon a few suchdinners would succeed in disenchanting me of all my military illusions;for, young as I was, I saw that the commissary was a vulgar bore, thedoctor a humbug, the adjutant a sot, and the major himself I greatlysuspected to be an old rogue."You are coming with us, Sparks?" said Major Dalrymple, as he took me byone arm and the ensign by the other. "We are going to have a little teawith the ladies; not five minutes' walk.""Most happy, sir," said Mr. Sparks, with a very flattered expression ofcountenance."O'Malley, you know Sparks, and Burton too."This served for a species of triple introduction, at which we all bowed,simpered, and bowed again. We were very happy to have the pleasure, etc."How pleasant to get away from these fellows!" said the major, "they are souncommonly prosy! That commissary, with his mess beef, and old Pritchard,with black doses and rigors,--nothing so insufferable! Besides, inreality, a young officer never needs all that nonsense. A little medicinechest--I'll get you one each to-morrow for five pounds--no, five poundsten--the same thing--that will see you all through the Peninsula. Remind meof it in the morning." This we all promised to do, and the major resumed:"I say, Sparks, you've got a real prize in that gray horse,--such a trooperas he is! O'Malley, you'll be wanting something of that kind, if we canfind it for you.""Many thanks, Major; but my cattle are on the way here already. I've onlythree horses, but I think they are tolerably good ones."The major now turned to Burton and said something in a low tone, to whichthe other replied, "Well, if you say so, I'll get it; but it's devilishdear.""Dear, my young friend! Cheap, dog cheap.""Only think, O'Malley, a whole brass bed, camp-stool, basin-stand, allcomplete, for sixty pounds! If it was not that a widow was disposing ofit in great distress, one hundred could not buy it. Here we are; comealong,--no ceremony. Mind the two steps; that's it, Mrs. Dalrymple, Mr.O'Malley; Mr. Sparks, Mr. Burton, my daughters. Is tea over, girls?""Why, Papa, it's nearly eleven o'clock," said Fanny, as she rose to ringthe bell, displaying in so doing the least possible portion of a verywell-turned ankle.Miss Matilda Dal laid down her book, but seemingly lost in abstraction, didnot deign to look at us. Mrs. Dalrymple, however, did the honors with muchpoliteness, and having by a few adroit and well-put queries ascertainedeverything concerning our rank and position, seemed perfectly satisfiedthat our intrusion was justifiable.While my confrre, Mr. Sparks, was undergoing his examination I had timeto look at the ladies, whom I was much surprised at finding so verywell looking; and as the ensign had opened a conversation with Fanny, Iapproached my chair towards the other, and having carelessly turned overthe leaves of the book she had been reading, drew her on to talk of it. Asmy acquaintance with young ladies hitherto had been limited to those whohad "no soul," I felt some difficulty at first in keeping up with theexalted tone of my fair companion, but by letting her take the lead forsome time, I got to know more of the ground. We went on tolerably together,every moment increasing my stock of technicals, which were all that wasneeded to sustain the conversation. How often have I found the same plansucceed, whether discussing a question of law or medicine, with a learnedprofessor of either! or, what is still more difficult, canvassing themerits of a preacher or a doctrine with a serious young lady, whose"blessed privileges" were at first a little puzzling to comprehend.I so contrived it, too, that Miss Matilda should seem as much to be makinga convert to her views as to have found a person capable of sympathizingwith her; and thus, long before the little supper, with which it was themajor's practice to regale his friends every evening, made its appearance,we had established a perfect understanding together,--a circumstance that,a bystander might have remarked, was productive of a more widely diffusedsatisfaction than I could have myself seen any just cause for. Mr. Burtonwas also progressing, as the Yankees say, with the sister; Sparks hadbooked himself as purchaser of military stores enough to make the campaignof the whole globe; and we were thus all evidently fulfilling our variousvocations, and affording perfect satisfaction to our entertainers.Then came the spatch-cock, and the sandwiches, and the negus, which Fannyfirst mixed for papa, and subsequently, with some little pressing, for Mr.Burton; Matilda the romantic assisted me; Sparks helped himself. Then welaughed, and told stories; pressed Sparks to sing, which, as he declined,we only pressed the more. How, invariably, by-the-bye, is it the custom toshow one's appreciation of anything like a butt by pressing him for a song!The major was in great spirits; told us anecdotes of his early life inIndia, and how he once contracted to supply the troops with milk, and madea purchase, in consequence, of some score of cattle, which turned out to bebullocks. Matilda recited some lines from Pope in my ear. Fanny challengedBurton to a rowing match. Sparks listened to all around him, and Mrs.Dalrymple mixed a very little weak punch, which Dr. Lucas had recommendedto her to take the last thing at night,--Noctes coenoeque etc. Saywhat you will, these were very jovial little runions. The girls weredecidedly very pretty. We were in high favor; and when we took leave at thedoor, with a very cordial shake hands, it was with no arrire pense wepromised to see them in the morning.CHAPTER XXV.THE ENTANGLEMENT.When we think for a moment over all the toils, all the anxieties, all thefevered excitement of a grande passion, it is not a little singular thatlove should so frequently be elicited by a state of mere idleness; and yetnothing, after all, is so predisposing a cause as this. Where is the manbetween eighteen and eight-and-thirty--might I not say forty--who,without any very pressing duns, and having no taste for strong liquor androuge-et-noir, can possibly lounge through the long hours of his daywithout at least fancying himself in love? The thousand little occupationsit suggests become a necessity of existence; its very worries are like thewholesome opposition that purifies and strengthens the frame of a freestate. Then, what is there half so sweet as the reflective flattery whichresults from our appreciation of an object who in return deems us the neplus ultra of perfection? There it is, in fact; that confounded bump ofself-esteem does it all, and has more imprudent matches to answer for thanall the occipital protuberances that ever scared poor Harriet Martineau.Now, to apply my moralizing. I very soon, to use the mess phrase, got"devilish spooney" about the "Dals." The morning drill, the riding-school,and the parade were all most fervently consigned to a certain militarycharacter that shall be nameless, as detaining me from some appointmentmade the evening before; for as I supped there each night, a party of onekind or another was always planned for the day following. Sometimes we hada boating excursion to Cove, sometimes a picnic at Foaty; now a rowingparty to Glanmire, or a ride, at which I furnished the cavalry. Thesedoings were all under my especial direction, and I thus became speedilythe organ of the Dalrymple family; and the simple phrase, "It was Mr.O'Malley's arrangement," "Mr. O'Malley wished it," was like the Moi leroi of Louis XIV.Though all this while we continued to carry on most pleasantly, Mrs.Dalrymple, I could perceive, did not entirely sympathize with our projectsof amusement. As an experienced engineer might feel when watching thecourse of some storming projectile--some brilliant congreve--flying overa besieged fortress, yet never touching the walls nor harming theinhabitants, so she looked on at all these demonstrations of attack withno small impatience, and wondered when would the breach be reportedpracticable. Another puzzle also contributed its share of anxiety,--whichof the girls was it? To be sure, he spent three hours every morning withFanny; but then, he never left Matilda the whole evening. He had given hisminiature to one; a locket with his hair was a present to the sister.The major thinks he saw his arm round Matilda's waist in the garden; thehousemaid swears she saw him kiss Fanny in the pantry. Matilda smiles whenwe talk of his name with her sister's; Fanny laughs outright, andsays, "Poor Matilda! the man never dreamed of her." This is becominguncomfortable. The major must ask his intentions. It is certainly oneor the other; but then, we have a right to know which. Such was a verycondensed view of Mrs. Dalrymple's reflections on this important topic,--aview taken with her usual tact and clear-sightedness.Matters were in this state when Power at length arrived in Cork, totake command of our detachment and make the final preparations for ourdeparture. I had been, as usual, spending the evening at the major's, andhad just reached my quarters, when I found my friend sitting at my fire,smoking his cigar and solacing himself with a little brandy-and-water."At last," said he, as I entered,--"at last! Why, where the deuce have youbeen till this hour,--past two o'clock? There is no ball, no assembly goingon, eh?""No," said I, half blushing at the eagerness of the inquiry; "I've beenspending the evening with a friend.""Spending the evening! Say, rather, the night! Why, confound you, man, whatis there in Cork to keep you out of bed till near three?""Well, if you must know, I have been supping at a Major Dalrymple's,--adevilish good fellow, with two such daughters!""Ahem!" said Power, shutting one eye knowingly, and giving a look like aYorkshire horse-dealer. "Go on.""Why, what do you mean?""Go on; continue.""I've finished; I've nothing more to tell.""So, they're here, are they?" said he, reflectingly."Who?" said I."Matilda and Fanny, to be sure.""Why, you know them, then?""I should think I do.""Where have you met them?""Where have I not? When I was in the Rifles they were quartered at Zante.Matilda was just then coming it rather strong with Villiers, of ours, aregular greenhorn. Fanny, also, nearly did for Harry Nesbitt, by riding ahurdle race. Then they left for Gibraltar, in the year,--what year was it?""Come, come," said I, "this is a humbug; the girls are quite young; youjust have heard their names.""Well, perhaps so; only tell me which is your peculiar weakness, as theysay in the west, and may be I'll convince you.""Oh, as to that," said I, laughing, "I'm not very far gone on either side.""Then, Matilda, probably, has not tried you with Cowley, eh?--you look alittle pink--'There are hearts that live and love alone.' Oh, poor fellow,you've got it! By Jove, how you've been coming it, though, in ten days! Sheought not to have got to that for a month, at least; and how like a youngone it was, to be caught by the poetry. Oh, Master Charley, I thought thatthe steeple-chaser might have done most with your Galway heart,--the girlin the gray habit, that sings 'Moddirederoo,' ought to have been the prize!Halt! by Saint George, but that tickles you also! Why, zounds, if I go on,probably, at this rate, I'll find a tender spot occupied by the 'blacklady' herself."It was no use concealing, or attempting to conceal, anything from myinquisitive friend; so I mixed my grog, and opened my whole heart; told howI had been conducting myself for the entire preceding fortnight; and whenI concluded, sat silently awaiting Power's verdict, as though a jury wereabout to pronounce upon my life."Have you ever written?""Never; except, perhaps, a few lines with tickets for the theatre, orsomething of that kind.""Have you copies of your correspondence?""Of course not. Why, what do you mean?""Has Mrs. Dal ever been present; or, as the French say, has she assisted atany of your tender interviews with the young ladies?""I'm not aware that one kisses a girl before mamma.""I'm not speaking of that; I merely allude to an ordinary flirtation.""Oh, I suppose she has seen me attentive.""Very awkward, indeed! There is only one point in your favor; for as yourattentions were not decided, and as the law does not, as yet, permitpolygamy--""Come, come, you know I never thought of marrying.""Ah, but they did.""Not a bit of it.""Ay, but they did. What do you wager but that the major asks yourintentions, as he calls it, the moment he hears the transport has arrived?""By Jove! now you remind me, he asked this evening, when he could have afew minutes' private conversation with me to-morrow, and I thought it wasabout some confounded military chest or sea-store, or one of his infernalcontrivances that he every day assures me are indispensable; though, ifevery officer had only as much baggage as I have got, under his directions,it would take two armies, at least, to carry the effects of the fightingone.""Poor fellow!" said he, starting upon his legs; "what a burst you've madeof it!" So saying, he began in a nasal twang,--"I publish the banns of marriage between Charles O'Malley, late of hisMajesty's 14th Dragoons, and ------ Dalrymple, spinster, of this city--""I'll be hanged if you do, though," said I, seeing pretty clearly, by thistime, something of the estimation my friends were held in. "Come, Power,pull me through, like a good fellow,--pull me through, without doinganything to hurt the girls' feelings.""Well, we'll see about it," said he,--"we'll see about it in the morning;but, at the same time, let me assure you, the affair is not so easy asyou may at first blush suppose. These worthy people have been so often'done'--to use the cant phrase--before, that scarcely a ruse remainsuntried. It is of no use pleading that your family won't consent; that yourprospects are null; that you are ordered for India; that you are engagedelsewhere; that you have nothing but your pay; that you are too young ortoo old,--all such reasons, good and valid with any other family, willavail you little here. Neither will it serve your cause that you maybe warranted by a doctor as subject to periodical fits of insanity;monomaniacal tendencies to cut somebody's throat, etc. Bless your heart,man, they have a soul above such littlenesses! They care nothing forconsent of friends, means, age, health, climate, prospects, or temper.Firmly believing matrimony to be a lottery, they are not superstitiousabout the number they pitch upon; provided only that they get a ticket,they are content.""Then it strikes me, if what you say is correct, that I have no earthlychance of escape, except some kind friend will undertake to shoot me.""That has been also tried.""Why, how do you mean?""A mock duel, got up at mess,--we had one at Malta. Poor Vickers was thehero of that affair. It was right well planned, too. One of the letterswas suffered, by mere accident, to fall into Mrs. Dal's hands, and she wasquite prepared for the event when he was reported shot the next morning.Then the young lady, of course, whether she cared or not, was obliged to beperfectly unconcerned, lest the story of engaged affections might get windand spoil another market. The thing went on admirably, till one day, somefew months later, they saw, in a confounded army-list, that the lateGeorge Vickers was promoted to the 18th Dragoons, so that the trick wasdiscovered, and is, of course, stale at present.""Then could I not have a wife already, and a large family of interestingbabies?""No go,--only swell the damages, when they come to prosecute. Besides, yourage and looks forbid the assumption of such a fact. No, no; we must godeeper to work.""But where shall we go?" said I, impatiently; "for it appears to me thesegood people have been treated to every trick and subterfuge that everingenuity suggested.""Come, I think I have it; but it will need a little more reflection.So, now, let us to bed. I'll give you the result of my lucubrations atbreakfast; and, if I mistake not, we may get you through this without anyill-consequences. Good-night, then, old boy; and now dream away of yourlady-love till our next meeting."CHAPTER XXVI.THE PREPARATION.To prevent needless repetitions in my story, I shall not record here theconversation which passed between my friend Power and myself on the morningfollowing at breakfast. Suffice it to say, that the plan proposed by himfor my rescue was one I agreed to adopt, reserving to myself, in caseof failure, a pis aller of which I knew not the meaning, but of whoseefficacy Power assured me I need not doubt."If all fail," said he,--"if every bridge break down beneath you, and noroad of escape be left, why, then, I believe you must have recourse toanother alternative. Still I should wish to avoid it, if possible, and Iput it to you, in honor, not to employ it unless as a last expedient. Youpromise me this?""Of course," said I, with great anxiety for the dread final measure. "Whatis it?"He paused, smiled dubiously, and resumed,--"And, after all,--but, to be sure, there will not be need for it,--theother plan will do,--must do. Come, come, O'Malley, the admiralty say thatnothing encourages drowning in the navy like a life-buoy. The men have sucha prospect of being picked up that they don't mind falling overboard; so,if I give you this life-preserver of mine, you'll not swim an inch. Is itnot so, eh?""Far from it," said I. "I shall feel in honor bound to exert myself themore, because I now see how much it costs you to part with it.""Well, then, hear it. When everything fails; when all your resources areexhausted; when you have totally lost your memory, in fact, and youringenuity in excuses say,--but mind, Charley, not till then,--say that youmust consult your friend, Captain Power, of the 14th; that's all.""And is this it?" said I, quite disappointed at the lame and impotentconclusion to all the high-sounding exordium; "is this all?""Yes," said he, "that is all. But stop, Charley; is not that the majorcrossing the street there? Yes, to be sure it is; and, by Jove! he has goton the old braided frock this morning. Had you not told me one word of yourcritical position, I should have guessed there was something in the windfrom that. That same vestment has caused many a stout heart to tremble thatnever quailed before a shot or shell.""How can that be? I should like to hear.""Why, my dear boy, that's his explanation coat, as we called it atGibraltar. He was never known to wear it except when asking some poorfellow's 'intentions.' He would no more think of sporting it as anevery-day affair, than the chief-justice would go cook-shooting in hisblack cap and ermine. Come, he is bound for your quarters, and as itwill not answer our plans to let him see you now, you had better hastendown-stairs, and get round by the back way into George's Street, and you'llbe at his house before he can return."Following Power's directions, I seized my foraging-cap and got clear out ofthe premises before the major had reached them. It was exactly noon as Isounded my loud and now well-known summons at the major's knocker. The doorwas quickly opened; but instead of dashing up-stairs, four steps at a time,as was my wont, to the drawing-room, I turned short into the dingy-lookinglittle parlor on the right, and desired Matthew, the venerable servitor ofthe house, to say that I wished particularly to see Mrs. Dalrymple for afew minutes, if the hour were not inconvenient.There was something perhaps of excitement in my manner, some flurry in mylook, or some trepidation in my voice, or perhaps it was the unusual hour,or the still more remarkable circumstance of my not going at once to thedrawing-room, that raised some doubts in Matthew's mind as to the object ofmy visit; and instead of at once complying with my request to inform Mrs.Dalrymple that I was there, he cautiously closed the door, and taking aquick but satisfactory glance round the apartment to assure himself that wewere alone, he placed his back against it and heaved a deep sigh.We were both perfectly silent: I in total amazement at what the old mancould possibly mean; he, following up the train of his own thoughts,comprehended little or nothing of my surprise, and evidently was soengrossed by his reflections that he had neither ears nor eyes for aughtaround him. There was a most singular semi-comic expression in the oldwithered face that nearly made me laugh at first; but as I continued tolook steadily at it, I perceived that, despite the long-worn wrinkles thatlow Irish drollery and fun had furrowed around the angles of his mouth, thereal character of his look was one of sorrowful compassion.Doubtless, my readers have read many interesting narratives wherein theunconscious traveller in some remote land has been warned of a plan tomurder him, by some mere passing wink, a look, a sign, which some one, lesssteeped in crime, less hardened in iniquity than his fellows, has venturedfor his rescue. Sometimes, according to the taste of the narrator, theinteresting individual is an old woman, sometimes a young one, sometimesa black-bearded bandit, sometimes a child; and not unfrequently, a dog ishumane enough to do this service. One thing, however, never varies,--be theagent biped or quadruped, dumb or speechful, young or old, the strangerinvariably takes the hint, and gets off scott free for his sharpness. Thisnever-varying trick on the doomed man, I had often been sceptical enough tosuspect; however, I had not been many minutes a spectator of the old man'scountenance, when I most thoroughly recanted my errors, and acknowledgedmyself wrong. If ever the look of a man conveyed a warning, his did; butthere was more in it than even that,--there was a tone of sad and pitifulcompassion, such as an old gray-bearded rat might be supposed to put on atseeing a young and inexperienced one opening the hinge of an iron trap,to try its efficacy upon his neck. Many a little occasion had presenteditself, during my intimacy with the family, of doing Matthew some smallservices, of making him some trifling presents; so that, when he assumedbefore me the gesture and look I have mentioned, I was not long indeciphering his intentions."Matthew!" screamed a sharp voice which I recognized at once for that ofMrs. Dalrymple. "Matthew! Where is the old fool?"But Matthew heard not, or heeded not."Matthew! Matthew! I say.""I'm comin', ma'am," said he, with a sigh, as, opening the parlor-door, heturned upon me one look of such import that only the circumstances of mystory can explain its force, or my reader's own ingenious imagination cansupply."Never fear, my good old friend," said I, grasping his hand warmly, andleaving a guinea in the palm,--"never fear.""God grant it, sir!" said he, setting on his wig in preparation for hisappearance in the drawing-room."Matthew! The old wretch!""Mr. O'Malley," said the often-called Matthew, as opening the door, heannounced me unexpectedly among the ladies there assembled, who, nothearing of my approach, were evidently not a little surprised andastonished. Had I been really the enamored swain that the Dalrymple familywere willing to believe, I half suspect that the prospect before me mighthave cured me of my passion. A round bullet-head, papillot, withthe "Cork Observer," where still-born babes and maids-of-all-work weredescanted upon in very legible type, was now the substitute for the classicfront and Italian ringlets of la belle Matilda; while the chaste Fannyherself, whose feet had been a fortune for a statuary, was, in the mostslatternly and slipshod attire, pacing the room in a towering rage, atsome thing, place, or person, unknown (to me). If the ballet-master at theAcadmie could only learn to get his imps, demons, angels, and goblins"off" half as rapidly as the two young ladies retreated on my beingannounced, I answer for the piece so brought out having a run for half theseason. Before my eyes had regained their position parallel to the plane ofthe horizon, they were gone, and I found myself alone with Mrs. Dalrymple.Now, she stood her ground, partly to cover the retreat of the main body,partly, too, because--representing the baggage wagons, ammunition stores,hospital, staff, etc.--her retirement from the field demanded more time andcircumspection than the light brigade.Let not my readers suppose that the mre Dalrymple was so perfectlyfaultless in costume that her remaining was a matter of actualindifference; far from it. She evidently had a struggle for it; but a senseof duty decided her, and as Ney doggedly held back to cover the retreatingforces on the march from Moscow, so did she resolutely lurk behind tillthe last flutter of the last petticoat assured her that the fugitives weresafe. Then did she hesitate for a moment what course to take; but as Iassumed my chair beside her, she composedly sat down, and crossing herhands before her, waited for an explanation of this ill-timed visit.Had the Horse Guards, in the plenitude of their power and the perfection oftheir taste, ordained that the 79th and 42d Regiments should in future,in lieu of their respective tartans, wear flannel kilts and black worstedhose, I could readily have fallen into the error of mistaking Mrs.Dalrymple for a field officer in the new regulation dress; the philabegfinding no mean representation in a capacious pincushion that hung downfrom her girdle, while a pair of shears, not scissors, corresponded to thedirk. After several ineffectual efforts on her part to make her vestment (Iknow not its fitting designation) cover more of her legs than its lengthcould possibly effect, and after some most bland smiles and half blushes atdishabille, etc., were over, and that I had apologized most humbly forthe unusually early hour of my call, I proceeded to open my negotiations,and unfurl my banner for the fray."The old 'Racehorse' has arrived at last," said I, with a half-sigh, "and Ibelieve that we shall not obtain a very long time for our leave-taking; sothat, trespassing upon your very great kindness, I have ventured upon anearly call.""The 'Racehorse,' surely can't sail to-morrow," said Mrs. Dalrymple, whoseexperience of such matters made her a very competent judge; "her stores--""Are taken in already," said I; "and an order from the Horse Guardscommands us to embark in twenty-four hours; so that, in fact, we scarcelyhave time to look about us.""Have you seen the major?" inquired Mrs. Dalrymple, eagerly."Not to-day," I replied, carelessly; "but, of course, during the morning weare sure to meet. I have many thanks yet to give him for all his most kindattentions.""I know he is most anxious to see you," said Mrs. Dalrymple, with a verypeculiar emphasis, and evidently desiring that I should inquire thereasons of this anxiety. I, however, most heroically forbore indulging mycuriosity, and added that I should endeavor to find him on my way to thebarracks; and then, hastily looking at my watch, I pronounced it a fullhour later than it really was, and promising to spend the evening--my lastevening--with them, I took my leave and hurried away, in no small flurry tobe once more out of reach of Mrs. Dalrymple's fire, which I every momentexpected to open upon me.CHAPTER XXVII.THE SUPPER.Power and I dined together tte--tte at the hotel, and sat chattingover my adventures with the Dalrymples till nearly nine o'clock."Come, Charley," said he, at length, "I see your eye wandering very oftentowards the timepiece; another bumper, and I'll let you off. What shall itbe?""What you like," said I, upon whom a share of three bottles of strongclaret had already made a very satisfactory impression."Then champagne for the coup-de-grace. Nothing like your vin mousseuxfor a critical moment,--every bubble that rises sparkling to the surfaceprompts some bright thought, or elicits some brilliant idea, that wouldonly have been drowned in your more sober fluids. Here's to the girl youlove, whoever she be.""To her bright eyes, then, be it," said I, clearing off a brimming gobletof nearly half the bottle, while my friend Power seemed multiplied intoany given number of gentlemen standing amidst something like a glassmanufactory of decanters."I hope you feel steady enough for this business," said my friend,examining me closely with the candle."I'm an archdeacon," muttered I, with one eye involuntarily closing."You'll not let them double on you!""Trust me, old boy," said I, endeavoring to look knowing."I think you'll do," said he, "so now march. I'll wait for you here,and we'll go on board together; for old Bloater the skipper says he'llcertainly weigh by daybreak.""Till then," said I, as opening the door, I proceeded very cautiously todescend the stairs, affecting all the time considerable nonchalance, andendeavoring, as well as my thickened utterance would permit, to hum:--"Oh, love is the soul of an Irish dragoon."If I was not in the most perfect possession of my faculties in the house,the change to the open air certainly but little contributed to theirrestoration; and I scarcely felt myself in the street when my brain becameabsolutely one whirl of maddened and confused excitement. Time and spaceare nothing to a man thus enlightened, and so they appeared to me; scarcelya second had elapsed when I found myself standing in the Dalrymples'drawing-room.If a few hours had done much to metamorphose me, certes, they had donesomething for my fair friends also; anything more unlike what they appearedin the morning can scarcely be imagined. Matilda in black, with her hair inheavy madonna bands upon her fair cheek, now paler even than usual, neverseemed so handsome; while Fanny, in a light-blue dress, with blue flowersin her hair, and a blue sash, looked the most lovely piece of coquetry everman set his eyes upon. The old major, too, was smartened up, and put intoan old regimental coat that he had worn during the siege of Gibraltar; andlastly, Mrs. Dalrymple herself was attired in a very imposing costume thatmade her, to my not over-accurate judgment, look very like an elderlybishop in a flame-colored cassock. Sparks was the only stranger, andwore upon his countenance, as I entered, a look of very considerableembarrassment that even my thick-sightedness could not fail of detecting.Parlez-moi de l'amiti, my friends. Talk to me of the warm embrace ofyour earliest friend, after years of absence; the cordial and heartfeltshake hands of your old school companion, when in after years, a chancemeeting has brought you together, and you have had time and opportunity forbecoming distinguished and in repute, and are rather a good hit to be knownto than otherwise; of the close grip you give your second when he comes upto say, that the gentleman with the loaded detonator opposite won't fire,that he feels he's in the wrong. Any or all of these together, veryeffective and powerful though they be, are light in the balance whencompared with the two-handed compression you receive from the gentlemanthat expects you to marry one of his daughters."My dear O'Malley, how goes it? Thought you'd never come," said he, stillholding me fast and looking me full in the face, to calculate the extent towhich my potations rendered his flattery feasible."Hurried to death with preparations, I suppose," said Mrs. Dalrymple,smiling blandly. "Fanny dear, some tea for him.""Oh, Mamma, he does not like all that sugar; surely not," said she, lookingup with a most sweet expression, as though to say, "I at least know histastes.""I believed you were going without seeing us," whispered Matilda, with avery glassy look about the corner of her eyes.Eloquence was not just then my forte, so that I contented myself with avery intelligible look at Fanny, and a tender squeeze of Matilda's hand, asI seated myself at the table.Scarcely had I placed myself at the tea-table, with Matilda beside andFanny opposite me, each vying with the other in their delicate and kindattentions, when I totally forgot all my poor friend Power's injunctionsand directions for my management. It is true, I remembered that there wasa scrape of some kind or other to be got out of, and one requiring somedexterity, too; but what or with whom I could not for the life of medetermine. What the wine had begun, the bright eyes completed; and amidstthe witchcraft of silky tresses and sweet looks, I lost all my reflection,till the impression of an impending difficulty remained fixed in my mind,and I tortured my poor, weak, and erring intellect to detect it. At last,and by a mere chance, my eyes fell upon Sparks; and by what mechanism Icontrived it, I know not, but I immediately saddled him with the whole ofmy annoyances, and attributed to him and to his fault any embarrassment Ilabored under.The physiological reason of the fact I'm very ignorant of, but for thetruth and frequency I can well vouch, that there are certain people,certain faces, certain voices, certain whiskers, legs, waistcoats, andguard-chains, that inevitably produce the most striking effects upon thebrain of a gentleman already excited by wine, and not exactly cognizant ofhis own peculiar fallacies.These effects are not produced merely among those who are quarrelsome intheir cups, for I call the whole 14th to witness that I am not such; but toany person so disguised, the inoffensiveness of the object is no securityon the other hand,--for I once knew an eight-day clock kicked down abarrack stairs by an old Scotch major, because he thought it was laughingat him. To this source alone, whatever it be, can I attribute the feelingof rising indignation with which I contemplated the luckless cornet, who,seated at the fire, unnoticed and uncared for, seemed a very unworthyobject to vent anger or ill-temper upon."Mr. Sparks, I fear," said I, endeavoring at the time to call up a look ofvery sovereign contempt,--"Mr. Sparks, I fear, regards my visit here in thelight of an intrusion."Had poor Mr. Sparks been told to proceed incontinently up the chimneybefore him, he could not have looked more aghast. Reply was quite out ofhis power. So sudden and unexpectedly was this charge of mine made that hecould only stare vacantly from one to the other; while I, warming withmy subject, and perhaps--but I'll not swear it--stimulated by a gentlepressure from a soft hand near me, continued:--"If he thinks for one moment that my attentions in this family are in anyway to be questioned by him, I can only say--""My dear O'Malley, my dear boy!" said the major, with the look of afather-in-law in his eye."The spirit of an officer and a gentleman spoke there," said Mrs.Dalrymple, now carried beyond all prudence by the hope that my attack mightarouse my dormant friend into a counter-declaration; nothing, however, wasfurther from poor Sparks, who began to think he had been unconsciouslydrinking tea with five lunatics."If he supposes," said I, rising from my chair, "that his silence will passwith me as any palliation--""Oh, dear! oh, dear! there will be a duel. Papa, dear, why don't you speakto Mr. O'Malley?""There now, O'Malley, sit down. Don't you see he is quite in error?""Then let him say so," said I, fiercely."Ah, yes, to be sure," said Fanny. "Do say it; say anything he likes, Mr.Sparks.""I must say," said Mrs. Dalrymple, "however sorry I may feel in my ownhouse to condemn any one, that Mr. Sparks is very much in the wrong."Poor Sparks looked like a man in a dream."If he will tell Charles,--Mr. O'Malley, I mean," said Matilda, blushingscarlet, "that he meant nothing by what he said--""But I never spoke, never opened my lips!" cried out the wretched man, atlength sufficiently recovered to defend himself."Oh, Mr. Sparks!""Oh, Mr. Sparks!""Oh, Mr. Sparks!" chorussed the three ladies.While the old major brought up the rear with an "Oh, Sparks, I must say--""Then, by all the saints in the calendar, I must be mad," said he; "but ifI have said anything to offend you, O'Malley, I am sincerely sorry for it.""That will do, sir," said I, with a look of royal condescension at theamende I considered as somewhat late in coming, and resumed my seat.This little intermezzo, it might be supposed, was rather calculated tointerrupt the harmony of our evening. Not so, however. I had apparentlyacquitted myself like a hero, and was evidently in a white heat, in which Icould be fashioned into any shape. Sparks was humbled so far that he wouldprobably feel it a relief to make any proposition; so that by our oppositecourses we had both arrived at a point at which all the dexterity andaddress of the family had been long since aiming without success.Conversation then resumed its flow, and in a few minutes every trace of ourlate fracas had disappeared.By degrees I felt myself more and more disposed to turn my attentiontowards Matilda, and dropping my voice into a lower tone, opened aflirtation of a most determined kind. Fanny had, meanwhile, assumed a placebeside Sparks, and by the muttered tones that passed between them, I couldplainly perceive they were similarly occupied. The major took up the"Southern Reporter," of which he appeared deep in the contemplation, whileMrs. Dal herself buried her head in her embroidery and neither heard norsaw anything around her.I know, unfortunately, but very little what passed between myself and myfair companion; I can only say that when supper was announced at twelve (anhour later than usual), I was sitting upon the sofa with my arm roundher waist, my cheek so close that already her lovely tresses brushed myforehead, and her breath fanned my burning brow."Supper, at last," said the major, with a loud voice, to arouse us fromour trance of happiness without taking any mean opportunity of lookingunobserved. "Supper, Sparks, O'Malley; come now, it will be some timebefore we all meet this way again.""Perhaps not so long, after all," said I, knowingly."Very likely not," echoed Sparks, in the same key."I've proposed for Fanny," said he, whispering in my ear."Matilda's mine," replied I, with the look of an emperor."A word with you, Major," said Sparks, his eye flashing with enthusiasm,and his cheek scarlet. "One word,--I'll not detain you."They withdrew into a corner for a few seconds, during which Mrs. Dalrympleamused herself by wondering what the secret could be, why Mr. Sparkscouldn't tell her, and Fanny meanwhile pretended to look for something at aside table, and never turned her head round."Then give me your hand," said the major, as he shook Sparks's with awarmth of whose sincerity there could be no question. "Bess, my love," saidhe, addressing his wife. The remainder was lost in a whisper; but whateverit was, it evidently redounded to Sparks's credit, for the next moment arepetition of the hand-shaking took place, and Sparks looked the happiestof men."A mon tour," thought I, "now," as I touched the major's arm, and led himtowards the window. What I said may be one day matter for Major Dalrymple'smemoirs, if he ever writes them; but for my part I have not the least idea.I only know that while I was yet speaking he called over Mrs. Dal, who,in a frenzy of joy, seized me in her arms and embraced me. After which, Ikissed her, shook hands with the major, kissed Matilda's hand, and laughedprodigiously, as though I had done something confoundedly droll,--asentiment evidently participated in by Sparks, who laughed too, as did theothers; and a merrier, happier party never sat down to supper."Make your company pleased with themselves," says Mr. Walker, in hisOriginal work upon dinner-giving, "and everything goes on well." Now,Major Dalrymple, without having read the authority in question, probablybecause it was not written at the time, understood the principle fullyas well as the police-magistrate, and certainly was a proficient in thepractice of it.To be sure, he possessed one grand requisite for success,--he seemed mostperfectly happy himself. There was that air dgag about him which, whenan old man puts it on among his juniors, is so very attractive. Then theladies, too, were evidently well pleased; and the usually austere mamma hadrelaxed her "rigid front" into a smile in which any habitu of the housecould have read our fate.We ate, we drank, we ogled, smiled, squeezed hands beneath the table,and, in fact, so pleasant a party had rarely assembled round the major'smahogany. As for me, I made a full disclosure of the most burning love,backed by a resolve to marry my fair neighbor, and settle upon her aconsiderably larger part of my native county than I had ever even rodeover. Sparks, on the other side, had opened his fire more cautiously,but whether taking courage from my boldness, or perceiving with envy thegreater estimation I was held in, was now going the pace fully as fast asmyself, and had commenced explanations of his intentions with regard toFanny that evidently satisfied her friends. Meanwhile the wine was passingvery freely, and the hints half uttered an hour before began now to be moreopenly spoken and canvassed.Sparks and I hob-nobbed across the table and looked unspeakable things ateach other; the girls held down their heads; Mrs. Dal wiped her eyes; andthe major pronounced himself the happiest father in Europe.It was now wearing late, or rather early; some gray streaks of dubiouslight were faintly forcing their way through the half-closed curtains, andthe dread thought of parting first presented itself. A cavalry trumpet,too, at this moment sounded a call that aroused us from our trance ofpleasure, and warned us that our moments were few. A dead silence creptover all; the solemn feeling which leave-taking ever inspires wasuppermost, and none spoke. The major was the first to break it."O'Malley, my friend, and you, Mr. Sparks; I must have a word with you,boys, before we part.""Here let it be, then, Major," said I, holding his arm as he turned toleave the room,--"here, now; we are all so deeply interested, no place isso fit.""Well, then," said the major, "as you desire it, now that I'm to regardyou both in the light of my sons-in-law,--at least, as pledged to becomeso,--it is only fair as respects--""I see,--I understand perfectly," interrupted I, whose passion forconducting the whole affair myself was gradually gaining on me. "Whatyou mean is, that we should make known our intentions before some mutualfriends ere we part; eh, Sparks? eh, Major?""Right, my boy,--right on every point.""Well, then, I thought of all that; and if you'll just send your servantover to my quarters for our captain,--he's the fittest person, you know, atsuch a time--""How considerate!" said Mrs. Dalrymple."How perfectly just his idea is!" said the major."We'll then, in his presence, avow our present and unalterabledetermination as regards your fair daughters; and as the time is short--"Here I turned towards Matilda, who placed her arm within mine; Sparkspossessed himself of Fanny's hand, while the major and his wife consultedfor a few seconds."Well, O'Malley, all you propose is perfect. Now, then, for the captain.Who shall he inquire for?"[Illustration: CHARLES POPS THE QUESTION.]"Oh, an old friend of yours," said I, jocularly; "you'll be glad to seehim.""Indeed!" said all together."Oh, yes, quite a surprise, I'll warrant it.""Who can it be? Who on earth is it?""You can't guess," added I, with a very knowing look. "Knew you at Corfu; avery intimate friend, indeed, if he tell the truth."A look of something like embarrassment passed around the circle at thesewords, while I, wishing to end the mystery, resumed:--"Come, then, who can be so proper for all parties, at a moment like this,as our mutual friend Captain Power?"Had a shell fallen into the cold grouse pie in the midst of us, scatteringdeath and destruction on every side, the effect could scarcely have beenmore frightful than that my last words produced. Mrs. Dalrymple fell witha sough upon the floor, motionless as a corpse; Fanny threw herself,screaming, upon a sofa; Matilda went off into strong hysterics upon thehearth-rug; while the major, after giving me a look a maniac might haveenvied, rushed from the room in search of his pistols with a most terrificoath to shoot somebody, whether Sparks or myself, or both of us, on hisreturn, I cannot say. Fanny's sobs and Matilda's cries, assisted by adrumming process by Mrs. Dal's heels upon the floor, made a most infernalconcert and effectually prevented anything like thought or reflection; andin all probability so overwhelmed was I at the sudden catastrophe I had soinnocently caused, I should have waited in due patience for the major'sreturn, had not Sparks seized my arm, and cried out,--"Run for it, O'Malley; cut like fun, my boy, or we're done for.""Run; why? What for? Where?" said I, stupefied by the scene before me."Here he is!" called out Sparks, as throwing up the window, he sprang outupon the stone sill, and leaped into the street. I followed mechanically,and jumped after him, just as the major had reached the window. A ballwhizzed by me, that soon determined my further movements; so, putting onall speed, I flew down the street, turned the corner, and regained thehotel breathless and without a hat, while Sparks arrived a moment later,pale as a ghost, and trembling like an aspen-leaf."Safe, by Jove!" said Sparks, throwing himself into a chair, and pantingfor breath."Safe, at last," said I, without well knowing why or for what."You've had a sharp run of it, apparently," said Power, coolly, and withoutany curiosity as to the cause; "and now, let us on board; there goes thetrumpet again. The skipper is a surly old fellow, and we must not lose histide for him." So saying, he proceeded to collect his cloaks, cane, etc.,and get ready for departure.CHAPTER XXVIIITHE VOYAGE.When I awoke from the long, sound sleep which succeeded my last adventure,I had some difficulty in remembering where I was or how I had come there.From my narrow berth I looked out upon the now empty cabin, and at lengthsome misty and confused sense of my situation crept slowly over me. Iopened the little shutter beside me and looked out. The bold headlands ofthe southern coast were frowning in sullen and dark masses about a coupleof miles distant, and I perceived that we were going fast through thewater, which was beautifully calm and still. I now looked at my watch;it was past eight o'clock; and as it must evidently be evening, from theappearance of the sky, I felt that I had slept soundly for above twelvehours.In the hurry of departure the cabin had not been set to rights, and therelay every species of lumber and luggage in all imaginable confusion.Trunks, gun-cases, baskets of eggs, umbrellas, hampers of sea-store,cloaks, foraging-caps, maps, and sword-belts were scattered on everyside,--while the dbris of a dinner, not over-remarkable for itspropriety in table equipage, added to the ludicrous effect. The heavy trampof a foot overhead denoted the step of some one taking his short walk ofexercise; while the rough voice of the skipper, as he gave the word to "Goabout!" all convinced me that we were at last under way, and off to "thewars."The confusion our last evening on shore produced in my brain was suchthat every effort I made to remember anything about it only increased mydifficulty, and I felt myself in a web so tangled and inextricable thatall endeavor to escape free was impossible. Sometimes I thought that I hadreally married Matilda Dalrymple; then, I supposed that the father hadcalled me out, and wounded me in a duel; and finally, I had some confusednotion about a quarrel with Sparks, but what for, when, and how it ended, Iknew not. How tremendously tipsy I must have been! was the only conclusionI could draw from all these conflicting doubts; and after all, it was theonly thing like fact that beamed upon my mind. How I had come on board andreached my berth was a matter I reserved for future inquiry, resolving thatabout the real history of my last night on shore I would ask no questions,if others were equally disposed to let it pass in silence.I next began to wonder if Mike had looked after all my luggage, trunks,etc., and whether he himself had been forgotten in our hasty departure.About this latter point I was not destined for much doubt; for a well-knownvoice, from the foot of the companion-ladder, at once proclaimed myfaithful follower, and evidenced his feelings at his departure from hishome and country.Mr. Free was, at the time I mention, gathered up like a ball opposite asmall, low window that looked upon the bluff headlands now fast becomingdim and misty as the night approached. He was apparently in low spirits,and hummed in a species of low, droning voice, the following ballad, at theend of each verse of which came an Irish chorus which, to the erudite insuch matters, will suggest the air of Moddirederoo:--MICKEY FREE'S LAMENT.Then fare ye well, ould Erin dear;To part, my heart does ache well:From Carrickfergus to Cape Clear,I'll never see your equal.And though to foreign parts we're bound,Where cannibals may ate us,We'll ne'er forget the holy groundOf potteen and potatoes.Moddirederoo aroo, aroo, etc.When good Saint Patrick banished frogs,And shook them from his garment,He never thought we'd go abroad,To live upon such varmint;Nor quit the land where whiskey grewTo wear King George's button,Take vinegar for mountain dew,And toads for mountain mutton.Moddirederoo aroo, aroo, etc."I say, Mike, stop that confounded keen, and tell me where are we?""Off the ould head of Kinsale, sir.""Where is Captain Power?""Smoking a cigar on deck, with the captain, sir.""And Mr. Sparks?""Mighty sick in his own state-room. Oh, but it's himself has enough ofglory--bad luck to it!--by this time. He'd make your heart break to look athim.""Who have you got on board besides?""The adjutant's here, sir; and an old gentleman they call the major.""Not Major Dalrymple?" said I, starting up with terror at the thought, "eh,Mike?""No, sir, another major; his name is Mulroon, or Mundoon, or something likethat.""Monsoon, you son of a lumper potato," cried out a surly, gruff voice froma berth opposite. "Monsoon. Who's at the other side?""Mr. O'Malley, 14th," said I, by way of introduction."My service to you, then," said the voice. "Going to join your regiment?""Yes; and you, are you bound on a similar errand?""No, Heaven be praised! I'm attached to the commissariat, and only going toLisbon. Have you had any dinner?""Not a morsel; have you?""No more than yourself; but I always lie by for three or four days thisway, till I get used to the confounded rocking and pitching, and witha little grog and some sleep, get over the time gayly enough. Steward,another tumbler like the last; there--very good--that will do. Your goodhealth, Mr.--what was it you said?""O'Malley.""O'Malley--your good health! Good-night." And so ended our brief colloquy,and in a few minutes more, a very decisive snore pronounced my friend to befulfilling his precept for killing the hours.I now made the effort to emancipate myself from my crib, and at lastsucceeded in getting on the floor, where, after one chassez at a smalllooking-glass opposite, followed by a very impetuous rush at a little brassstove, in which I was interrupted by a trunk and laid prostrate, I finallygot my clothes on, and made my way to the deck. Little attuned as was mymind at the moment to admire anything like scenery, it was impossible to beunmoved by the magnificent prospect before me. It was a beautiful eveningin summer; the sun had set above an hour before, leaving behind him in thewest one vast arch of rich and burnished gold, stretching along the wholehorizon, and tipping all the summits of the heavy rolling sea, as it rolledon, unbroken by foam or ripple, in vast moving mountains, from the farcoast of Labrador. We were already in blue water, though the bold cliffsthat were to form our departing point were but a few miles to leeward.There lay the lofty bluff of Old Kinsale, whose crest, overhanging, peeredfrom a summit of some hundred feet into the deep water that swept its rockybase, many a tangled lichen and straggling bough trailing in the floodbeneath. Here and there upon the coast a twinkling gleam proclaimed the hutof the fisherman, whose swift hookers had more than once shot by us anddisappeared in a moment. The wind, which began to fall at sunset, freshenedas the moon rose; and the good ship, bending to the breeze, lay gentlyover, and rushed through the waters with a sound of gladness. I was aloneupon the deck. Power and the captain, whom I expected to have found, haddisappeared somehow, and I was, after all, not sorry to be left to my ownreflections uninterrupted.My thoughts turned once more to my home,--to my first, my best, earliestfriend, whose hearth I had rendered lonely and desolate, and my heartsank within me as I remembered it. How deeply I reproached myself for theselfish impetuosity with which I had ever followed any rising fancy, anynew and sudden desire, and never thought of him whose every hope was in,whose every wish was for me. Alas! alas, my poor uncle! how gladly wouldI resign every prospect my soldier's life may hold out, with all itsglittering promise, and all the flattery of success, to be once more besideyou; to feel your warm and manly grasp; to see your smile; to hear yourvoice; to be again where all our best feelings are born and nurtured, ourcares assuaged, our joys more joyed in, and our griefs more wept,--at home!These very words have more music to my ears than all the softest strainsthat ever siren sung. They bring us back to all we have loved, by ties thatare never felt but through such simple associations. And in the earliermemories called up, our childish feelings come back once more to visit uslike better spirits, as we walk amidst the dreary desolation that years ofcare and uneasiness have spread around us.Wretched must he be who ne'er has felt such bliss; and thrice happy he who,feeling it, knows that still there lives for him that same early home, withall its loved inmates, its every dear and devoted object waiting his comingand longing for his approach.Such were my thoughts as I stood gazing at the bold line of coast nowgradually growing more and more dim while evening fell, and we continuedto stand farther out to sea. So absorbed was I all this time in myreflections, that I never heard the voices which now suddenly burst upon myears quite close beside me. I turned, and saw for the first time that atthe end of the quarter-deck stood what is called a roundhouse, a smallcabin, from which the sounds in question proceeded. I walked gently forwardand peeped in, and certainly anything more in contrast with my late reveryneed not be conceived. There sat the skipper, a bluff, round-faced,jolly-looking little tar, mixing a bowl of punch at a table, at which satmy friend Power, the adjutant, and a tall, meagre-looking Scotchman, whomI once met in Cork, and heard that he was the doctor of some infantryregiment. Two or three black bottles, a paper of cigars, and a tallowcandle were all the table equipage; but certainly the party seemed not towant for spirits and fun, to judge from the hearty bursts of laughing thatevery moment pealed forth, and shook the little building that held them.Power, as usual with him, seemed to be taking the lead, and was evidentlyamusing himself with the peculiarities of his companions."Come, Adjutant, fill up; here's to the campaign before us. We, at least,have nothing but pleasure in the anticipation; no lovely wife behind; nocharming babes to fret and be fretted for, eh?""Vara true," said the doctor, who was mated with a tartar, "ye maun haveless regrets at leaving hame; but a married man is no' entirely denied hisain consolations.""Good sense in that," said the skipper; "a wide berth and plenty of searoom are not bad things now and then.""Is that your experience also?" said Power, with a knowing look. "Come,come, Adjutant, we're not so ill off, you see; but, by Jove, I can'timagine how it is a man ever comes to thirty without having at least onewife,--without counting his colonial possessions of course.""Yes," said the adjutant, with a sigh, as he drained his glass to thebottom. "It is devilish strange,--woman, lovely woman!" Here he filled anddrank again, as though he had been proposing a toast for his own peculiardrinking."I say, now," resumed Power, catching at once that there was somethingworking in his mind,--"I say, now, how happened it that you, a rightgood-looking, soldier-like fellow, that always made his way among the fairones, with that confounded roguish eye and slippery tongue,--how the deucedid it come to pass that you never married?""I've been more than once on the verge of it," said the adjutant, smilingblandly at the flattery."And nae bad notion yours just to stay there," said the doctor, with a verypeculiar contortion of countenance."No pleasing you, no contenting a fellow like you," said Power, returningto the charge; "that's the thing; you get a certain ascendancy; you have akind of success that renders you, as the French say, tte monte, and youthink no woman rich enough or good-looking enough or big enough.""No; by Jove you're wrong," said the adjutant, swallowing the bait, hookand all,--"quite wrong there; for some how, all my life, I was decidedlysusceptible. Not that I cared much for your blushing sixteen, or buddingbeauties in white muslin, fresh from a back-board and a governess; no, mytaste inclined rather to the more sober charms of two or three-and-thirty,the embonpoint, a good foot and ankle, a sensible breadth about theshoulders--""Somewhat Dutch-like, I take it," said the skipper, puffing out a volume ofsmoke; "a little bluff in the bows, and great stowage, eh?""You leaned then towards the widows?" said Power."Exactly; I confess, a widow always was my weakness. There was somethingI ever liked in the notion of a woman who had got over all the awkwardgirlishness of early years, and had that self-possession which habit andknowledge of the world confer, and knew enough of herself to understandwhat she really wished, and where she would really go.""Like the trade winds," puffed the skipper."Then, as regards fortune, they have a decided superiority overthe spinster class. I defy any man breathing,--let him be halfpolice-magistrate, half chancellor,--to find out the figure of a younglady's dower. On your first introduction to the house, some kind friendwhispers, 'Go it, old boy; forty thousand, not a penny less.' A few weekslater, as the siege progresses, a maiden aunt, disposed to puffing, comesdown to twenty; this diminishes again one half, but then 'the money is inbank stock, hard Three-and-a-Half.' You go a little farther, and as you sitone day over your wine with papa, he certainly promulgates the fact thathis daughter has five thousand pounds, two of which turn out to be inMexican bonds, and three in an Irish mortgage.""Happy for you," interrupted Power, "that it be not in Galway, where aproposal to foreclose, would be a signal for your being called out and shotwithout benefit of clergy.""Bad luck to it, for Galway," said the adjutant. "I was nearly taken inthere once to marry a girl that her brother-in-law swore had eight hundreda year; and it came out afterwards that so she had, but it was for one yearonly; and he challenged me for doubting his word too.""There's an old formula for finding out an Irish fortune," says Power,"worth, all the algebra they ever taught in Trinity. Take the half of theassumed sum, and divide it by three; the quotient will be a flatteringrepresentative of the figure sought for.""Not in the north," said the adjutant, firmly,--"not in the north, Power.They are all well off there. There's a race of canny, thrifty, half-Scotchniggers,--your pardon, Doctor, they are all Irish,--linen-weaving,Presbyterian, yarn-factoring, long-nosed, hard-drinking fellows, that layby rather a snug thing now and then. Do you know, I was very near it oncein the north. I've half a mind to tell you the story; though, perhaps,you'll laugh at me."The whole party at once protested that nothing could induce them to deviateso widely from the line of propriety; and the skipper having mixed a freshbowl and filled all the glasses round, the cigars were lighted, and theadjutant began.CHAPTER XXIX.THE ADJUTANT'S STORY.--LIFE IN DERBY."It is now about eight, may be ten, years since we were ordered to marchfrom Belfast and take up our quarters in Londonderry. We had not been morethan a few weeks altogether in Ulster when the order came; and as we hadbeen, for the preceding two years, doing duty in the south and west, weconcluded that the island was tolerably the same in all parts. We openedour campaign in the maiden city exactly as we had been doing with'unparalleled success' in Cashel, Fermoy, Tuam, etc.,--that is to say, weannounced garrison balls and private theatricals; offered a cup to be runfor in steeple-chase; turned out a four-in-hand drag, with mottled grays;and brought over two Deal boats to challenge the north.""The 18th found the place stupid," said his companions."To be sure, they did; slow fellows like them must find any place stupid.No dinners; but they gave none. No fun; but they had none in themselves.In fact, we knew better; we understood how the thing was to be done, andresolved that, as a mine of rich ore lay unworked, it was reserved for usto produce the shining metal that others, less discerning, had failed todiscover. Little we knew of the matter; never was there a blunder likeours. Were you ever in Derry?""Never," said the three listeners."Well, then, let me inform you that the place has its own peculiarfeatures. In the first place, all the large towns in the south and westhave, besides the country neighborhood that surrounds them, a certainsprinkling of gentlefolk, who, though with small fortunes and not muchusage of the world, are still a great accession to society, and make up theblank which, even in the most thickly peopled country, would be sadlyfelt without them. Now, in Derry, there is none of this. After the greatguns--and, per Baccho! what great guns they are!--you have nothing butthe men engaged in commerce,--sharp, clever, shrewd, well-informed fellows;they are deep in flax-seed, cunning in molasses, and not to be excelledin all that pertains to coffee, sassafras, cinnamon, gum, oakum, andelephants' teeth. The place is a rich one, and the spirit of commerce isfelt throughout it. Nothing is cared for, nothing is talked of, nothingalluded to, that does not bear upon this; and, in fact, if you haven't aventure in Smyrna figs, Memel timber, Dutch dolls, or some such commodity,you are absolutely nothing, and might as well be at a ball with a cork leg,or go deaf to the opera.""Now, when I've told thus much, I leave you to guess what impression ourtriumphal entry into the city produced. Instead of the admiring crowdsthat awaited us elsewhere, as we marched gayly into quarters, here we sawnothing but grave, sober-looking, and, I confess it, intelligent-lookingfaces, that scrutinized our appearance closely enough, but evidently withno great approval and less enthusiasm. The men passed on hurriedly to thecounting-houses and wharves; the women, with almost as little interest,peeped at us from the windows, and walked away again. Oh, how we wished forGalway, glorious Galway, that paradise of the infantry that lies west ofthe Shannon! Little we knew, as we ordered the band, in lively anticipationof the gayeties before us, to strike up 'Payne's first set,' that, to theears of the fair listeners in Ship Quay Street, the rumble of a sugarhogshead or the crank of a weighing crane were more delightful music.""By Jove!" interrupted Power, "you are quite right. Women are stronglyimitative in their tastes. The lovely Italian, whose very costume is anatural following of a Raphael, is no more like the pretty Liverpool damselthan Genoa is to Glasnevin; and yet what the deuce have they, dear souls,with their feet upon a soft carpet and their eyes upon the pages of Scottor Byron, to do with all the cotton or dimity that ever was printed? Butlet us not repine; that very plastic character is our greatest blessing.""I'm not so sure that it always exists," said the doctor, dubiously, asthough his own experience pointed otherwise."Well, go ahead!" said the skipper, who evidently disliked the digressionthus interrupting the adjutant's story."Well, we marched along, looking right and left at the pretty faces--andthere were plenty of them, too--that a momentary curiosity drew to thewindows; but although we smiled and ogled and leered as only a newlyarrived regiment can smile, ogle, or leer, by all that's provoking we mightas well have wasted our blandishments upon the Presbyterian meeting-house,that frowned upon us with its high-pitched roof and round windows."'Droll people, these,' said one; 'Rayther rum ones,' cried another; 'Theblack north, by Jove!' said a third: and so we went along to the barracks,somewhat displeased to think that, though the 18th were slow, they mighthave met their match."Disappointed, as we undoubtedly felt, at the little enthusiasm that markedour entre, we still resolved to persist in our original plan, andaccordingly, early the following morning, announced our intention of givingamateur theatricals. The mayor, who called upon our colonel, was the firstto learn this, and received the information with pretty much the samekind of look the Archbishop of Canterbury might be supposed to assume ifrequested by a a friend to ride 'a Derby.' The incredulous expression ofthe poor man's face, as he turned from one of us to the other, evidentlycanvassing in his mind whether we might not, by some special dispensationof Providence, be all insane, I shall never forget."His visit was a very short one; whether concluding that we were not quitesafe company, or whether our notification was too much for his nerves, Iknow not."We were not to be balked, however. Our plans for gayety, long planned andconned over, were soon announced in all form; and though we made effortsalmost super-human in the cause, our plays were performed to empty benches,our balls were unattended, our picnic invitations politely declined, and,in a word, all our advances treated with a cold and chilling politenessthat plainly said, 'We'll none of you.'"Each day brought some new discomfiture, and as we met at mess, insteadof having, as heretofore, some prospect of pleasure and amusement to chatover, it was only to talk gloomily over our miserable failures, and lamentthe dreary quarters that our fates had doomed us to."Some months wore on in this fashion, and at length--what will not timedo?--we began, by degrees, to forget our woes. Some of us took to latehours and brandy-and-water; others got sentimental, and wrote journals andnovels and poetry; some made acquaintances among the townspeople, and outin to a quiet rubber to pass the evening; while another detachment, amongwhich I was, got up a little love affair to while away the tedious hours,and cheat the lazy sun."I have already said something of my taste in beauty; now, Mrs. Boggswas exactly the style of woman I fancied. She was a widow; she had blackeyes,--not your jet-black, sparkling, Dutch-doll eyes, that roll about andtwinkle, but mean nothing; no, hers had a soft, subdued, downcast, pensivelook about them, and were fully as melting a pair of orbs as any blue eyesyou ever looked at."Then, she had a short upper lip, and sweet teeth; by Jove, they werepearls! and she showed them too, pretty often. Her figure was well-rounded,plump, and what the French call nette. To complete all, her instep andankle were unexceptional; and lastly, her jointure was seven hundred poundsper annum, with a trifle of eight thousand more that the late lamentedBoggs bequeathed, when, after four months of uninterrupted bliss, he leftDerry for another world."When chance first threw me in the way of the fair widow, some casualcoincidence of opinion happened to raise me in her estimation, and I soonafterwards received an invitation to a small evening party at her house, towhich I alone of the regiment was asked."I shall not weary you with the details of my intimacy; it is enough that Itell you I fell desperately in love. I began by visiting twice or thrice aweek, and in less than two months, spent every morning at her house, andrarely left it till the 'Roast beef' announced mess."I soon discovered the widow's cue; she was serious. Now, I had conductedall manner of flirtatious in my previous life; timid young ladies, manlyyoung ladies, musical, artistical, poetical, and hysterical,--bless you, Iknew them all by heart; but never before had I to deal with a serious one,and a widow to boot. The case was a trying one. For some weeks it was allvery up-hill work; all the red shot of warm affection I used to pour in onother occasions was of no use here. The language of love, in which I wasno mean proficient, availed me not. Compliments and flattery, those rareskirmishers before the engagement, were denied me; and I verily think thata tender squeeze of the hand would have cost me my dismissal."'How very slow, all this!' thought I, as, at the end of two months siege,I still found myself seated in the trenches, and not a single breach in thefortress; 'but, to be sure, it's the way they have in the north, and onemust be patient.'"While thus I was in no very sanguine frame of mind as to my prospects, inreality my progress was very considerable. Having become a member of Mr.M'Phun's congregation, I was gradually rising in the estimation of thewidow and her friends, whom my constant attendance at meeting, and my veryserious demeanor had so far impressed that very grave deliberation was heldwhether I should not be made an elder at the next brevet."If the widow Boggs had not been a very lovely and wealthy widow; had shenot possessed the eyes, lips, hips, ankles, and jointure aforesaid,--Ihonestly avow that neither the charms of that sweet man Mr. M'Phun'seloquence, nor even the flattering distinction in store for me, would haveinduced me to prolong my suit. However, I was not going to despair when insight of land. The widow was evidently softened. A little time longer, andthe most scrupulous moralist, the most rigid advocate for employing timewisely, could not have objected to my daily system of courtship. I wasnone of your sighing, dying, ogling, hand-squeezing, waist-pressing,oath-swearing, everlasting-adoring affairs, with an interchange of ringsand lockets; not a bit of it. It was confoundedly like a controversialmeeting at the Rotundo, and I myself had a far greater resemblance toFather Tom Maguire than a gay Lothario."After all, when mess-time came, when the 'Roast beef' played, and weassembled at dinner, and the soup and fish had gone round, with two glassesof sherry in, my spirits rallied, and a very jolly evening consoled me forall my fatigues and exertions, and supplied me with energy for the morrow;for, let me observe here, that I only made love before dinner. The eveningsI reserved for myself, assuring Mrs. Boggs that my regimental dutiesrequired all my time after mess hour, in which I was perfectly correct:for at six we dined; at seven I opened the claret No. 1; at eight I haduncorked my second bottle; by half-past eight I was returning to thesherry; and at ten, punctual to the moment, I was repairing to my quarterson the back of my servant, Tim Daly, who had carried me safely for eightyears, without a single mistake, as the fox-hunters say. This was a way wehad in the --th. Every man was carried away from mess, some sooner, somelater. I was always an early riser, and went betimes."Now, although I had very abundant proof, from circumstantial evidence,that I was nightly removed from the mess-room to my bed in the mode Imention, it would have puzzled me sorely to prove the fact in any directway; inasmuch as by half-past nine, as the clock chimed, and Tim entered totake me, I was very innocent of all that was going on, and except a certainvague sense of regret at leaving the decanter, felt nothing whatever."It so chanced--what mere trifles are we ruled by in our destiny!--thatjust as my suit with the widow had assumed its most favorable footing, oldGeneral Hinks, that commanded the district, announced his coming over toinspect our regiment. Over he came accordingly, and to be sure, we had aday of it. We were paraded for six mortal hours; then we were marching andcountermarching, moving into line, back again into column, now forming opencolumn, then into square; till at last, we began to think that the oldgeneral was like the Flying Dutchman, and was probably condemned to keep ondrilling us to the day of judgment. To be sure, he enlivened the proceedingto me by pronouncing the regiment the worst-drilled and appointed corps inthe service, and the adjutant (me!) the stupidest dunderhead--these werehis words--he had ever met with."'Never mind,' thought I; 'a few days more, and it's little I'll care forthe eighteen manoeuvres. It's small trouble your eyes right or your left,shoulders forward, will give me. I'll sell out, and with the Widow Boggsand seven hundred a year,--but no matter.'"This confounded inspection lasted till half-past five in the afternoon; sothat our mess was delayed a full hour in consequence, and it was past sevenas we sat down to dinner. Our faces were grim enough as we met together atfirst; but what will not a good dinner and good wine do for the surliestparty? By eight o'clock we began to feel somewhat more conviviallydisposed; and before nine, the decanters were performing a quick-step roundthe table, in a fashion very exhilarating and very jovial to look at."'No flinching to-night,' said the senior major. 'We've had a severe day;let us also have a merry evening.'"'By Jove! Ormond,' cried another, 'we must not leave this to-night.Confound the old humbugs and their musty whist party; throw them over.'"'I say, Adjutant,' said Forbes; addressing me, 'you've nothing particularto say to the fair widow this evening? You'll not bolt, I hope?'"'That he sha'n't,' said one near me; 'he must make up for his absenceto-morrow, for to-night we all stand fast.'"'Besides,' said another, 'she's at meeting by this.Old--what-d'ye-call-him?--is at fourteenthly before now.'"'A note for you, sir,' said the mess waiter, presenting me with arose-colored three-cornered billet. It was from la chre Boggs herself,and ran thus:--DEAR SIR,--Mr. M'Phun and a few friends are coming to tea atmy house after meeting; perhaps you will also favor us with yourcompany.Yours truly,ELIZA BOGGS."What was to be done? Quit the mess; leave a jolly party just at thejolliest moment; exchange Lafitte and red hermitage for a soire ofelders, presided over by that sweet man, Mr. M'Phun! It was too bad!--butthen, how much was in the scale! What would the widow say if I declined?What would she think? I well knew that the invitation meant nothing lessthan a full-dress parade of me before her friends, and that to decline wasperhaps to forfeit all my hopes in that quarter forever."'Any answer, sir?' said the waiter."'Yes,' said I, in a half-whisper, 'I'll go,--tell the servant, I'll go.'"At this moment my tender epistle was subtracted from before me, and ere Ihad turned round, had made the tour of half the table. I never perceivedthe circumstance, however, and filling my glass, professed my resolve tosit to the last, with a mental reserve to take my departure at the veryfirst opportunity. Ormond and the paymaster quitted the room for a moment,as if to give orders for a broil at twelve, and now all seemed to promise avery convivial and well-sustained party for the night."'Is that all arranged?' inquired the major, as Ormond entered."'All right,' said he; 'and now let us have a bumper and a song. Adjutant,old boy, give us a chant.'"'What shall it be, then?' inquired I, anxious to cover my intended retreatby any appearance of joviality."'Give us--"When I was in the FusiliersSome fourteen years ago."'"'No, no; confound it! I've heard nothing else since I joined the regiment.Let us have the "Paymaster's Daughter."'"'Ah! that's pathetic; I like that,' lisped a young ensign."'If I'm to have a vote,' grunted out the senior major, 'I pronounce for"West India Quarters."'"'Yes, yes,' said half-a-dozen voices together; 'let's have "West IndiaQuarters." Come, give him a glass of sherry, and let him begin.'"I had scarcely finished off my glass, and cleared my throat for my song,when the clock on the chimney-piece chimed half-past nine, and the sameinstant I felt a heavy hand fall upon my shoulder. I turned and beheld myservant Tim. This, as I have already mentioned, was the hour at which Timwas in the habit of taking me home to my quarters; and though we had dinedan hour later, he took no notice of the circumstance, but true to hiscustom, he was behind my chair. A very cursory glance at my 'familiar' wasquite sufficient to show me that we had somehow changed sides; for Tim, whowas habitually the most sober of mankind, was, on the present occasion,exceedingly drunk, while I, a full hour before that consummation, wasperfectly sober."'What d'ye want, sir?' inquired I, with something of severity in mymanner."'Come home,' said Tim, with a hiccough that set the whole table in a roar."'Leave the room this instant,' said I, feeling wrath at being thus madea butt of for his offences. 'Leave the room, or I'll kick you out of it.'Now, this, let me add in a parenthesis, was somewhat of a boast, for Timwas six feet three, and strong in proportion, and when in liquor, fearlessas a tiger."'You'll kick me out of the room, eh, will you? Try, only try it, that'sall.' Here a new roar of laughter burst forth, while Tim, again placing anenormous paw upon my shoulder, continued, 'Don't be sitting there, making abaste of yourself, when you've got enough. Don't you see you're drunk?'"I sprang to my legs on this, and made a rush to the fireplace to securethe poker; but Tim was beforehand with me, and seizing me by the waist withboth hands, flung me across his shoulders as though I were a baby, saying,at the same time, 'I'll take you away at half-past eight to-morrow, asyou're as rampageous again.' I kicked, I plunged, I swore, I threatened, Ieven begged and implored to be set down; but whether my voice was lost inthe uproar around me, or that Tim only regarded my denunciations in thelight of cursing, I know not, but he carried me bodily down the stairs,steadying himself by one hand on the banisters, while with the other heheld me as in a vice. I had but one consolation all this while; it wasthis, that as my quarters lay immediately behind the mess-room, Tim'sexcursion would soon come to an end, and I should be free once more; butguess my terror to find that the drunken scoundrel, instead of going asusual to the left, turned short to the right hand, and marched boldlyinto Ship Quay Street. Every window in the mess-room was filled with ourfellows, absolutely shouting with laughter. 'Go it Tim! That's the fellow!Hold him tight! Never let go!' cried a dozen voices; whilethe wretch, with the tenacity of drunkenness, gripped me still harder, andtook his way down the middle of the street.[Illustration: THE ADJUTANT'S AFTER DINNER RIDE.]"It was a beautiful evening in July, a soft summer night, as I made thispleasing excursion down the most frequented thoroughfare in the maidencity, my struggles every moment exciting roars of laughter from anincreasing crowd of spectators, who seemed scarcely less amused thanpuzzled at the exhibition. In the midst of a torrent of imprecationsagainst my torturer, a loud noise attracted me. I turned my head, andsaw,--horror of horrors!--the door of the meeting-house just flung open,and the congregation issuing forth en masse. Is it any wonder if Iremember no more? There I was, the chosen one of the widow Boggs, the elderelect, the favored friend and admired associate of Mr. M'Phun, taking anairing on a summer's evening on the back of a drunken Irishman. Oh, thethought was horrible! and certainly the short and pithy epithets by which Iwas characterized in the crowd, neither improved my temper nor assuaged mywrath, and I feel bound to confess that my own language was neither seriousnor becoming. Tim, however, cared little for all this, and pursued the eventenor of his way through the whole crowd, nor stopped till, having madehalf the circuit of the wall, he deposited me safe at my own door; adding,as he set me down, 'Oh, av you're as throublesome every evening, it's awheelbarrow I'll be obleeged to bring for you!'"The next day I obtained a short leave of absence, and ere a fortnightexpired, exchanged into the --th, preferring Halifax itself to the ridiculethat awaited me in Londonderry."CHAPTER XXX.FRED POWER'S ADVENTURE IN PHILIPSTOWN.The lazy hours of the long summer day crept slowly over. The sea, unbrokenby foam or ripple, shone like a broad blue mirror, reflecting here andthere some fleecy patches of snow-white cloud as they stood unmoved in thesky. The good ship rocked to and fro with a heavy and lumbering motion, thecordage rattled, the bulkheads creaked, the sails flapped lazily againstthe masts, the very sea-gulls seemed to sleep as they rested on the longswell that bore them along, and everything in sea and sky bespoke the calm.No sailor trod the deck; no watch was stirring; the very tiller ropes weredeserted; and as they traversed backwards and forwards with every roll ofthe vessel, told that we had no steerage-way, and lay a mere log upon thewater.I sat alone in the bow, and fell into a musing fit upon the past andthe future. How happily for us is it ordained that in the most stirringexistences there are every here and there such little resting-spots ofreflection, from which, as from some eminence, we look back upon the roadwe have been treading in life, and cast a wistful glance at the dark vistabefore us! When first we set out upon our worldly pilgrimage, these areindeed precious moments, when with buoyant heart and spirit high, believingall things, trusting all things, our very youth comes back to us, reflectedfrom every object we meet; and like Narcissus, we are but worshipping ourown image in the water. As we go on in life, the cares, the anxieties, andthe business of the world engross us more and more, and such moments becomefewer and shorter. Many a bright dream has been dissolved, many a fairyvision replaced, by some dark reality; blighted hopes, false friendshipshave gradually worn callous the heart once alive to every gentle feeling,and time begins to tell upon us,--yet still, as the well-remembered melodyto which we listened with delight in infancy brings to our mature age atouch of early years, so will the very association of these happy momentsrecur to us in our revery, and make us young again in thought. Then it isthat, as we look back upon our worldly career, we become convinced howtruly is the child the father of the man, how frequently are the projectsof our manhood the fruit of some boyish predilection; and that in theemulative ardor that stirs the schoolboy's heart, we may read theprestige of that high daring that makes a hero of its possessor.These moments, too, are scarcely more pleasurable than they are salutary tous. Disengaged for the time from every worldly anxiety, we pass in reviewbefore our own selves, and in the solitude of our own hearts are we judged.That still small voice of conscience, unheard and unlistened to amidst thedin and bustle of life, speaks audibly to us now; and while chastenedon one side by regrets, we are sustained on the other by some approvingthought; and with many a sorrow for the past, and many a promise for thefuture, we begin to feel "how good it is for us to be here."The evening wore later; the red sun sank down upon the sea, growing largerand larger; the long line of mellow gold that sheeted along the distanthorizon grew first of a dark ruddy tinge, then paler and paler, till itbecame almost gray; a single star shone faintly in the east, and darknesssoon set in. With night came the wind, for almost imperceptibly the sailsswelled slowly out, a slight rustle at the bow followed, the ship laygently over, and we were once more in motion. It struck four bells; somecasual resemblance in the sound of the old pendulum that marked the hour atmy uncle's house startled me so that I actually knew not where I was. Withlightning speed my once home rose up before me with its happy hearts; theold familiar faces were there; the gay laugh was in my ears; there satmy dear old uncle, as with bright eye and mellow voice he looked a verywelcome to his guests; there Boyle; there Considine; there the grim-visagedportraits that graced the old walls whose black oak wainscot stood in broadlight and shadow, as the blazing turf fire shone upon it; there was my ownplace, now vacant; methought my uncle's eye was turned towards it and thatI heard him say, "My poor boy! I wonder where is he now!" My heart swelled,my chest heaved, the tears coursed slowly down my cheeks, as I askedmyself, "Shall I ever see them more?" Oh, how little, how very little to usare the accustomed blessings of our life till some change has robbed us ofthem, and how dear are they when lost to us! My uncle's dark forebodingthat we should never meet again on earth, came for the first time forciblyto my mind, and my heart was full to bursting. What could repay me forthe agony of that moment as I thought of him, my first, my best, my onlyfriend, whom I had deserted? And how gladly would I have resigned my brightday-dawn of ambition to be once more beside his chair, to hear his voice,to see his smile, to feel his love for me! A loud laugh from the cabinroused me from my sad, depressing revery, and at the same instantMike's well-known voice informed me that the captain was looking for meeverywhere, as supper was on the table. Little as I felt disposed to jointhe party at such a moment, as I knew there was no escaping Power, Iresolved to make the best of matters; so after a few minutes I followedMickey down the companion and entered the cabin.The scene before me was certainly not calculated to perpetuate depressingthoughts. At the head of a rude old-fashioned table, upon which figuredseveral black bottles and various ill-looking drinking vessels of everyshape and material, sat Fred Power; on his right was placed the skipper, onhis left the doctor,--the bronzed, merry-looking, weather-beaten featuresof the one contrasting ludicrously with the pale, ascetic, acute-lookingexpression of the other. Sparks, more than half-drunk, with the mark of ared-hot cigar upon his nether lip, was lower down; while Major Monsoon, topreserve the symmetry of the party, had protruded his head, surmounted by ahuge red nightcap, from the berth opposite, and held out his goblet to bereplenished from the punch-bowl."Welcome, thrice welcome, thou man of Galway!" cried out Power, as hepointed to a seat, and pushed a wine-glass towards me. "Just in time, too,to pronounce upon a new brewery. Taste that; a little more of the lemon youwould say, perhaps? Well, I agree with you. Rum and brandy, glenlivetand guava jelly, limes, green tea, and a slight suspicion of preservedginger,--nothing else, upon honor,--and the most simple mixture for thecure, the radical cure, of blue devils and debt I know of; eh, Doctor? Youadvise it yourself, to be taken before bed-time; nothing inflammatory init, nothing pugnacious; a mere circulation of the better juices and moregenial spirits of the marly clay, without arousing any of the baserpassions; whiskey is the devil for that.""I canna say that I dinna like whiskey toddy," said the doctor; "in thecauld winter nights it's no sae bad.""Ah, that's it," said Power; "there's the pull you Scotch have upon us poorPatlanders,--cool, calculating, long-headed fellows, you only come up tothe mark after fifteen tumblers; whereas we hot-brained devils, with ablood at 212 degrees of Fahrenheit and a high-pressure engine of goodspirits always ready for an explosion, we go clean mad when tipsy; not butI am fully convinced that a mad Irishman is worth two sane people of anyother country under heaven.""If you mean by that insin--insin--sinuation to imply any disrespect to theEnglish," stuttered out Sparks, "I am bound to say that I for one, and thedoctor, I am sure, for another--""Na, na," interrupted the doctor, "ye mauna coont upon me; I'm no disposedto fetch ower our liquor.""Then, Major Monsoon, I'm certain--""Are ye, faith?" said the major, with a grin; "blessed are they who expectnothing,--of which number you are not,--for most decidedly you shall bedisappointed.""Never mind, Sparks, take the whole fight to your own proper self, anddo battle like a man; and here I stand, ready at all arms to prove myposition,--that we drink better, sing better, court better, fight better,and make better punch than every John Bull, from Berwick to the Land'sEnd."Sparks, however, who seemed not exactly sure how far his antagonist wasdisposed to quiz, relapsed into a half-tipsy expression of contemptuoussilence, and sipped his liquor without reply."Yes," said Power, after a pause, "bad luck to it for whiskey; it nearlygot me broke once, and poor Tom O'Reilly of the 5th, too, the best-temperedfellow in the service. We were as near it as touch and go; and all for someconfounded Loughrea spirits that we believed to be perfectly innocent, andused to swill away freely without suspicion of any kind.""Let's hear the story," said I, "by all means.""It's not a long one," said Power, "so I don't care if I tell it; andbesides, if I make a clean breast of my own sins, I'll insist uponMonsoon's telling you afterwards how he stocked his cellar in Cadiz. Eh,Major; there's worse tipple than the King of Spain's sherry?""You shall judge for yourself, old boy," said Monsoon, good-humoredly; "andas for the narrative, it is equally at your service. Of course it goes nofurther. The commander-in-chief, long life to him! is a glorious fellow;but he has no more idea of a joke than the Archbishop of Canterbury, and itmight chance to reach him.""Recount, and fear not!" cried Power; "we are discreet as the worshipfulcompany of apothecaries.""But you forget you are to lead the way.""Here goes, then," said the jolly captain; "not that the story has anymerit in it, but the moral is beautiful."Ireland, to be sure, is a beautiful country; but somehow it would prove avery dull one to be quartered in, if it were not that the people seem tohave a natural taste for the army. From the belle of Merrion Square downto the inn-keeper's daughter in Tralee, the loveliest part of thecreation seem to have a perfect appreciation of our high acquirements andadvantages; and in no other part of the globe, the Tonga Islands included,is a red-coat more in favor. To be sure, they would be very ungrateful ifit were not the case; for we, upon our side, leave no stone unturned tomake ourselves agreeable. We ride, drink, play, and make love to the ladiesfrom Fairhead to Killarney, in a way greatly calculated to render uspopular; and as far as making the time pass pleasantly, we are the boys forthe 'greatest happiness' principle. I repeat it; we deserve our popularity.Which of us does not get head and ears in debt with garrison balls andsteeple-chases, picnics, regattas, and the thousand-and-one inventions toget rid of one's spare cash,--so called for being so sparingly dealt outby our governors? Now and then, too, when all else fails, we take anewly-joined ensign and make him marry some pretty but penniless lass ina country town, just to show the rest that we are not joking, but haveserious ideas of matrimony in the midst of all our flirtations. If it wereall like this, the Green Isle would be a paradise; but unluckily every nowand then one is condemned to some infernal place where there is neither apretty face nor tight ankle, where the priest himself is not a good fellow,and long, ill-paved, straggling streets, filled on market days with boothsof striped calico and soapy cheese, is the only promenade, and a ruinousbarrack, with mouldy walls and a tumbling chimney, the only quarters."In vain, on your return from your morning stroll or afternoon canter, youlook on the chimney-piece for a shower of visiting-cards and pink notes ofinvitation; in vain you ask your servant, 'Has any one called.' Alas,your only visitor has been the ganger, to demand a party to assist instill-hunting amidst that interesting class of the population who, havingnothing to eat, are engaged in devising drink, and care as much for thelife of a red-coat as you do for that of a crow or a curlew. This may seemoverdrawn; but I would ask you, Were you ever for your sins quartered inthat capital city of the Bog of Allen they call Philipstown? Oh, but it isa romantic spot! They tell us somewhere that much of the expression of thehuman face divine depends upon the objects which constantly surround us.Thus the inhabitants of mountain districts imbibe, as it were, a certainbold and daring character of expression from the scenery, very differentfrom the placid and monotonous look of those who dwell in plains andvalleys; and I can certainly credit the theory in this instance, for everyman, woman, and child you meet has a brown, baked, scruffy, turf-like face,that fully satisfies you that if Adam were formed of clay the Philipstownpeople were worse treated and only made of bog mould."Well, one fine morning poor Tom and myself were marched off from Birr,where one might 'live and love forever,' to take up our quarters at thissweet spot. Little we knew of Philipstown; and like my friend the adjutantthere, when he laid siege to Derry, we made our entre with all the pompwe could muster, and though we had no band, our drums and fifes did dutyfor it; and we brushed along through turf-creels and wicker-baskets of newbrogues that obstructed the street till we reached the barrack,--the onlytestimony of admiration we met with being, I feel bound to admit, from aragged urchin of ten years, who, with a wattle in his hand, imitated me asI marched along, and when I cried halt, took his leave of us by dexterouslyfixing his thumb to the side of his nose and outstretching his fingers, asif thus to convey a very strong hint that we were not half so fine fellowsas we thought ourselves. Well, four mortal summer months of hot sun andcloudless sky went over, and still we lingered in that vile village, theeverlasting monotony of our days being marked by the same brief morningdrill, the same blue-legged chicken dinner, the same smoky Loughreawhiskey, and the same evening stroll along the canal bank to watch forthe Dublin packet-boat, with its never-varying cargo of cattle-dealers,priests, and peelers on their way to the west country, as though the demandfor such colonial productions in these parts was insatiable. This waspleasant, you will say; but what was to be done? We had nothing else. Now,nothing saps a man's temper like ennui. The cranky, peevish people onemeets with would be excellent folk, if they only had something to do. Asfor us, I'll venture to say two men more disposed to go pleasantly downthe current of life it were hard to meet with; and yet, such was theconsequence of these confounded four months' sequestration from all othersociety, we became sour and cross-grained, everlastingly disputingabout trifles, and continually arguing about matters which neither wereinterested in, nor, indeed, knew anything about. There were, it is true,few topics to discuss; newspapers we never saw; sporting there wasnone,--but then, the drill, the return of duty, the probable chances of ourbeing ordered for service, were all daily subjects to be talked over, andusually with considerable asperity and bitterness. One point, however,always served us when hard pushed for a bone of contention; and which,begun by a mere accident at first, gradually increased to a sore andpeevish subject, and finally led to the consequences which I have hinted atin the beginning. This was no less than the respective merits of our mutualservants; each everlastingly indulging in a tirade against the other forawkwardness, incivility, unhandiness,--charges, I am bound to confess, mostamply proved on either side."'Well, I am sure, O'Reilly, if you can stand that fellow, it's no affairof mine; but such an ungainly savage I never met,' I would say."To which he would reply, 'Bad enough he is, certainly; but, by Jove! whenI only think of your Hottentot, I feel grateful for what I've got.'"Then ensued a discussion, with attack, rejoinder, charge, andrecrimination till we retired for the night, wearied with our exertions,and not a little ashamed of ourselves at bottom for our absurd warmth andexcitement. In the morning the matter would be rigidly avoided by eachparty until some chance occasion had brought it on the tapis, whenhostilities would be immediately renewed, and carried on with the samevigor, to end as before."In this agreeable state of matters we sat one warm summer evening beforethe mess-room, under the shade of a canvas awning, discussing, by way ofrefrigerant, our eighth tumbler of whiskey punch. We had, as usual, beenjarring away about everything under heaven. A lately arrived post-chaise,with an old, stiff-looking gentleman in a queue, had formed a kind of'godsend' for debate, as to who he was, whither he was going, whetherhe really had intended to spend the night there, or that he only put upbecause the chaise was broken; each, as was customary, maintaining his ownopinion with an obstinacy we have often since laughed at, though, at thetime, we had few mirthful thoughts about the matter."As the debate waxed warm, O'Reilly asserted that he positively knewthe individual in question to be a United Irishman, travelling withinstructions from the French government; while I laughed him to scorn byswearing that he was the rector of Tyrrell's Pass, that I knew him well,and, moreover, that he was the worst preacher in Ireland. Singular enoughit was that all this while the disputed identity was himself standingcoolly at the inn window, with his snuff-box in his hand, leisurelysurveying us as we sat, appearing, at least, to take a very lively interestin our debate."'Come, now,' said O'Reilly, 'there's only one way to conclude this, andmake you pay for your obstinacy. What will you bet that he's the rector ofTyrrell's Pass?'"'What odds will you take that he's Wolfe Tone?' inquired I, sneeringly."'Five to one against the rector,' said he, exultingly."'An elephant's molar to a toothpick against Wolfe Tone,' cried I."'Ten pounds even that I'm nearer the mark than you,' said Tom, with asmash of his fist upon the table."'Done,' said I,--'done. But how are we to decide the wager?'"'That's soon done,' said he. At the same instant he sprang to his legs andcalled out: 'Pat, I say, Pat, I want you to present my respects to--'"'No, no, I bar that; no ex parte statements. Here, Jem, do you simplytell that--'"'That fellow can't deliver a message. Do come here, Pat. Just beg of--'"'He'll blunder it, the confounded fool; so, Jem, do you go.'"The two individuals thus addressed were just in the act of conveying atray of glasses and a spiced round of beef for supper into the mess-room;and as I may remark that they fully entered into the feelings of jealousytheir respective masters professed, each eyed the other with a look of veryunequivocal dislike."'Arrah! you needn't be pushing me that way,' said Pat, 'an' the round o'beef in my hands.'"'Devil's luck to ye, it's the glasses you'll be breaking with your awkwardelbow!'"'Then, why don't ye leave the way? Ain't I your suparior?'"'Ain't I the captain's own man?'"'Ay, and if you war. Don't I belong to his betters? Isn't my master thetwo liftenants?'"This, strange as it may sound, was so far true, as I held a commission inan African corps, with my lieutenancy in the 5th."'Be-gorra, av he was six--There now, you done it!'"At the same moment, a tremendous crash took place and the large dishfell in a thousand pieces on the pavement, while the spiced round rolledpensively down the yard.[Illustration: THE RIVAL FLUNKIES.]"Scarcely was the noise heard when, with one vigorous kick, the tray ofglasses was sent spinning into the air, and the next moment the disputantswere engaged in bloody battle. It was at this moment that our attention wasfirst drawn towards them, and I need not say with what feelings of interestwe looked on."'Hit him, Pat--there, Jem, under the guard! That's it--go in! Well done,left hand! By Jove! that was a facer! His eye's closed--he's down! Not abit of it--how do you like that? Unfair, unfair! No such thing! I say itwas! Not at all--I deny it!'"By this time we had approached the combatants, each man patting his ownfellow on the back, and encouraging him by the most lavish promises. Now itwas, but in what way I never could exactly tell, that I threw out my righthand to stop a blow that I saw coming rather too near me, when, by someunhappy mischance, my doubled fist lighted upon Tom O'Reilly's nose. BeforeI could express my sincere regret for the accident, the blow was returnedwith double force, and the next moment we were at it harder than theothers. After five minutes' sharp work, we both stopped for breath, andincontinently burst out a-laughing. There was Tom, with a nose as large asthree, a huge cheek on one side, and the whole head swinging round like aharlequin's; while I, with one eye closed, and the other like a half-shutcockle-shell, looked scarcely less rueful. We had not much time for mirth,for at the same instant a sharp, full voice called out close beside us--"To your quarters, sirs. I put you both under arrest, from which you arenot to be released until the sentence of a court-martial decide if conductsuch as this becomes officers and gentlemen.'"I looked round, and saw the old fellow in the queue."'Wolfe Tone, by all that's unlucky!' said I, with an attempt at a smile."'The rector of Tyrrell's Pass,' cried out Tom, with a snuffle; 'the worstpreacher in Ireland--eh, Fred?'"We had not much time for further commentaries upon our friend, for he atonce opened his frock coat, and displayed to our horrified gaze the uniformof a general officer."'Yes, sir, General Johnson, if you will allow me to present him to youracquaintance; and now, guard, turn out.'"In a few minutes more the orders were issued, and poor Tom and myselffound ourselves fast confined to our quarters, with a sentinel at the door,and the pleasant prospect that, in the space of about ten days, we shouldbe broke, and dismissed the service; which verdict, as the general orderwould say, the commander of the forces has been graciously pleased toapprove."However, when morning came the old general, who was really a trump,inquired a little further into the matter, saw it was partly accidental,and after a severe reprimand, and a caution about Loughrea whiskey afterthe sixth tumbler, released us from arrest, and forgave the whole affair."CHAPTER XXXI.THE VOYAGE CONTINUED.Ugh, what a miserable thing is a voyage! Here we are now eight days at sea,the eternal sameness of all around growing every hour less supportable.Sea and sky are beautiful things when seen from the dark woods and wavingmeadows on shore; but their picturesque effect is sadly marred from wantof contrast. Besides that, the "toujours pork," with crystals of salt aslong as your wife's fingers; the potatoes that seemed varnished in Frenchpolish; the tea seasoned with geological specimens from the basin ofLondon, ycleped maple sugar; and the butter--ye gods, the butter! But whyenumerate these smaller features of discomfort and omit the more glaringones?--the utter selfishness which blue water suggests, as inevitably asthe cold fit follows the ague. The good fellow that shares his knapsackor his last guinea on land, here forages out the best corner to hang hishammock; jockeys you into a comfortless crib, where the uncalked deck-buttfilters every rain from heaven on your head; votes you the cornerat dinner, not only that he may place you with your back to thethorough-draught of the gangway ladder, but that he may eat, drink, and liedown before you have even begun to feel the qualmishness that the dinner ofa troop-ship is well calculated to suggest; cuts his pencil with your bestrazor; wears your shirts, as washing is scarce; and winds up all by havinga good story of you every evening for the edification of the other "sharpgentlemen," who, being too wide awake to be humbugged themselves, enjoy hissuccess prodigiously. This, gentle reader, is neither confession nor avowalof mine. The passage I have here presented to you I have taken fromthe journal of my brother officer, Mr. Sparks, who, when not otherwiseoccupied, usually employed his time in committing to paper his thoughtsupon men, manners, and things at sea in general; though, sooth to say, hiswas not an idle life. Being voted by unanimous consent "a junior," he wascondemned to offices that the veriest fag in Eton or Harrow had rebelledagainst. In the morning, under the pseudonym of Mrs. Sparks, he presidedat breakfast, having previously made tea, coffee, and chocolate for thewhole cabin, besides boiling about twenty eggs at various degrees ofhardness; he was under heavy recognizances to provide a plate of butteredtoast of very alarming magnitude, fried ham, kidneys, etc., to no end.Later on, when others sauntered about the deck, vainly endeavoring to fixtheir attention upon a novel or a review, the poor cornet might be seenwith a white apron tucked gracefully round his spare proportions, whippingeggs for pancakes, or, with upturned shirt-sleeves, fashioning dough fora pudding. As the day waned, the cook's galley became his haunt, where,exposed to a roasting fire, he inspected the details of a cuisine; forwhich, whatever his demerits, he was sure of an ample remuneration in abuseat dinner. Then came the dinner itself, that dread ordeal, where nothingwas praised and everything censured. This was followed by the punch-making,where the tastes of six different and differing individuals were to beexclusively consulted in the self-same beverage; and lastly, the supper atnight, when Sparkie, as he was familiarly called, towards evening grownquite exhausted, became the subject of unmitigated wrath and mostunmeasured reprobation."I say, Sparks, it's getting late. The spatch-cock, old boy. Don't beslumbering.""By-the-bye, Sparkie, what a mess you made of that pea-soup to-day! ByJove, I never felt so ill in my life!""Na, na; it was na the soup. It was something he pit in the punch, that'sburning me ever since I tuk it. Ou, man, but ye're an awfu' creture wi'vittals!""He'll improve, Doctor; he'll improve. Don't discourage him; the boy'syoung. Be alive now, there. Where's the toast?--confound you, where's thetoast?""There, Sparks, you like a drumstick, I know. Mustn't muzzle the ox, eh?Scripture for you, old boy. Eat away; hang the expense. Hand him over thejug. Empty--eh, Charley? Come, Sparkie, bear a hand; the liquor's out.""But won't you let me eat?""Eat! Heavens, what a fellow for eating! By George, such an appetite isclean against the articles of war! Come, man, it's drink we're thinking of.There's the rum, sugar, limes; see to the hot water. Well, Skipper, how arewe getting on?""Lying our course; eight knots off the log. Pass the rum. Why, MisterSparks!""Eh, Sparks, what's this?""Sparks, my man, confound it!"And then, omnes chorussing "Sparks!" in every key of the gamut, theluckless fellow would be obliged to jump up from his meagre fare and set towork at a fresh brewage of punch for the others. The bowl and the glassesfilled, by some little management on Power's part our friend the cornetwould be drawn out, as the phrase is, into some confession of hisearly years, which seemed to have been exclusively spent inlove-making,--devotion to the fair being as integral a portion of hischaracter as tippling was of the worthy major's.Like most men who pass their lives in over-studious efforts toplease,--however ungallant the confession be,--the amiable Sparks hadhad little success. His love, if not, as it generally happened, totallyunrequited, was invariably the source of some awkward catastrophe, therebeing no imaginable error he had not at some time or other fallen into, norany conceivable mischance to which he had not been exposed. Inconsolablewidows, attached wives, fond mothers, newly-married brides, engagedyoung ladies were by some contretemps continually the subject of hisattachments; and the least mishap which followed the avowal of his passionwas to be heartily laughed at and obliged to leave the neighborhood.Duels, apologies, actions at law, compensations, etc., were of every-dayoccurrence, and to such an extent, too, that any man blessed with a smallerbump upon the occiput would eventually have long since abandoned thepursuit, and taken to some less expensive pleasure. But poor Sparks, in thetrue spirit of a martyr, only gloried the more, the more he suffered; andlike the worthy man who continued to purchase tickets in the lottery forthirty years, with nothing but a succession of blanks, he ever imaginedthat Fortune was only trying his patience, and had some cool forty thousandpounds of happiness waiting his perseverance in the end. Whether this prizeever did turn up in the course of years, I am unable to say; but certainly,up to the period of his history I now speak of, all had been as gloomyand unrequiting as need be. Power, who knew something of every man'sadventures, was aware of so much of poor Sparks's career, and usuallycontrived to lay a trap for a confession that generally served to amuse usduring an evening,--as much, I acknowledge, from the manner of the recitalas anything contained in the story. There was a species of seriousmatter-of-fact simplicity in his detail of the most ridiculous scenes thatleft you convinced that his bearing upon the affair in question must havegreatly heightened the absurdity,--nothing, however comic or droll initself, ever exciting in him the least approach to a smile. He sat with hislarge light-blue eyes, light hair, long upper lip, and retreating chin,lisping out an account of an adventure, with a look of Listen about himthat was inconceivably amusing."Come, Sparks," said Power, "I claim a promise you made me the other night,on condition we let you off making the oyster-patties at ten o'clock; youcan't forget what I mean." Here the captain knowingly touched the tip ofhis ear, at which signal the cornet colored slightly, and drank off hiswine in a hurried, confused way. "He promised to tell us, Major, howhe lost the tip of his left ear. I have myself heard hints of thecircumstance, but would much rather hear Sparks's own version of it.""Another love story," said the doctor, with a grin, "I'll be bound.""Shot off in a duel?" said I, inquiringly. "Close work, too.""No such thing," replied Power; "but Sparks will enlighten you. It is,without exception, the most touching and beautiful thing I ever heard. As asimple story, it beats the 'Vicar of Wakefield' to sticks.""You don't say so?" said poor Sparks, blushing."Ay, that I do; and maintain it, too. I'd rather be the hero of that littleadventure, and be able to recount it as you do,--for, mark me, that's nosmall part of the effect,--than I'd be full colonel of the regiment. Well,I am sure I always thought it affecting. But, somehow, my dear friend, youdon't know your powers; you have that within you would make the fortune ofhalf the periodicals going. Ask Monsoon or O'Malley there if I did not sayso at breakfast, when you were grilling the old hen,--which, by-the-bye,let me remark, was not one of your chefs-d'oeuvre.""A tougher beastie I never put a tooth in.""But the story, the story," said I."Yes," said Power, with a tone of command, "the story, Sparks.""Well, if you really think it worth telling, as I have always felt it avery remarkable incident, here goes."CHAPTER XXXIIMR. SPARKS'S STORY."I sat at breakfast one beautiful morning at the Goat Inn at Barmouth,looking out of a window upon the lovely vale of Barmouth, with its talltrees and brown trout-stream struggling through the woods, then turningto take a view of the calm sea, that, speckled over with white-sailedfishing-boats, stretched away in the distance. The eggs were fresh; thetrout newly caught; the cream delicious. Before me lay the 'PlwdwddlwnAdvertiser,' which, among the fashionable arrivals at the seaside, setforth Mr. Sparks, nephew of Sir Toby Sparks, of Manchester,--a paragraph,by the way, I always inserted. The English are naturally an aristocraticpeople, and set a due value upon a title.""A very just observation," remarked Power, seriously, while Sparkscontinued."However, as far as any result from the announcement, I might as well havespared myself the trouble, for not a single person called. Not one solitaryinvitation to dinner, not a picnic, not a breakfast, no, nor even atea-party, was heard of. Barmouth, at the time I speak of, was just in thattransition state at which the caterpillar may be imagined, when, havingabandoned his reptile habits, he still has not succeeded in becoming abutterfly. In fact, it had ceased to be a fishing village, but had notarrived at the dignity of a watering-place. Now, I know nothing as bad asthis. You have not, on one hand, the quiet retirement of a little peacefulhamlet, with its humble dwellings and cheap pleasures, nor have you the gayand animated tableau of fashion in miniature, on the other; but you havenoise, din, bustle, confusion, beautiful scenery and lovely points of viewmarred and ruined by vulgar associations. Every bold rock and juttingpromontory has its citizen occupants; every sandy cove or tide-washed bayhas its myriads of squalling babes and red baize-clad bathing women,--thoseveritable descendants of the nymphs of old. Pink parasols, donkey-carts,baskets of bread-and-butter, reticules, guides to Barmouth, specimens ofore, fragments of gypsum meet you at every step, and destroy every illusionof the picturesque.""'I shall leave this,' thought I. 'My dreams, my long-cherished dreams ofromantic walks upon the sea-shore, of evening strolls by moonlight, throughdell and dingle, are reduced to a short promenade through an alley ofbathing-boxes, amidst a screaming population of nursery-maids and sickchildren, with a thorough-bass of "Fresh shrimps!" discordant enough tofrighten the very fish from the shores. There is no peace, no quiet, noromance, no poetry, no love.' Alas, that most of all was wanting! For,after all, what is it which lights up the heart, save the flame of a mutualattachment? What gilds the fair stream of life, save the bright ray of warmaffection? What--""In a word," said Power, "it is the sugar in the punch-bowl of ourexistence. Perge, Sparks; push on.""I was not long in making up my mind. I called for my bill; I packed myclothes; I ordered post-horses; I was ready to start; one item in the billalone detained me. The frequent occurrence of the enigmatical word 'crw,'following my servant's name, demanded an explanation, which I was in theact of receiving, when a chaise-and-four drove rapidly up to the house. Ina moment the blinds were drawn up, and such a head appeared at the window!Let me pause for one moment to drink in the remembrance of that lovelybeing,--eyes where heaven's own blue seemed concentrated were shaded bylong, deep lashes of the darkest brown; a brow fair, noble, and expansive,at each side of which masses of dark-brown hair waved half in ringlets,half in loose falling bands, shadowing her pale and downy cheek, where onefaint rosebud tinge seemed lingering; lips slightly parted, as though tospeak, gave to the features all the play of animation which completed thisintellectual character, and made up--""What I should say was a devilish pretty girl," interrupted Power."Back the widow against her at long odds, any day," murmured the adjutant."She was an angel! an angel!" cried Sparks with enthusiasm."So was the widow, if you go to that," said the adjutant, hastily."And so is Matilda Dalrymple," said Power, with a sly look at me. "We areall honorable men; eh, Charley?""Go ahead with the story," said the skipper; "I'm beginning to feel aninterest in it.""'Isabella,' said a man's voice, as a large, well-dressed personageassisted her to alight,--'Isabella, love, you must take a little rest herebefore we proceed farther.'"'I think she had better, sir,' said a matronly-looking woman, with a plaidcloak and a black bonnet."They disappeared within the house, and I was left alone. The bright dreamwas past: she was there no longer; but in my heart her image lived, and Ialmost felt she was before me. I thought I heard her voice, I saw her move;my limbs trembled; my hands tingled; I rang the bell, ordered my trunksback again to No. 5, and as I sank upon the sofa, murmured to myself, 'Thisis indeed love at first sight.'""How devilish sudden it was," said the skipper."Exactly like camp fever," responded the doctor. "One moment ye are varawell; the next ye are seized wi' a kind of shivering; then comes a kind ofmandering, dandering, travelling a'overness.""D---- the camp fever," interrupted Power."Well, as I observed, I fell in love; and here let me take the opportunityof observing that all that we are in the habit of hearing about single oronly attachments is mere nonsense. No man is so capable of feeling deeplyas he who is in the daily practice of it. Love, like everything else inthis world, demands a species of cultivation. The mere tyro in an affair ofthe heart thinks he has exhausted all its pleasures and pains; but onlyhe who has made it his daily study for years, familiarizing his mind withevery phase of the passion, can properly or adequately appreciate it. Thus,the more you love, the better you love; the more frequently has your heartyielded--""It's vara like the mucous membrane," said the doctor."I'll break your neck with the decanter if you interrupt him again!"exclaimed Power."For days I scarcely ever left the house," resumed Sparks, "watching tocatch one glance of the lovely Isabella. My farthest excursion was to thelittle garden of the inn, where I used to set every imaginable species ofsnare, in the event of her venturing to walk there. One day I would leave avolume of poetry; another, a copy of Paul and Virginia with a marked page;sometimes my guitar, with a broad, blue ribbon, would hang pensively from atree,--but, alas! all in vain; she never appeared. At length I took courageto ask the waiter about her. For some minutes he could not comprehend whatI meant; but, at last, discovering my object, he cried out, 'Oh, No. 8,sir; it is No. 8 you mean?'"'It may be,' said I. 'What of her, then?'"'Oh, sir, she's gone these three days.'"'Gone!' said I, with a groan."'Yes, sir; she left this early on Tuesday with the same old gentleman andthe old woman in a chaise-and-four. They ordered horses at Dolgelly to meetthem; but I don't know which road they took afterwards.'"I fell back on my chair unable to speak. Here was I enacting Romeo forthree mortal days to a mere company of Welsh waiters and chamber-maids,sighing, serenading, reciting, attitudinizing, rose-plucking,soliloquizing, half-suiciding, and all for the edification of a set ofsavages, with about as much civilization as their own goats."'The bill,' cried I, in a voice of thunder; 'my bill this instant.'"I had been imposed upon shamefully, grossly imposed upon, and would notremain another hour in the house. Such were my feelings at least, and sothinking, I sent for my servant, abused him for not having my clothes readypacked. He replied; I reiterated, and as my temper mounted, vented everyimaginable epithet upon his head, and concluded by paying him his wages andsending him about his business. In one hour more I was upon the road."'What road, sir,' said the postilion, as he mounted into the saddle."'To the devil, if you please,' said I, throwing myself back in thecarriage."'Very well, sir,' replied the boy, putting spurs to his horse."That evening I arrived in Bedgellert."The little humble inn of Bedgellert, with its thatched roof and earthenfloor, was a most welcome sight to me, after eleven hours' travelling on abroiling July day. Behind the very house itself rose the mighty Snowdon,towering high above the other mountains, whose lofty peaks were lost amidstthe clouds; before me was the narrow valley--""Wake me up when he's under way again," said the skipper, yawningfearfully."Go on, Sparks," said Power, encouragingly; "I was never more interested inmy life; eh, O'Malley?""Quite thrilling," responded I, and Sparks resumed."Three weeks did I loiter about that sweet spot, my mind filled with imagesof the past and dreams of the future, my fishing-rod my only companion.Not, indeed, that I ever caught anything; for, somehow, my tackle wasalways getting foul of some willow-tree or water-lily, and at last, I gaveup even the pretence of whipping the streams. Well, one day--I remember itas well as though it were but yesterday, it was the 4th of August--I hadset off upon an excursion to Llanberris. I had crossed Snowdon early, andreached the little lake on the opposite side by breakfast time. There I satdown near the ruined tower of Dolbadern, and opening my knapsack, made ahearty meal. I have ever been a day-dreamer; and there are few things Ilike better than to lie, upon some hot and sunny day, in the tall grassbeneath the shade of some deep boughs, with running water murmuring near,hearing the summer bee buzzing monotonously, and in the distance, theclear, sharp tinkle of the sheep-bell. In such a place, at such a time,one's fancy strays playfully, like some happy child, and none but pleasantthoughts present themselves. Fatigued by my long walk, and overcome byheat, I fell asleep. How long I lay there I cannot tell, but the deepshadows were half way down the tall mountain when I awoke. A sound hadstartled me; I thought I heard a voice speaking close to me. I looked up,and for some seconds I could not believe that I was not dreaming. Besideme, within a few paces, stood Isabella, the beautiful vision that I hadseen at Barmouth, but far, a thousand times, more beautiful. She wasdressed in something like a peasant's dress, and wore the round hat which,in Wales at least, seems to suit the character of the female face so well;her long and waving ringlets fell carelessly upon her shoulders, and hercheek flushed from walking. Before I had a moment's notice to recover myroving thought, she spoke; her voice was full and round, but soft andthrilling, as she said,--"'I beg pardon, sir, for having disturbed you unconsciously; but, havingdone so, may I request you will assist me to fill this pitcher with water?'"She pointed at the same time to a small stream which trickled down afissure in the rock, and formed a little well of clear water beneath. Ibowed deeply, and murmuring something, I know not what, took the pitcherfrom her hand, and scaling the rocky cliff, mounted to the clear sourceabove, where having filled the vessel, I descended. When I reached theground beneath, I discovered that she was joined by another person whom,in an instant, I recognized to be the old gentleman I had seen with her atBarmouth, and who in the most courteous manner apologized for the trouble Ihad been caused, and informed me that a party of his friends were enjoyinga little picnic quite near, and invited me to make one of them."I need not say that I accepted the invitation, nor that with delight Iseized the opportunity of forming an acquaintance with Isabella, who, Imust confess, upon her part showed no disinclination to the prospect of myjoining the party."After a few minutes' walking, we came to a small rocky point whichprojected for some distance into the lake, and offered a view for severalmiles of the vale of Llanberris. Upon this lovely spot we found the partyassembled; they consisted of about fourteen or fifteen persons, all busilyengaged in the arrangement of a very excellent cold dinner, each individualhaving some peculiar province allotted to him or her, to be performed bytheir own hands. Thus, one elderly gentlemen was whipping cream under achestnut-tree, while a very fashionably-dressed young man was washingradishes in the lake; an old lady with spectacles was frying salmon over awood-fire, opposite to a short, pursy man with a bald head and drab shorts,deep in the mystery of a chicken salad, from which he never lifted his eyeswhen I came up. It was thus I found how the fair Isabella's lot had beencast, as a drawer of water; she, with the others, contributing her share ofexertion for the common good. The old gentleman who accompanied her seemedthe only unoccupied person, and appeared to be regarded as the ruler of thefeast; at least, they all called him general, and implicitly followed everysuggestion he threw out. He was a man of a certain grave and quiet manner,blended with a degree of mild good-nature and courtesy, that struck me muchat first, and gained greatly on me, even in the few minutes I conversedwith him as we came along. Just before he presented me to his friends, hegently touched my arm, and drawing me aside, whispered in my ear:--"'Don't be surprised at anything you may hear to-day here; for I mustinform you this is a kind of club, as I may call it, where every oneassumes a certain character, and is bound to sustain it under a penalty. Wehave these little meetings every now and then; and as strangers are neverpresent, I feel some explanation necessary, that you may be able to enjoythe thing,--you understand?'"'Oh, perfectly,' said I, overjoyed at the novelty of the scene, andanticipating much pleasure from my chance meeting with such very originalcharacters."'Mr. Sparks, Mrs. Winterbottom. Allow me to present Mr. Sparks.'"'Any news from Batavia, young gentleman?' said the sallow old ladyaddressed. 'How is coffee!'"The general passed on, introducing me rapidly as he went."'Mr. Doolittle, Mr. Sparks.'"'Ah, how do you do, old boy?' said Mr. Doolittle; 'sit down beside me. Wehave forty thousand acres of pickled cabbage spoiling for want of a littlevinegar.'"'Fie, fie, Mr. Doolittle,' said the general, and passed on to another."'Mr. Sparks, Captain Crosstree.'"'Ah, Sparks, Sparks! son of old Blazes! ha, ha, ha!' and the captain fellback into an immoderate fit of laughter."'Le Rio est serci,' said the thin meagre figure in nankeens, bowing, capin hand, before the general; and accordingly, we all assumed our placesupon the grass."'Say it again! Say it again, and I'll plunge this dagger in your heart!'said a hollow voice, tremulous with agitation and rage, close beside me. Iturned my head, and saw an old gentleman with a wart on his nose, sittingopposite a meat-pie, which he was contemplating with a look of fieryindignation. Before I could witness the sequel of the scene, I felt a softhand pressed upon mine. I turned. It was Isabella herself, who, looking atme with an expression I shall never forget, said:--"'Don't mind poor Faddy; he never hurts any one.'"Meanwhile the business of dinner went on rapidly. The servants, of whomenormous numbers were now present, ran hither and thither; and duck, ham,pigeon-pie, cold veal, apple tarts, cheese, pickled salmon, melon, and ricepudding, flourished on every side. As for me, whatever I might have gleanedfrom the conversation around under other circumstances, I was too muchoccupied with Isabella to think of any one else. My suit--for such itwas--progressed rapidly. There was evidently something favorable in thecircumstances we last met under; for her manner had all the warmth andcordiality of old friendship. It is true that, more than once, I caught thegeneral's eye fixed upon us with anything but an expression of pleasure,and I thought that Isabella blushed and seemed confused also. 'What careI?' however, was my reflection; 'my views are honorable; and the nephew andheir of Sir Toby Sparks--' Just in the very act of making this reflection,the old man in the shorts hit me in the eye with a roasted apple, callingout at the moment:--"'When did you join, thou child of the pale-faces?'"'Mr. Murdocks!' cried the general, in a voice of thunder; and the littleman hung down his head, and spoke not."'A word with you, young gentleman,' said a fat old lady, pinching my armabove the elbow."'Never mind her,' said Isabella, smiling; 'poor dear old Dorking, shethinks she's an hour-glass. How droll, isn't it?'"'Young man, have you any feelings of humanity?' inquired the old lady,with tears in her eyes as she spoke; 'will you, dare you assist afellow-creature under my sad circumstances?'"'What can I do for you, Madam?' said I, really feeling for her distress."'Just like a good dear soul, just turn me up, for I'm nearly run out.'"Isabella burst out a laughing at the strange request,--an excess which, Iconfess, I was unable myself to repress; upon which the old lady, puttingon a frown of the most ominous blackness, said:--"'You may laugh, Madam; but first before you ridicule the misfortunes ofothers, ask yourself are you, too, free from infirmity? When did you seethe ace of spades, Madam? Answer me that.'"Isabella became suddenly pale as death; her very lips blanched, and hervoice, almost inaudible, muttered:--"'Am I, then, deceived? Is not this he?' So saying, she placed her handupon my shoulder."'That the ace of spades?' exclaimed the old lady, with a sneer,--'that theace of spades!'"'Are you, or are you not, sir?' said Isabella, fixing her deep and languideyes upon me. 'Answer me, as you are honest; are you the ace of spades?'"'He is the King of Tuscarora. Look at his war paint!' cried an elderlygentleman, putting a streak of mustard across my nose and cheek."'Then am I deceived,' said Isabella. And flying at me, she plucked ahandful of hair out of my whiskers."'Cuckoo, cuckoo!' shouted one; 'Bow-wow-wow!' roared another; 'Phiz!' wenta third; and in an instant, such a scene of commotion and riot ensued.Plates, dishes, knives, forks, and decanters flew right and left; everyone pitched into his neighbor with the most fearful cries, and hell itselfseemed broke loose. The hour-glass and the Moulah of Oude had got me downand were pummelling me to death, when a short, thickset man came on allfours slap down upon them shouting out, 'Way, make way for the royal Bengaltiger!' at which they both fled like lightning, leaving me to the encountersingle-handed. Fortunately, however, this was not of very long duration,for some well-disposed Christians pulled him from off me; not, however,before he had seized me in his grasp, and bitten off a portion of my leftear, leaving me, as you see, thus mutilated for the rest of my days.""What an extraordinary club," broke in the doctor."Club, sir, club! it was a lunatic asylum. The general was no other thanthe famous Dr. Andrew Moorville, that had the great madhouse at Bangor, andwho was in the habit of giving his patients every now and then a kind ofcountry party; it being one remarkable feature of their malady that whenone takes to his peculiar flight, whatever it be, the others immediatelytake the hint and go off at score. Hence my agreeable adventure: the Bengaltiger being a Liverpool merchant, and the most vivacious madman in England;while the hour-glass and the Moulah were both on an experimental tour tosee whether they should not be pronounced totally incurable for life.""And Isabella?" inquired Power."Ah, poor Isabella had been driven mad by a card-playing aunt at Bath, andwas in fact the most hopeless case there. The last words I heard her speakconfirmed my mournful impression of her case,--"'Yes,' said she, as they removed her to her carriage, 'I must, indeed,have but a weak intellect, when I could have taken the nephew of aManchester cotton-spinner, with a face like a printed calico, for a trumpcard, and the best in the pack!'"Poor Sparks uttered these last words with a faltering accent, and finishinghis glass at one draught withdrew without wishing us good-night.CHAPTER XXXIII.THE SKIPPER.In such like gossipings passed our days away, for our voyage itself hadnothing of adventure or incident to break its dull monotony; save some fewhours of calm, we had been steadily following our seaward track with a fairbreeze, and the long pennant pointed ever to the land where our ardentexpectations were hurrying before it.The latest accounts which had reached us from the Peninsula told that ourregiment was almost daily engaged; and we burned with impatience to sharewith the others the glory they were reaping. Power, who had seen service,felt less on this score than we who had not "fleshed our maiden swords;"but even he sometimes gave way, and when the wind fell toward sunset, hewould break out into some exclamation of discontent, half fearing we shouldbe too late. "For," said he, "if we go on in this way the regiment will berelieved and ordered home before we reach it.""Never fear, my boys, you'll have enough of it. Both sides like the worktoo well to give in; they've got a capital ground and plenty of sparetime," said the major."Only to think," cried Power, "that we should be lounging away our idlehours when these gallant fellows are in the saddle late and early. It istoo bad; eh, O'Malley? You'll not be pleased to go back with the polish onyour sabre? What will Lucy Dashwood say?"This was the first allusion Power had ever made to her, and I became red tothe very forehead."By-the-bye," added he, "I have a letter for Hammersley, which shouldrather have been entrusted to your keeping."At these words I felt cold as death, while he continued:--"Poor fellow! certainly he is most desperately smitten; for, mark me, whena man at his age takes the malady, it is forty times as severe as with ayounger fellow, like you. But then, to be sure, he began at the wrong endin the matter; why commence with papa? When a man has his own consent forliking a girl, he must be a contemptible fellow if he can't get her; and asto anything else being wanting, I don't understand it. But the moment youbegin by influencing the heads of the house, good-by to your chances withthe dear thing herself, if she have any spirit whatever. It is, in fact,calling on her to surrender without the honors of war; and what girl wouldstand that?""It's vara true," said the doctor; "there's a strong speerit of oppositionin the sex, from physiological causes.""Curse your physiology, old Galen; what you call opposition, is thatpiquant resistance to oppression that makes half the charm of the sex.It is with them--with reverence be it spoken--as with horses: the dull,heavy-shouldered ones, that bore away with the bit in their teeth, nevercaring whether you are pulling to the right or to the left, are worthnothing; the real luxury is in the management of your arching-neckedcurvetter, springing from side to side with every motion of your wrist,madly bounding at restraint, yet, to the practised hand, held in check witha silk tread. Eh, Skipper, am I not right?""Well, I can't say I've had much to do with horse-beasts, but I believeyou're not far wrong. The lively craft that answers the helm quick, goesround well in stays, luffs up close within a point or two, when you wanther, is always a good sea-boat, even though she pitches and rolls a bit;but the heavy lugger that never knows whether your helm is up or down,whether she's off the wind or on it, is only fit for firewood,--you can donothing with a ship or a woman if she hasn't got steerage way on her.""Come, Skipper, we've all been telling our stories; let us hear one ofyours?""My yarn won't come so well after your sky-scrapers of love and courtingand all that. But if you like to hear what happened to me once, I have noobjection to tell you."I often think how little we know what's going to happen to us any minuteof our lives. To-day we have the breeze fair in our favor, we are goingseven knots, studding-sails set, smooth water, and plenty of sea-room;to-morrow the wind freshens to half a gale, the sea gets up, a rocky coastis seen from the lee bow, and may be--to add to all--we spring a leakforward; but then, after all, bad as it looks, mayhap, we rub through eventhis, and with the next day, the prospect is as bright and cheering asever. You'll perhaps ask me what has all this moralizing to do with womenand ships at sea? Nothing at all with them, except that I was a going tosay, that when matters look worst, very often the best is in store for us,and we should never say strike when there is a timber together. Now for mystory:--"It's about four years ago, I was strolling one evening down the side ofthe harbor at Cove, with my hands in my pocket, having nothing to do, norno prospect of it, for my last ship had been wrecked off the Bermudas, andnearly all the crew lost; and somehow, when a man is in misfortune, theunderwriters won't have him at no price. Well, there I was, looking aboutme at the craft that lay on every side waiting for a fair wind to run downchannel. All was active and busy; every one getting his vessel ship-shapeand tidy,--tarring, painting, mending sails, stretching new bunting, andgetting in sea-store; boats were plying on every side, signals flying, gunsfiring from the men-of-war, and everything was lively as might be,--all butme. There I was, like an old water-logged timber ship, never moving a spar,but looking for all the world as though I were a settling fast to go downstern foremost: may be as how I had no objection to that same; but that'sneither here nor there. Well, I sat down on the fluke of an anchor, andbegan a thinking if it wasn't better to go before the mast than live onthat way. Just before me, where I sat down, there was an old schooner thatlay moored in the same place for as long as I could remember. She was therewhen I was a boy, and never looked a bit the fresher nor newer as long as Irecollected; her old bluff bows, her high poop, her round stern, her flushdeck, all Dutch-like, I knew them well, and many a time I delighted tothink what queer kind of a chap he was that first set her on the stocks,and pondered in what trade she ever could have been. All the sailors aboutthe port used to call her Noah's Ark, and swear she was the identical craftthat he stowed away all the wild beasts in during the rainy season. Be thatas it might, since I fell into misfortune, I got to feel a liking for theold schooner; she was like an old friend; she never changed to me, fairweather or foul; there she was, just the same as thirty years before, whenall the world were forgetting and steering wide away from me. Every morningI used to go down to the harbor and have a look at her, just to see thatall was right and nothing stirred; and if it blew very hard at night, I'dget up and go down to look how she weathered it, just as if I was at sea inher. Now and then I'd get some of the watermen to row me aboard of her, andleave me there for a few hours; when I used to be quite happy walking thedeck, holding the old worm-eaten wheel, looking out ahead, and going downbelow, just as though I was in command of her. Day after day this habitgrew on me, and at last my whole life was spent in watching her and lookingafter her,---there was something so much alike in our fortunes, thatI always thought of her. Like myself, she had had her day of life andactivity; we had both braved the storm and the breeze; her shatteredbulwarks and worn cutwater attested that she had, like myself, not escapedher calamities. We both had survived our dangers, to be neglected andforgotten, and to lie rotting on the stream of life till the crumbling handof Time should break us up, timber by timber. Is it any wonder if I lovedthe old craft; nor if by any chance the idle boys would venture aboardof her to play and amuse themselves that I hallooed them away; or when anewly-arrived ship, not caring for the old boat, would run foul of her, andcarry away some spar or piece of running rigging, I would suddenly call outto them to sheer off and not damage us? By degrees, they came all to noticethis; and I found that they thought me out of my senses, and many a trickwas played off upon old Noah, for that was the name the sailors gave me."Well, this evening, as I was saying, I sat upon the fluke of the anchor,waiting for a chance boat to put me aboard. It was past sunset, the tidewas ebbing, and the old craft was surging to the fast current that ran bywith a short, impatient jerk, as though she were well weary, and wished tobe at rest; her loose stays creaked mournfully, and as she yawed over, thesea ran from many a breach in her worn sides, like blood trickling from awound. 'Ay, ay,' thought I, 'the hour is not far off; another stiff gale,and all that remains of you will be found high and dry upon the shore.' Myheart was very heavy as I thought of this; for in my loneliness, the oldArk--though that was not her name, as I'll tell you presently--was allthe companion I had. I've heard of a poor prisoner who, for many and manyyears, watched a spider that wove his web within his window, and never lostsight of him from morning till night; and somehow, I can believe it well.The heart will cling to something, and if it has no living object to pressto, it will find a lifeless one,--it can no more stand alone than theshrouds can without the mast. The evening wore on, as I was thinking thus;the moon shone out, but no boat came, and I was just determining to go homeagain for the night, when I saw two men standing on the steps of the wharfbelow me, and looking straight at the Ark. Now, I must tell you I alwaysfelt uneasy when any one came to look at her; for I began to fear that someshipowner or other would buy her to break up, though, except the copperfastenings, there was little of any value about her. Now, the moment I sawthe two figures stop short, and point to her, I said to myself, 'Ah, my oldgirl, so they won't even let the blue water finish you, but they mustset their carpenters and dockyard people to work upon you.' This thoughtgrieved me more and more. Had a stiff sou'-wester laid her over, I shouldhave felt it more natural, for her sand was run out; but just as thispassed through my mind, I heard a voice from one of the persons, that I atonce knew to be the port admiral's:--"'Well, Dawkins,' said he to the other, 'if you think she'll hold together,I'm sure I've no objection. I don't like the job, I confess; but still theAdmiralty must be obeyed.'"'Oh, my lord,' said the other, 'she's the very thing; she's arakish-looking craft, and will do admirably. Any repair we want, a few dayswill effect; secrecy is the great thing.'"'Yes,' said the admiral, after a pause, 'as you observed, secrecy is thegreat thing.'"'Ho! ho!' thought I, 'there's something in the wind, here;' so I laidmyself out upon the anchor-stock, to listen better, unobserved."'We must find a crew for her, give her a few carronades, make her asship-shape as we can, and if the skipper--'"'Ay, but there is the real difficulty,' said the admiral, hastily; 'whereare we to find a fellow that will suit us? We can't every day find a manwilling to jeopardize himself in such a cause as this, even though thereward be a great one.'"'Very true, my lord; but I don't think there is any necessity for ourexplaining to him the exact nature of the service.'"'Come, come, Dawkins, you can't mean that you'll lead a poor fellow intosuch a scrape blindfolded?'"'Why, my lord, you never think it requisite to give a plan of your cruiseto your ship's crew before clearing out of harbor.'"'This may be perfectly just, but I don't like it,' said the admiral."'In that case, my lord, you are imparting the secrets of the Admiralty toa party who may betray the whole plot.'"'I wish, with all my soul, they'd given the order to any one else,' saidthe admiral, with a sigh; and for a few moments neither spoke a word."'Well, then, Dawkins, I believe there is nothing for it but what you say;meanwhile, let the repairs be got in hand, and see after a crew.'"'Oh, as to that,' said the other, 'there are plenty of scoundrels in thefleet here fit for nothing else. Any fellow who has been thrice up forpunishment in six months, we'll draft on board of her; the fellows who haveonly been once to the gangway, we'll make the officers.'"'A pleasant ship's company,' thought I, 'if the Devil would only take thecommand."'And with a skipper proportionate to their merit,' said Dawkins."'Begad, I'll wish the French joy of them,' said the admiral."'Ho, ho!' thought I, 'I've found you out at last; so this is a secretexpedition. I see it all; they're fitting her out as a fire-ship, and goingto send her slap in among the French fleet at Brest. Well,' thought I,'even that's better; that, at least, is a glorious end, though the poorfellows have no chance of escape.'"'Now, then,' said the admiral, 'to-morrow you'll look out for the fellowto take the command. He must be a smart seaman, a bold fellow, too,otherwise the ruffianly crew will be too much for him; he may bid high,we'll come to his price.'"'So you may,' thought I, 'when you're buying his life.'"'I hope sincerely,' continued the admiral, 'that we may light upon someone without wife or child; I never could forgive myself--'"'Never fear, my lord,' said the other; 'my care shall be to pitch upon onewhose loss no one would feel; some one without friend or home, who, settinghis life for nought, cares less for the gain than the very recklessness ofthe adventure.'"'That's me,' said I, springing up from the anchor-stock, and springingbetween them; 'I'm that man.'"Had the very Devil himself appeared at the moment, I doubt if they wouldhave been more scared. The admiral started a pace or two backwards, whileDawkins, the first surprise over, seized me by the collar, and hold mefast."'Who are you, scoundrel, and what brings you here?' said he, in a voicehoarse with passion."'I'm old Noah,' said I; for somehow, I had been called by no other namefor so long, I never thought of my real one."'Noah!' said the admiral,--'Noah! Well, but Noah, what were you doing hereat this time of night?'"'I was a watching the Ark, my lord,' said I, bowing, as I took off my hat."'I've heard of this fellow before, my lord,' said Dawkins; 'he's a poorlunatic that is always wandering about the harbor, and, I believe, has noharm in him.'"'Yes, but he has been listening, doubtless, to our conversation,' said theadmiral. 'Eh, have you heard all we have been saying?'"'Every word of it, my lord.'"At this the admiral and Dawkins looked steadfastly at each other for someminutes, but neither spoke; at last Dawkins said, 'Well, Noah, I've beentold you are a man to be depended on; may we rely upon your not repeatinganything you overheard this evening,--at least, for a year to come?'"'You may,' said I."'But, Dawkins,' said the admiral, in a half-whisper, 'if the poor fellowbe mad?'"'My lord,' said I, boldly, 'I am not mad. Misfortune and calamity I havehad enough of to make me so; but, thank God, my brain has been tougher thanmy poor heart. I was once the part-owner and commander of a goodly craft,that swept the sea, if not with a broad pennon at her mast-head, with aslight a spirit as ever lived beneath one. I was rich, I had a home and achild; I am now poor, houseless, childless, friendless, and an outcast. Ifin my solitary wretchedness I have loved to look upon that old bark, it isbecause its fortune seemed like my own. It had outlived all that needed orcared for it. For this reason have they thought me mad, though there arethose, and not few either, who can well bear testimony if stain or reproachlie at my door, and if I can be reproached with aught save bad luck. I haveheard by chance what you have said this night. I know that you are fittingout a secret expedition; I know its dangers, its inevitable dangers, and Ihere offer myself to lead it. I ask no reward; I look for no price. Alas,who is left to me for whom I could labor now? Give me but the opportunityto end my days with honor on board the old craft, where my heart stillclings; give me but that. Well, if you will not do so much, let me serveamong the crew; put me before the mast. My lord, you'll not refuse this.It is an old man asks; one whose gray hairs have floated many a year agobefore the breeze.'"'My poor fellow, you know not what you ask; this is no common case ofdanger.'"'I know it all, my lord; I have heard it all.'"'Dawkins, what is to be done here?' inquired the admiral."'I say, friend,' inquired Dawkins, laying his hand upon my arm, 'what isyour real name? Are you he who commanded the "Dwarf" privateer in the Isleof France?'"'The same.'"'Then you are known to Lord Collingwood?'"'He knows me well, and can speak to my character.'"'What he says of himself is all true, my lord.'"'True,' said I, 'true! You did not doubt it, did you?'"'We,' said the admiral, 'must speak together again. Be here to-morrownight at this hour; keep your own counsel of what has passed, and nowgood-night.' So saying, the admiral took Dawkins by the arm and returnedslowly towards the town, leaving me where I stood, meditating on thissingular meeting and its possible consequences."The whole of the following day was passed by me in a state of feverishexcitement which I cannot describe; this strange adventure breaking in sosuddenly upon the dull monotony of my daily existence had so aroused andstimulated me that I could neither rest nor eat. How I longed for night tocome; for sometimes, as the day wore later, I began to fear that the wholescene of my meeting with the admiral had been merely some excited dream ofa tortured and fretted mind; and as I stood examining the ground whereI believed the interview to have occurred, I endeavored to recall theposition of different objects as they stood around, to corroborate my ownfailing remembrance."At last the evening closed in; but unlike the preceding one, the skywas covered with masses of dark and watery cloud that drifted hurriedlyacross; the air felt heavy and thick, and unnaturally still and calm; thewater of the harbor looked of a dull, leaden hue, and all the vesselsseemed larger than they were, and stood out from the landscape more clearlythan usual; now and then a low rumbling noise was heard, somewhat alike insound, but far too faint for distant thunder, while occasionally the boatsand smaller craft rocked to and fro, as though some ground swell stirredthem without breaking the languid surface of the sea above."A few drops of thick, heavy rain fell just as the darkness came on, andthen all felt still and calm as before. I sat upon the anchor-stock, myeyes fixed upon the old Ark, until gradually her outline grew fainterand fainter against the dark sky, and her black hull could scarcely bedistinguished from the water beneath. I felt that I was looking towardsher; for long after I had lost sight of the tall mast and high-pitchedbowsprit, I feared to turn away my head lest I should lose the place whereshe lay."The time went slowly on, and although in reality I had not been longthere, I felt as if years themselves had passed over my head. Since Ihad come there my mind brooded over all the misfortunes of my life; as Icontrasted its outset, bright with hope and rich in promise, with the sadreality, my heart grew heavy and my chest heaved painfully. So sunk was Iin my reflections, so lost in thought, that I never knew that the storm hadbroken loose, and that the heavy rain was falling in torrents. The veryground, parched with long drought, smoked as it pattered upon it; while thelow, wailing cry of the sea-gull, mingled with the deep growl of far-offthunder, told that the night was a fearful one for those at sea. Wetthrough and shivering, I sat still, now listening amidst the noise of thehurricane and the creaking of the cordage for any footstep to approach, andnow relapsing back into half-despairing dread that my heated brainalone had conjured up the scene of the day before. Such were my drearyreflections when a loud crash aboard the schooner told me that some oldspar had given way. I strained my eyes through the dark to see what hadhappened, but in vain; the black vapor, thick with falling rain, obscuredeverything, and all was hid from view. I could hear that she workedviolently as the waves beat against her worn sides, and that her ironcable creaked as she pitched to the breaking sea. The wind was momentarilyincreasing, and I began to fear lest I should have taken my last look atthe old craft, when my attention was called off by hearing a loud voice cryout, 'Halloo there! Where are you?'"'Ay, ay, sir, I'm here.' In a moment the admiral and his friend werebeside me."'What a night!' exclaimed the admiral, as he shook the rain from the heavyboat-cloak and cowered in beneath some tall blocks of granite near. 'Ibegan half to hope that you might not have been here, my poor fellow,' saidthe admiral; 'it's a dreadful time for one so poorly clad for a storm. Isay, Dawkins, let him have a pull at your flask.' The brandy rallied me alittle, and I felt that it cheered my drooping courage."'This is not a time nor is it a place for much parley,' said the admiral,'so that we must even make short work of it. Since we met here last night Ihave satisfied myself that you are to be trusted, that your characterand reputation have nothing heavier against them than misfortune, whichcertainly, if I have been rightly informed, has been largely dealt out toyou. Now, then, I am willing to accept of your offer of service if youare still of the same mind as when you made it, and if you are willing toundertake what we have to do without any question and inquiry as to pointson which we must not and dare not inform you. Whatever you may haveoverheard last night may or may not have put you in possession of oursecret. If the former, your determination can be made at once; if thelatter, you have only to decide whether you are ready to go blindfolded inthe business.'"'I am ready, my lord,' said I."'You perhaps are then aware what is the nature of the service?'"'I know it not,' said I. 'All that I heard, sir, leads me to suppose itone of danger, but that's all.'"'I think, my lord,' said Dawkins, 'that no more need now be said. Cupplesis ready to engage, we are equally so to accept; the thing is pressing.When can you sail?'"'To-night,' said I, 'if you will.'"'Really, Dawkins,' said the admiral, 'I don't see why--''"My lord, I beg of you,' said the other, interrupting, 'let me nowcomplete the arrangement. This is the plan,' said he, turning towards meas he spoke: 'As soon as that old craft can be got ready for sea, or someother if she be not worth, it, you will sail from this port with a strongcrew, well armed and supplied with ammunition. Your destination is Malta,your object to deliver to the admiral stationed there the despatcheswith which you will be entrusted; they contain information of immenseimportance, which for certain reasons cannot be sent through a ship of war,but must be forwarded by a vessel that may not attract peculiar notice. Ifyou be attacked, your orders are to resist; if you be taken, on no accountdestroy the papers, for the French vessel can scarcely escape capture fromour frigates, and it is of great consequence these papers should remain.Such is a brief sketch of our plan; the details can be made known to youhereafter.'"'I am quite ready, my lord. I ask for no terms; I make no stipulations. Ifthe result be favorable it will be time enough to speak of that. When am Ito sail?'"As I spoke, the admiral turned suddenly round and said something in awhisper to Dawkins, who appeared to overrule it, whatever it might be, andfinally brought him over to his own opinion."'Come, Cupples,' said Dawkins, 'the affair is now settled; to-morrow aboat will be in waiting for you opposite Spike Island to convey you onboard the "Semiramis," where every step in the whole business shall beexplained to you; meanwhile you have only to keep your own counsel andtrust the secret to no one.'"'Yes, Cupples,' said the admiral, 'we rely upon you for that, sogood-night.' As he spoke he placed within my hands a crumpled note for tenpounds, and squeezing my fingers, departed."My yarn is spinning out to a far greater length than I intended, so I'lltry and shorten it a bit. The next day I went aboard the 'Semiramis,'where, when I appeared upon the quarter-deck, I found myself an objectof some interest. The report that I was the man about to command the'Brian,'--that was the real name of the old craft,--had caused somecuriosity among the officers, and they all spoke to me with great courtesy.After waiting a short time I was ordered to go below, where the admiral,his flag-captain, Dawkins, and the others were seated. They repeated atgreater length the conversation of the night before, and finally decidedthat I was to sail in three weeks; for although the old schooner was sadlydamaged, they had lost no time, but had her already high in dock, with twohundred ship-carpenters at work upon her."I do not shorten sail here to tell you what reports were circulated aboutCove as to my extraordinary change in circumstances, nor how I bore myaltered fortunes. It is enough if I say that in less than three weeks Iweighed anchor and stood out to sea one beautiful morning in autumn, andset out upon my expedition."I have already told you something of the craft. Let me complete thepicture by informing you that before twenty-four hours passed over Idiscovered that so ungainly, so awkward, so unmanageable a vessel neverput to sea. In light winds she scarcely stirred or moved, as if she werewaterlogged; if it came to blow upon the quarter, she fell off from herhelm at a fearful rate; in wearing, she endangered every spar she had; andwhen you put her in stays, when half round she would fall back and nearlycarry away every stitch of canvas with the shock. If the ship was bad, thecrew was ten times worse. What Dawkins said turned out to be literallytrue. Every ill-conducted, disorderly fellow who had been up the gangwayonce a week or so, every unreclaimed landsman of bad character and noseamanship, was sent on board of us: and in fact, except that there wasscarcely any discipline and no restraint, we appeared like a floatingpenitentiary of convicted felons.So long as we ran down channel with a slack sea and fair wind, so long allwent on tolerably well; to be sure they only kept watch when they weretired below, when they came up, reeled about the deck, did all just as theypleased, and treated me with no manner of respect. After some vain effortsto repress their excesses,--vain, for I had but one to second me,--Iappeared to take no notice of their misconduct, and contented myself withwaiting for the time when, my dreary voyage over, I should quit the commandand part company with such associates forever. At last, however, it came onto blow, and the night we passed the Lizard was indeed a fearful one.As morning broke, a sea running mountains high, a wind strong fromthe northwest, was hurrying the old craft along at a rate I believedimpossible. I shall not stop to recount the frightful scenes of anarchy,confusion, drunkenness, and insubordination which our crew exhibited,--therecollection is too bad already, and I would spare you and myself therecital; but on the fourth day from the setting in of the gale, as weentered the Bay of Biscay, some one aloft descried a strange sail towindward bearing down as if in pursuit of us. Scarcely did the news reachthe deck when, bad as it was before, matters became now ten times worse,some resolving to give themselves up if the chase happened to be French,and vowing that before surrendering the spirit-room should be forced, andevery man let drink as he pleased. Others proposed if there were anythinglike equality in the force, to attack, and convert the captured vessel, ifthey succeeded, into a slaver, and sail at once for Africa. Some were forblowing up the old 'Brian' with all on board; and in fact every counselthat drunkenness, insanity, and crime combined could suggest was offeredand descanted on. Meanwhile the chase gained rapidly upon us, and beforenoon we discovered her to be a French letter-of-marque with four guns and along brass swivel upon the poop deck. As for us, every sheet of canvas wecould crowd was crammed on, but in vain. And as we labored through theheavy sea, our riotous crew grew every moment worse, and sitting downsulkily in groups upon the deck, declared that, come what might, they wouldneither work the ship nor fight her; that they had been sent to sea in arotten craft merely to effect their destruction; and that they cared littlefor the disgrace of a flag they detested. Half furious with the tauntingsarcasm I heard on every side, and nearly mad from passion, and bewildered,my first impulse was to run among them with my drawn cutlass, and ere Ifell their victim, take heavy vengeance upon the ringleaders, when suddenlya sharp booming noise came thundering along, and a round shot went flyingover our heads."'Down with the ensign; strike at once!' cried eight or ten voicestogether, as the ball whizzed through the rigging. Anticipating this, andresolving, whatever might happen, to fight her to the last, I had made themate, a staunch-hearted, resolute fellow, to make fast the signal sailyardaloft, so that it was impossible for any one on deck to lower the bunting.Bang! went another gun; and before the smoke cleared away, a third, which,truer in its aim than the rest, went clean through the lower part of ourmainsail."'Steady, then, boys, and clear for action,' said the mate.'She's a French smuggling craft that will sheer off when we show fight, sothat we must not fire a shot till she comes alongside.'"'And harkee, lads,' said I, taking up the tone of encouragement he spokewith, 'if we take her, I promise to claim nothing of the prize. Whatever wecapture you shall divide among yourselves.'"'It's very easy to divide what we never had,' said one; 'Nearly as easy asto give it,' cried another; 'I'll never light match or draw cutlass in thecause,' said a third."'Surrender!' 'Strike the flag!' 'Down with the colors!' roared severalvoices together."By this time the Frenchman was close up, and ranging his long gun tosweep our decks; his crew were quite perceptible,--about twenty bronzed,stout-looking follows, stripped to the waist, and carrying pistols in broadflat belts slung over the shoulder."'Come, my lads,' said I, raising my voice, as I drew a pistol from my sideand cocked it, 'our time is short now; I may as well tell you that thefirst shot that strikes us amidship blows up the whole craft and every manon board. We are nothing less than a fireship, destined for Brest harborto blow up the French fleet. If you are willing to make an effort for yourlives, follow me!'"The men looked aghast. Whatever recklessness crime and drunkenness hadgiven them, the awful feeling of inevitable death at once repelled.Short as was the time for reflection, they felt that there were manycircumstances to encourage the assertion,--the nature of the vessel, herriotous, disorderly crew, the secret nature of the service, all confirmedit,--and they answered with a shout of despairing vengeance, 'We'll boardher; lead us on!' As the cry rose up, the long swivel from the chase rangsharply in our ears, and a tremendous discharge of grape flew through ourrigging. None of our men, however, fell; and animated now with the desirefor battle, they sprang to the binnacle, and seized their arms."In an instant the whole deck became a scene of excited bustle; andscarcely was the ammunition dealt out, and the boarding party drawn up,when the Frenchman broached to and lashed his bowsprit to our own."One terrific yell burst from our fellows as they sprang from the riggingand the poop upon the astonished Frenchmen, who thought that the victorywas already their own; with death and ruin behind, their only hope before,they dashed forward like madmen to the fray."The conflict was bloody and terrific, though not a long one. Nearly equalin number, but far superior in personal strength, and stimulated by theirsense of danger, our fellows rushed onward, carrying all before them to thequarter-deck. Here the Frenchmen rallied, and for some minutes had ratherthe advantage, until the mate, turning one of their guns against them,prepared to sweep them down in a mass. Then it was that they ceased theirfire and cried out for quarter,--all save their captain, a short, thick-setfellow, with a grizzly beard and mustache, who, seeing his men fall back,turned on them one glance of scowling indignation, and rushing forward,clove our boatswain to the deck with one blow. Before the example couldhave been followed, he lay a bloody corpse upon the deck; while ourpeople, roused to madness by the loss of a favorite among the men, dashedimpetuously forward, and dealing death on every side, left not one manliving among their unresisting enemies. My story is soon told now. Webrought our prize safe into Malta, which we reached in five days. In lessthan a week our men were drafted into different men-of-war on the station.I was appointed a warrant officer in the 'Sheerwater,' forty-four guns; andas the admiral opened the despatch, the only words he spoke puzzled me formany a day after."'You have accomplished your orders too well,' said he; 'that privateer isbut a poor compensation for the whole French navy.'""Well," inquired Power, "and did you never hear the meaning of the words?""Yes," said he; "many years after I found out that our despatches werefalse ones, intended to have fallen into the hands of the French andmislead them as to Lord Nelson's fleet, which at that time was cruisingto the southward to catch them. This, of course, explained what fate wasdestined for us,--a French prison, if not death; and after all, either wasfully good enough for the crew that sailed in the old 'Brian.'"CHAPTER XXXIV.THE LAND.It was late when we separated for the night, and the morning was alreadyfar advanced ere I awoke; the monotonous tramp overhead showed me that theothers were stirring, and I gently moved the shutter of the narrow windowbeside me to look out.The sea, slightly rippled upon its surface, shone like a plate of frettedgold,--not a wave, not a breaker appeared; but the rushing sound close byshowed that we were moving fast through the water."Always calm hereabouts," said a gruff voice on deck, which I soonrecognized as the skipper's; "no sea whatever.""I can make nothing of it," cried out Power, from the forepart of thevessel. "It appears to me all cloud.""No, no, sir, believe me; it's no fog-bank, that large dark mass to leewardthere,--that's Cintra.""Land!" cried I, springing up, and rushing upon deck; "where,Skipper,--where is the land?""I say, Charley," said Power, "I hope you mean to adopt a little moreclothing on reaching Lisbon; for though the climate is a warm one--""Never mind, O'Malley," said the major, "the Portuguese will only beflattered by the attention, if you land as you are.""Why, how so?""Surely, you remember what the niggers said when they saw the 79thHighlanders landing at St. Lucie. They had never seen a Scotch regimentbefore, and were consequently somewhat puzzled at the costume; till atlast, one more cunning than the rest explained it by saying: 'They are insuch a hurry to kill the poor black men that they came away without theirbreeches.'""Now, what say you?" cried the skipper, as he pointed with his telescope toa dark-blue mass in the distance; "see there!""Ah, true enough; that's Cintra!""Then we shall probably be in the Tagus River before morning?""Before midnight, if the wind holds," said the skipper. We breakfasted ondeck beneath an awning. The vessel scarcely seemed to move as she cut herway through the calm water.The misty outline of the coast grew gradually more defined, and at lengththe blue mountains could be seen; at first but dimly, but as the day woreon, their many-colored hues shone forth, and patches of green verdure,dotted with sheep or sheltered by dark foliage, met the eye. The bulwarkswere crowded with anxious faces; each looked pointedly towards the shore,and many a stout heart beat high, as the land drew near, fated to coverwith its earth more than one among us."And that's Portingale, Mister Charles," said a voice behind me. I turnedand saw my man Mike, as with anxious joy, he fixed his eyes upon the shore."They tell me it's a beautiful place, with wine for nothing and spirits forless. Isn't it a pity they won't be raisonable and make peace with us?""Why, my good fellow, we are excellent friends; it's the French who want tobeat us all.""Upon my conscience, that's not right. There's an ould saying in Connaught,'It's not fair for one to fall upon twenty.' Sergeant Haggarty says thatI'll see none of the divarsion at all.""I don't well understand--""He does be telling me that, as I'm only your footboy, he'll send me awayto the rear, where there's nothing but wounded and wagons and women.""I believe the sergeant is right there; but after all, Mike, it's a safeplace.""Ah, then, musha for the safety! I don't think much of it. Sure, they mightcircumvint us. And av it wasn't displazing to you, I'd rather list.""Well, I've no objection, Mickey. Would you like to join my regiment?""By coorse, your honor. I'd like to be near yourself; bekase, too, ifanything happens to you,--the Lord be betune us and harm," here he crossedhimself piously,--"sure, I'd like to be able to tell the master how youdied; and sure, there's Mr. Considine--God pardon him! He'll be beating mybrains out av I couldn't explain it all.""Well, Mike, I'll speak to some of my friends here about you, and we'llsettle it all properly. Here's the doctor.""Arrah, Mr. Charles, don't mind him. He's a poor crayture entirely. Devil athing he knows.""Why, what do you mean, man? He's physician to the forces.""Oh, be-gorra, and so he may be!" said Mike, with a toss of his head."Those army docthers isn't worth their salt. It's thruth I'm telling you.Sure, didn't he come to see me when I was sick below in the hould?"'How do you feel?' says he."'Terribly dhry in the mouth,' says I."'But your bones,' says he; 'how's them?'"'As if cripples was kicking me,' says I."Well, with that he wint away, and brought back two powders."'Take them,' says he, 'and you'll be cured in no time.'"'What's them?' says I."'They're ematics,' says he."'Blood and ages!' says I, 'are they?'"'Devil a lie,' says he; 'take them immediately.'"And I tuk them; and would you believe me, Mister Charles?--it's thruth I'mtelling you,--devil a one o' them would stay on my stomach. So you see whata docther he is!"I could not help smiling at Mike's ideas of medicine, as I turned awayto talk to the major, who was busily engaged beside me. His occupationconsisted in furbishing up a very tarnished and faded uniform, whose whiteseams and threadbare lace betokened many years of service."Getting up our traps, you see, O'Malley," said he, as he looked with nosmall pride at the faded glories of his old vestment. "Astonish them atLisbon, we flatter ourselves. I say, Power, what a bad style of dressthey've got into latterly, with their tight waist and strapped trousers;nothing free, nothing easy, nothing dgag about it. When in a campaign,a man ought to be able to stow prog for twenty-four hours about his person,and no one the wiser. A very good rule, I assure you, though it sometimesleads to awkward results. At Vimeira, I got into a sad scrape that way. OldSir Harry, that commanded there, sent for the sick return. I was at dinnerwhen the orderly came, so I packed up the eatables about me, and rode off.Just, however, as I came up to the quarters, my horse stumbled and threw meslap on my head."'Is he killed?' said Sir Harry."'Only stunned, your Excellency,' said some one."'Then he'll come to, I suppose. Look for the papers in his pocket.'"So they turned me on my back, and plunged a hand into my side-pocket;but, the devil take it! they pulled out a roast hen. Well, the laugh wasscarcely over at this, when another fellow dived into my coat behind, andlugged out three sausages; and so they went on, till the ground was coveredwith ham, pigeon-pie, veal, kidney, and potatoes; and the only thing like apaper was a mess-roll of the 4th, with a droll song about Sir Harry writtenin pencil on the back of it. Devil of a bad affair for me! I was nearlybroke for it; but they only reprimanded me a little, and I was afterwardsattached to the victualling department."What an anxious thing is the last day of a voyage! How slowly creep thehours, teeming with memories of the past and expectations of the future!Every plan, every well-devised expedient to cheat the long and wearydays is at once abandoned; the chess-board and the new novel are alikeforgotten, and the very quarter-deck walk, with its merry gossip andcareless chit-chat, becomes distasteful. One blue and misty mountain, onefaint outline of the far-off shore, has dispelled all thought of these; andwith straining eye and anxious heart, we watch for land.As the day wears on apace, the excitement increases; the faint and shadowyforms of distant objects grow gradually clearer. Where before some tall andmisty mountain peak was seen, we now descry patches of deepest blue andsombre olive; the mellow corn and the waving woods, the village spire andthe lowly cot, come out of the landscape; and like some well-rememberedvoice, they speak of home. The objects we have seen, the sounds we haveheard a hundred times before without interest, become to us now things thatstir the heart.For a time the bright glare of the noonday sun dazzles the view and rendersindistinct the prospect; but as evening falls, once more is all fair andbright and rich before us. Rocked by the long and rolling swell, I laybeside the bowsprit, watching the shore-birds that came to rest upon therigging, or following some long and tangled seaweed as it floated by; mythoughts now wandering back to the brown hills and the broad river of myearly home, now straying off in dreary fancies of the future.How flat and unprofitable does all ambition seem at such moments as these;how valueless, how poor, in our estimation, those worldly distinctionswe have so often longed and thirsted for, as with lowly heart and simplespirit we watch each humble cottage, weaving to ourselves some story of itsinmates as we pass!The night at length closed in, but it was a bright and starry one, lendingto the landscape a hue of sombre shadow, while the outlines of the objectswere still sharp and distinct as before. One solitary star twinkled nearthe horizon. I watched it as, at intervals disappearing, it would againshine out, marking the calm sea with a tall pillar of light."Come down, Mr. O'Malley," cried the skipper's well-known voice,--"comedown below and join us in a parting glass; that's the Lisbon light toleeward, and before two hours we drop our anchor in the Tagus."CHAPTER XXXV.MAJOR MONSOON.Of my travelling companions I have already told my readers something. Poweris now an old acquaintance; to Sparks I have already presented them; of theadjutant they are not entirely ignorant; and it therefore only remains forme to introduce to their notice Major Monsoon. I should have some scruplefor the digression which this occasions in my narrative, were it not thatwith the worthy major I was destined to meet subsequently; and indeedserved under his orders for some months in the Peninsula. When MajorMonsoon had entered the army or in what precise capacity, I never yet metthe man who could tell. There were traditionary accounts of his havingserved in the East Indies and in Canada in times long past. His ownpeculiar reminiscences extended to nearly every regiment in the service,"horse, foot, and dragoons." There was not a clime he had not basked in;not an engagement he had not witnessed. His memory, or, if you will, hisinvention, was never at fault; and from the siege of Seringapatam tothe battle of Corunna he was perfect. Besides this, he possessed a mindretentive of even the most trifling details of his profession,--from theformation of a regiment to the introduction of a new button, from thelaying down of a parallel to the price of a camp-kettle, he knew it all. Tobe sure, he had served in the commissary-general's department for a numberof years, and nothing instils such habits as this."The commissaries are to the army what the special pleaders are to thebar," observed my friend Power,--"dry dogs, not over creditable on thewhole, but devilish useful."The major had begun life a two-bottle man; but by a studious cultivation ofhis natural gifts, and a steady determination to succeed, he had, at thetime I knew him, attained to his fifth. It need not be wondered at, then,that his countenance bore some traces of his habits. It was of a deepsunset-purple, which, becoming tropical, at the tip of the nose vergedalmost upon a plum-color; his mouth was large, thick-lipped, andgood-humored; his voice rich, mellow, and racy, and contributed, with theaid of a certain dry, chuckling laugh, greatly to increase the effect ofthe stories which he was ever ready to recount; and as they most frequentlybore in some degree against some of what he called his little failings,they were ever well received, no man being so popular with the world as hewho flatters its vanity at his own expense. To do this the major was everready, but at no time more so than when the evening wore late, and the lastbottle of his series seemed to imply that any caution regarding thenature of his communication was perfectly unnecessary. Indeed, from thecommencement of his evening to the close, he seemed to pass through anumber of mental changes, all in a manner preparing him for this finalconsummation, when he confessed anything and everything; and so wellregulated had those stages become, that a friend dropping in upon himsuddenly could at once pronounce from the tone of his conversation on whatprecise bottle the major was then engaged.Thus, in the outset he was gastronomic,--discussed the dinner from the soupto the Stilton; criticised the cutlets; pronounced upon the merits of themutton; and threw out certain vague hints that he would one day astonishthe world by a little volume upon cookery.With bottle No. 2 he took leave of the cuisine, and opened his batteryupon the wine. Bordeaux, Burgundy, hock, and hermitage, all passed inreview before him,--their flavor discussed, their treatment descantedupon, their virtues extolled; from humble port to imperial tokay, he wasthoroughly conversant with all, and not a vintage escaped as to when thesun had suffered eclipse, or when a comet had wagged his tail over it.With No. 3 he became pipeclay,--talked army list and eighteen manoeuvres,lamented the various changes in equipments which modern innovation hadintroduced, and feared the loss of pigtails might sap the military spiritof the nation.With No. 4 his anecdotic powers came into play,--he recounted variousincidents of the war with his own individual adventures and experience,told with an honest navet, that proved personal vanity; indeed,self-respect never marred the interest of the narrative, besides, as he hadever regarded a campaign something in the light of a foray, and esteemedwar as little else than a pillage excursion, his sentiments were singularlyamusing.With his last bottle, those feelings that seemed inevitably connectedwith whatever is last appeared to steal over him,--a tinge of sadness forpleasures fast passing and nearly passed, a kind of retrospective glance atthe fallacy of all our earthly enjoyments, insensibly suggesting moral andedifying reflections, led him by degrees to confess that he was not quitesatisfied with himself, though "not very bad for a commissary;" andfinally, as the decanter waxed low, he would interlard his meditations bypassages of Scripture, singularly perverted by his misconception fromtheir true meaning, and alternately throwing out prospects of censure orapproval. Such was Major Monsoon; and to conclude in his own words thisbrief sketch, he "would have been an excellent officer if Providence hadnot made him such a confounded, drunken, old scoundrel.""Now, then, for the King of Spain's story. Out with it, old boy; we are allgood men and true here," cried Power, as we slowly came along upon the tideup the Tagus, "so you've nothing to fear.""Upon my life," replied the major, "I don't half like the tone of ourconversation. There is a certain freedom young men affect now a-daysregarding morals that is not at all to my taste. When I was five or six andtwenty--""You were the greatest scamp in the service," cried Power."Fie, fie, Fred. If I was a little wild or so,"--here the major's eyestwinkled maliciously,--"it was the ladies that spoiled me; I was alwayssomething of a favorite, just like our friend Sparks there. Not that wefared very much alike in our little adventures; for somehow, I believe Iwas generally in fault in most of mine, as many a good man and many anexcellent man has been before." Here his voice dropped into a moralizingkey, as he added, "David, you know, didn't behave well to old Uriah. Uponmy life he did not, and he was a very respectable man.""The King of Spain's sherry! the sherry!" cried I, fearing that the major'sdigression might lose us a good story."You shall not have a drop of it," replied the major."But the story, Major, the story!""Nor the story, either.""What," said Power, "will you break faith with us?""There's none to be kept with reprobates like you. Fill my glass.""Hold there! stop!" cried Power. "Not a spoonful till he redeems hispledge.""Well, then, if you must have a story,--for most assuredly I must drink,--Ihave no objection to give you a leaf from my early reminiscences; and incompliment to Sparks there, my tale shall be of love.""I dinna like to lose the king's story. I hae my thoughts it was na a badane.""Nor I neither, Doctor; but--""Come, come, you shall have that too, the first night we meet in a bivouac,and as I fear the time may not be very far distant, don't be impatient;besides a love-story--""Quite true," said Power, "a love-story claims precedence; place auxdames. There's a bumper for you, old wickedness; so go along."The major cleared off his glass, refilled it, sipped twice, and ogled it asthough he would have no peculiar objection to sip once more, took a longpinch of snuff from a box nearly as long as, and something the shape of achild's coffin, looked around to see that we were all attention, and thusbegan:--"When I have been in a moralizing mood, as I very frequently am about thishour in the morning, I have often felt surprised by what little, trivial,and insignificant circumstances our lot in life seems to be cast; I meanespecially as regards the fair sex. You are prospering, as it were, to-day;to-morrow a new cut of your whiskers, a novel tie of your cravat, mars yourdestiny and spoils your future, varium et mutabile, as Horace has it.On the other hand, some equally slight circumstance will do what all youringenuity may have failed to effect. I knew a fellow who married thegreatest fortune in Bath, from the mere habit he had of squeezing one'shand. The lady in question thought it particular, looked conscious, and allthat; he followed up the blow; and, in a word, they were married in a week.So a friend of mine, who could not help winking his left eye, once openeda flirtation with a lively widow which cost him a special license and asettlement. In fact you are never safe. They are like the guerillas, andthey pick you off when you least expect it, and when you think there isnothing to fear. Therefore, as young fellows beginning life, I wouldcaution you. On this head you can never be too circumspect. Do you know, Iwas once nearly caught by so slight a habit as sitting thus, with my legsacross."Here the major rested his right foot on his left knee, in illustration, andcontinued:--"We were quartered in Jamaica. I had not long joined, and was about as rawa young gentleman as you could see; the only very clear ideas in my headbeing that we were monstrous fine fellows in the 50th, and that theplanters' daughters were deplorably in love with us. Not that I was muchwrong on either side. For brandy-and-water, sangaree, Manilla cigars, andthe ladies of color, I'd have backed the corps against the service.Proof was, of eighteen only two ever left the island; for what with theseductions of the coffee plantations, the sugar canes, the new rum, thebrown skins, the rainy season, and the yellow fever, most of us settledthere.""It's very hard to leave the West Indies if once you've been quarteredthere.""So I have heard," said Power."In time, if you don't knock under to the climate, you become soon totallyunfit for living anywhere else. Preserved ginger, yams, flannel jackets,and grog won't bear exportation; and the free-and-easy chuck under thechin, cherishing, waist-pressing kind of way we get with the ladies wouldbe quite misunderstood in less favored regions, and lead to very unpleasantconsequences.""It is a curious fact how much climate has to do with love-making. In ourcold country the progress is lamentably slow. Fogs, east winds, sleet,storms, and cutting March weather nip many a budding flirtation; whereaswarm, sunny days and bright moonlight nights, with genial air and balmyzephyrs, open the heart like the cup of a camelia, and let us drink in thesoft dew of--""Devilish poetical, that," said Power, evolving a long blue line of smokefrom the corner of his mouth."Isn't it, though?" said the major, smiling graciously. "'Pon my life, Ithought so myself. Where was I?""Out of my latitude altogether," said the poor skipper, who often found ithard to follow the thread of a story."Yes, I remember. I was remarking that sangaree and calipash, mangoes andguava jelly, dispose the heart to love, and so they do. I was not more thansix weeks in Jamaica when I felt it myself. Now, it was a very dangeroussymptom, if you had it strong in you, for this reason. Our colonel, themost cross-grained old crabstick that ever breathed, happened himself to betaken in when young, and resolving, like the fox who lost his tail and saidit was not the fashion to wear one, to pretend he did the thing for fun,determined to make every fellow marry upon the slightest provocation.Begad, you might as well enter a powder magazine with a branch of candlesin your hand, as go into society in the island with a leaning towards thefair sex. Very hard this was for me particularly; for like poor Sparksthere, my weakness was ever for the petticoats. I had, besides, nopetty, contemptible prejudices as to nation, habits, language, color, orcomplexion; black, brown, or fair, from the Muscovite to the Malabar, fromthe voluptuous embonpoint of the adjutant's widow,--don't be angry oldboy,--to the fairy form of Isabella herself, I loved them all round. Butwere I to give a preference anywhere I should certainly do so to the WestIndians, if it were only for the sake of the planters' daughters. I say itfearlessly, these colonies are the brightest jewels in the crown. Let'sdrink their health, for I'm as husky as a lime-kiln."This ceremony being performed with suitable enthusiasm, the major criedout, "Another cheer for Polly Hackett, the sweetest girl in Jamaica. ByJove, Power, if you only saw her as I did five and forty years ago, witheyes black as jet, twinkling, ogling, leering, teasing, and imploring,all at once, do you mind, and a mouthful of downright pearls poutingand smiling at you, why, man, you'd have proposed for her in the firsthalf-hour, and shot yourself the next, when she refused you. She was,indeed, a perfect little beauty, rayther dark, to be sure,--a little uponthe rosewood tinge, but beautifully polished, and a very nice piece offurniture for a cottage orn, as the French call it. Alas, alas, howthese vanities do catch hold of us! My recollections have made me quitefeverish and thirsty. Is there any cold punch in the bowl? Thank you,O'Malley, that will do,--merely to touch my lips. Well, well, it's all pastand gone now; but I was very fond of Polly Hackett, and she was of me.We used to take our little evening walks together through the coffeeplantation: very romantic little strolls they were, she in white muslinwith a blue sash and blue shoes; I in a flannel jacket and trousers, strawhat and cravat, a Virginia cigar as long as a walking-stick in mymouth, puffing and courting between times; then we'd take a turn to therefining-house, look in at the big boilers, quiz the niggers, and come backto Twangberry Moss to supper, where old Hackett, the father, sported aglorious table at eleven o'clock. Great feeding it was; you were alwayssure of a preserved monkey, a baked land-crab, or some such delicacy. Andsuch Madeira; it makes me dry to think of it."Talk of West India slavery, indeed. It's the only land of liberty.There is nothing to compare with the perfect free-and-easy,devil-may-care-kind-of-a-take-yourself way that every one has there. If itwould be any peculiar comfort for you to sit in the saddle of mutton, andput your legs in a soup tureen at dinner, there would be found very few toobject to it. There is no nonsense of any kind about etiquette. You eat,drink, and are merry, or, if you prefer, are sad; just as you please. Youmay wear uniform, or you may not, it's your own affair; and consequently,it may be imagined how insensibly such privileges gain upon one, and howvery reluctant we become ever to resign or abandon them."I was the man to appreciate it all. The whole course of proceeding seemedto have been invented for my peculiar convenience, and not a man in theisland enjoyed a more luxurious existence than myself, not knowing all thewhile how dearly I was destined to pay for my little comforts. Among myplenary after-dinner indulgences I had contracted an inveterate habit ofsitting cross-legged, as I showed you. Now, this was become a perfectnecessity of existence to me. I could have dispensed with cheese, with myglass of port, my pickled mango, my olive, my anchovy toast, my nutshell ofcuraoa, but not my favorite lounge. You may smile; but I've read of a manwho could never dance except in a room with an old hair-brush. Now, I'mcertain my stomach would not digest if my legs were perpendicular. Idon't mean to defend the thing. The attitude was not graceful, it was notimposing; but it suited me somehow, and I liked it."From what I have already mentioned, you may suppose that West India habitsexercised but little control over my favorite practice, which I indulgedin every evening of my life. Well, one day old Hackett gave us a greatblow-out,--a dinner of two-and-twenty souls; six days' notice; turtle fromSt. Lucie, guinea-fowl, claret of the year forty, Madeira  discrtion,and all that. Very well done the whole thing; nothing wrong, nothingwanting. As for me, I was in great feather. I took Polly in to dinner,greatly to the discomfiture of old Belson, our major, who was making up inthat quarter; for you must know, she was an only daughter, and had a verynice thing of it in molasses and niggers. The papa preferred the major,but Polly looked sweetly upon me. Well, down we went, and really a mostexcellent feed we had. Now, I must mention here that Polly had a favoriteBlenheim spaniel the old fellow detested; it was always tripping him up andsnarling at him,--for it was, except to herself, a beast of rather viciousinclinations. With a true Jamaica taste, it was her pleasure to bring theanimal always into the dinner-room, where, if papa discovered him, therewas sure to be a row. Servants sent in one direction to hunt him out,others endeavoring to hide him, and so on; in fact, a tremendous hubbubalways followed his introduction and accompanied his exit, upon whichoccasions I invariably exercised my gallantry by protecting the beast,although I hated him like the devil all the time."To return to our dinner. After two mortal hours of hard eating, the pacebegan to slacken, and as evening closed in, a sense of peaceful reposeseemed to descend upon our labors. Pastels shed an aromatic vaporthrough the room. The well-iced decanters went with measured pace along;conversation, subdued to the meridian of after-dinner comfort, justmurmured; the open jalousies displayed upon the broad veranda theorange-tree in full blossom, slightly stirring with the cool sea-breeze.""And the piece of white muslin beside you, what of her?""Looked twenty times more bewitching than ever. Well, it was just the hourwhen, opening the last two buttons of your white waistcoat (remember wewere in Jamaica), you stretch your legs to the full extent, throw your armcarelessly over the back of your chair, look contemplatively towards theceiling, and wonder, within yourself, why it is not all 'after dinner' inthis same world of ours. Such, at least, were my reflections as I assumedmy attitude of supreme comfort, and inwardly ejaculated a health to Sneydand Barton. Just at this moment I heard Polly's voice gently whisper,--"'Isn't he a love? Isn't he a darling?'"'Zounds!' thought I, as a pang of jealousy shot through my heart, 'is itthe major she means?' For old Belson, with his bag wig and rouged cheeks,was seated on the other side of her."'What a dear thing it is!' said Polly."'Worse and worse,' said I; 'it must be him.'"'I do so love his muzzy face.'"'It is him!' said I, throwing off a bumper, and almost boiling over withpassion at the moment."'I wish I could take one look at him,' said she, laying down her head asshe spoke."The major whispered something in her ear, to which she replied,--"'Oh, I dare not; papa will see me at once.'"'Don't be afraid, Madam,' said I, fiercely; 'your father perfectlyapproves of your taste.'"'Are you sure of it?' said she, giving me such a look."'I know it,' said I, struggling violently with my agitation."The major leaned over as if to touch her hand beneath the cloth. I almostsprang from my chair, when Polly, in her sweetest accents, said,--"'You must be patient, dear thing, or you may be found out, and then therewill be such a piece of work. Though I'm sure, Major, you would not betrayme.' The major smiled till he cracked the paint upon his cheeks. 'And I amsure that Mr. Monsoon--'"'You may rely upon me,' said I, half sneeringly."The major and I exchanged glances of defiance, while Polly continued,--"'Now, come, don't be restless. You are very comfortable there. Isn't he,Major?' The major smiled again more graciously than before, as he added,--"'May I take a look?'"'Just one peep, then, no more!' said she, coquettishly; 'poor dear Wowskiis so timid.'"Scarcely had these words borne balm and comfort to my heart,--for Inow knew that to the dog, and not to my rival, were all the flatteringexpressions applied,--when a slight scream from Polly, and a tremendousoath from the major, raised me from my dream of happiness."'Take your foot down, sir. Mr. Monsoon, how could you do so?' cried Polly."'What the devil, sir, do you mean?' shouted the major."'Oh, I shall die of shame,' sobbed she."'I'll shoot him like a riddle,' muttered old Belson."By this time the whole table had got at the story, and such peals oflaughter, mingled with suggestions for my personal maltreatment, I neverheard. All my attempts at explanation were in vain. I was not listened to,much less believed; and the old colonel finished the scene by ordering meto my quarters, in a voice I shall never forget, the whole room being, atthe time I made my exit, one scene of tumultuous laughter from one end tothe other. Jamaica after this became too hot for me. The story was repeatedon every side; for, it seems, I had been sitting with my foot on Polly'slap; but so occupied was I with my jealous vigilance of the major I was notaware of the fact until she herself discovered it."I need not say how the following morning brought with it every possibleoffer of amende upon my part; anything from a written apology to aproposition to marry the lady I was ready for, and how the matter mighthave ended I know not; for in the middle of the negotiations, we wereordered off to Halifax where, be assured, I abandoned my Oriental attitudefor many a long day after."CHAPTER XXXVI.THE LANDING.What a contrast to the dull monotony of our life at sea did the scenepresent which awaited us on landing in Lisbon. The whole quay was crowdedwith hundreds of people eagerly watching the vessel which bore from hermast the broad ensign of Britain. Dark-featured, swarthy, mustached faces,with red caps rakishly set on one side, mingled with the Saxon faces andfair-haired natives of our own country. Men-of-war boats plied unceasinglyto and fro across the tranquil river, some slender reefer in thestern-sheets, while behind him trailed the red pennon of some "talladmiral."The din and clamor of a mighty city mingled with the far-off sounds ofmilitary music; and in the vistas of the opening street, masses of troopsmight be seen in marching order; and all betokened the near approach ofwar.Our anchor had scarcely been dropped, when an eight-oar gig, with amidshipman steering, came alongside."Ship ahoy, there! You've troops on board?""Ay, ay, sir."Before the answer could be spoken, he was on the deck."May I ask," said he, touching his cap slightly, "who is the officer incommand of the detachment?""Captain Power; very much at your service," said Fred, returning thesalute."Rear-Admiral Sir Edward Douglas requests that you will do him the favor tocome on board immediately, and bring your despatches with you.""I'm quite ready," said Power, as he placed his papers in his sabretasche;"but first tell us what's doing here. Anything new lately?""I have heard nothing, except of some affair with the Portuguese,--they'vebeen drubbed again; but our people have not been engaged. I say, we hadbetter get under way; there's our first lieutenant with his telescope up;he's looking straight at us. So, come along. Good-evening, gentlemen." Andin another moment the sharp craft was cutting the clear water, while Powergayly waved us a good-by."Who's for shore?" said the skipper, as half-a-dozen boats swarmed aroundthe side, or held on by their boat-hooks to the rigging."Who is not?" said Monsoon, who now appeared in his old blue frock coveredwith tarnished braiding, and a cocked hat that might have roofed a pagoda."Who is not, my old boy? Is not every man among us delighted with theprospect of fresh prog, cool wine, and a bed somewhat longer than four feetsix? I say, O'Malley! Sparks! Where's the adjutant? Ah, there he is! We'llnot mind the doctor,--he's a very jovial little fellow, but a damned bore,entre nous; and we'll have a cosy little supper at the Rue di Toledo. Iknow the place well. Whew, now! Get away, boy. Sit steady, Sparks; she'sonly a cockleshell. There; that's the Plaza de la Regna,--there, tothe left. There's the great cathedral,--you can't see it now. Anotherseventy-four! Why there's a whole fleet here! I wish old Power joy of hisafternoon with old Douglas.""Do you know him then, Major?""Do I?--I should rather think I do. He was going to put me in irons here inthis river once. A great shame it was; but I'll tell you the story anothertime. There, gently now; that's it. Thank God! once more upon land. How Ido hate a ship; upon my life, a sauce-boat is the only boat endurable inthis world."We edged our way with difficulty through the dense crowd, and at lastreached the Plaza. Here the numbers were still greater, but of a differentclass: several pretty and well-dressed women, with their dark eyestwinkling above their black mantillas as they held them across their faces,watched with an intense curiosity one of the streets that opened upon thesquare.In a few moments the band of a regiment was heard, and very shortly afterthe regular tramp of troops followed, as the Eighty-seventh marched intothe Plaza, and formed a line.The music ceased; the drums rolled along the line; and the next momentall was still. It was really an inspiriting sight to one whose heart wasinterested in the career, to see those gallant fellows, as, with theirbronzed faces and stalwart frames, they stood motionless as a rock. As Icontinued to look, the band marched into the middle of the square, andstruck up, "Garryowen." Scarcely was the first part played, when atremendous cheer burst from the troop-ship in the river. The welcome noteshad reached the poor fellows there; the well-known sounds that told of homeand country met their ears; and the loud cry of recognition bespoke theirhearts' fullness."There they go. Your wild countrymen have heard their Ranz des vaches,it seems. Lord! how they frightened the poor Portuguese; look how they'rerunning!"Such was actually the case. The loud cheer uttered from the river was takenup by others straggling on shore, and one universal shout betokened thatfully one-third of the red-coats around came from the dear island, and intheir enthusiasm had terrified the natives to no small extent."Is not that Ferguson there!" cried the major, as an officer passed us withhis arm in a sling. "I say, Joe--Ferguson! oh, knew it was!""Monsoon, my hearty, how goes it?--only just arrived, I see. Delighted tomeet you out here once more. Why, we've been as dull as a veteran battalionwithout you. These your friends? Pray present me." The ceremony ofintroduction over, the major invited Ferguson to join our party at supper."No, not to-night, Major," said he, "you must be my guests this evening. Myquarters are not five minutes' walk from this; I shall not promise you veryluxurious fare.""A carbonade with olives, a roast duck, a bowl of bishop, and, if you will,a few bottles of Burgundy," said the major; "don't put yourself out forus,--soldier's fare, eh?"I could not help smiling at the nave notion of simplicity so cunninglysuggested by old Monsoon. As I followed the party through the streets,my step was light, my heart not less so; for what sensations are moredelightful than those of landing after a voyage? The escape from thedurance vile of shipboard, with its monotonous days and dreary nights,its ill-regulated appointments, its cramped accommodation, its uncertainduration, its eternal round of unchanging amusements, for the freedomof the shore, with a land breeze, and a firm footing to tread upon; andcertainly, not least of all, the sight of that brightest part of creation,whose soft eyes and tight ankles are, perhaps, the greatest of allimaginable pleasures to him who has been the dweller on blue water forseveral weeks long."Here we are," cried out Ferguson, as we stopped at the door of a largeand handsome house. We follow up a spacious stair into an ample room,sparingly, but not uncomfortably furnished: plans of sieges, maps of theseat of war, pistols, sabres, and belts decorated the white walls, and afew books and a stray army list betokened the habits of the occupant.While Ferguson disappeared to make some preparations for supper, Monsooncommenced a congratulation to the party upon the good fortune that hadbefallen them. "Capital fellow is Joe; never without something good, anda rare one to pass the bottle. Oh, here he comes. Be alive there, Sparks,take a corner of the cloth; how deliciously juicy that ham looks. Passthe Madeira down there; what's under that cover,--stewed kidneys?" WhileMonsoon went on thus we took our places at the table, and set to with anappetite which only a newly-landed traveller ever knows."Another spoonful of the gravy? Thank you. And so they say we've not beenfaring over well latterly?" said the major."Not a word of truth in the report. Our people have not been engaged. Theonly thing lately was a smart brush we had at the Tamega. Poor Patrick, acountryman of ours, and myself were serving with the Portuguese brigade,when Laborde drove us back upon the town and actually routed us. ThePortuguese general, caring little for anything save his own safety, wasmaking at once for the mountains when Patrick called upon his battalion toface about and charge; and nobly they did it, too. Down they came upon theadvancing masses of the French, and literally hurled them back upon themain body. The other regiments, seeing this gallant stand, wheeled aboutand poured in a volley, and then, fixing bayonets, stormed a little mountbeside the hedge, which commanded the whole suburb of Villa Real. TheFrench, who soon recovered their order, now prepared for a second attack,and came on in two dense columns, when Patrick, who had little confidencein the steadiness of his people for any lengthened resistance, resolvedupon once more charging with the bayonet. The order was scarcely given whenthe French were upon us, their flank defended by some of La Houssaye'sheavy dragoons. For an instant the conflict was doubtful, until poorPatrick fell mortally wounded upon the parapet; when the men, no longerhearing his bold cheer, nor seeing his noble figure in the advance, turnedand fled, pell-mell, back upon the town. As for me, blocked up amidst themass, I was cut down from the shoulder to the elbow by a young fellow ofabout sixteen, who galloped about like a schoolboy on a holiday. The woundwas only dangerous from the loss of blood, and so I contrived to reachAmacante without much difficulty; from whence, with three or four others, Iwas ordered here until fit for service.""But what news from our own head-quarters?" inquired I."All imaginable kind of rumors are afloat. Some say that Craddock isretiring; others, that a part of the army is in motion upon Caldas.""Then we are not going to have a very long sojourn here, after all, eh,Major? Donna Maria de Tormes will be inconsolable. By-the-bye, their houseis just opposite us. Have you never heard Monsoon mention his friendsthere?""Come, come, Joe, how can you be so foolish?""But, Major, my dear friend, what signifies your modesty? There is not aman in the service does not know it, save those in the last gazette.""Indeed, Joe, I am very angry with you.""Well, then, by Jove! I must tell it, myself; though, faith, lads, you losenot a little for want of Monsoon's tact in the narrative.""Anything is better that trusting to such a biographer," cried the major;"so here goes:--"When I was acting commissary-general to the Portuguese forces some fewyears ago, I obtained great experience of the habits of the people; forthough naturally of an unsuspecting temperament myself, I generallycontrive to pick out the little foibles of my associates, even upon a shortacquaintance. Now, my appointment pleased me very much on this score,--itgave me little opportunities of examining the world. 'The greatest study ofmankind is man,'--Sparks would say woman, but no matter."Now, I soon discovered that our ancient and very excellent allies, thePortuguese, with a beautiful climate, delicious wines, and very delightfulwives and daughters, were the most infernal rogues and scoundrels ever metwith. 'Make yourself thoroughly acquainted with the leading features of thenatives,' said old Sir Harry to me in a despatch from head-quarters; and,faith, it was not difficult,--such open, palpable, undisguised rascalsnever were heard of. I thought I knew a thing or two myself, when I landed;but, Lord love you! I was a babe, I was an infant in swaddling clothes,compared with them; and they humbugged me,--ay, me!--till I began tosuspect that I was only walking in my sleep."'Why, Monsoon,' said the general, 'they told me you were a sharp fellow,and yet the people here seem to work round you every day. This will neverdo. You must brighten up a little or I shall be obliged to send you back.'"'General,' said I, 'they used to call me no fool in England; but, somehow,here--'"'I understand,' said he; 'you don't know the Portuguese; there's but oneway with them,--strike quickly, and strike home. Never give them time forroguery,--for if they have a moment's reflection, they'll cheat the devilhimself; but when you see the plot working, come slap down and decide thething your own way.'"Well, now, there never was anything so true as this advice, and for theeighteen months I acted upon it, I never knew it to fail."'I want a thousand measures of wheat.'"'Senhor Excellenza, the crops have been miserably deficient, and----'"'Sergeant-major,' I would say, 'these poor people have no corn; it's awine country,--let them make up the rations that way.'"The wheat came in that evening."'One hundred and twenty bullocks wanted for the reserve.'"'The cattle are all up the mountains.'"'Let the alcalde catch them before night or I'll catch him.'"Lord bless you! I had beef enough to feed the Peninsula. And in this way,while the forces were eating short allowance and half rations elsewhere,our brigade were plump as aldermen."When we lay in Andalusia this was easy enough. What a country, to be sure!Such vineyards, such gardens, such delicious valleys, waving with corn andfat with olives; actually, it seemed a kind of dispensation of Providenceto make war in. There was everything you could desire; and then, thepeople, like all your wealthy ones, were so timid, and so easilyfrightened, you could get what you pleased out of them by a little terror.My scouts managed this very well."'He is coming,' they would say, 'after to-morrow.'"'Madre de Dios!'"'I hope he won't burn the village.'"'Questos infernales Ingleses! how wicked they are.'"'You'd better try what a sack of moidores or doubloons might do with him;he may refuse them, but make the effort.'"Ha!" said the major, with a long-drawn sigh, "those were pleasant times;alas, that they should ever come to an end! Well, among the old hidalgos Imet there was one Don Emanuel Selvio de Tormes, an awful old miser, rich asCroesus, and suspicious as the arch-fiend himself. Lord, how I melted himdown! I quartered two squadrons of horse and a troop of flying artilleryupon him. How the fellows did eat! Such a consumption of wines was neverheard of; and as they began to slacken a little, I took care to replacethem by fresh arrivals,--fellows from the mountains, caadores they callthem. At last, my friend Don Emanuel could stand it no longer, and he sentme a diplomatic envoy to negotiate terms, which, upon the whole, I mustsay, were fair enough; and in a few days after, the caadores werewithdrawn, and I took up my quarters at the chteau. I have had variouschances and changes in this wicked world, but I am free to confess that Inever passed a more agreeable time than the seven weeks I spent there. DonEmanuel, when properly managed, became a very pleasant little fellow; DonnaMaria, his wife, was a sweet creature. You need not be winking that way.Upon my life she was: rather fat, to be sure, and her age something vergingupon the fifties; but she had such eyes, black as sloes, and luscious asripe grapes; and she was always smiling and ogling, and looking so sweet.Confound me, if I think she wasn't the most enchanting being in this world,with about ten thousand pounds' worth of jewels upon her fingers and inher ears. I have her before me at this instant, as she used to sit in thelittle arbor in the garden, with a Manilla cigar in her mouth, and a littlebrandy-and-water--quite weak, you know--beside her."'Ah, General,' she used to say--she always called me general--'what aglorious career yours is! A soldier is indeed a man.'"Then she would look at poor Emanuel, who used to sit in a corner, holdinghis hand to his face, for hours, calculating interest and cent per cent,till he fell asleep."Now, he labored under a very singular malady,--not that I ever knew it atthe time,--a kind of luxation of the lower jaw, which, when it came on,happened somehow to press upon some vital nerve or other, and left himperfectly paralyzed till it was restored to its proper place. In fact,during the time the agony lasted, he was like one in a trance; for thoughhe could see and hear, he could neither speak nor move, and looked as if hehad done with both for many a day to come."Well, as I was saying, I knew nothing of all this till a slightcircumstance made it known to me. I was seated one evening in the littlearbor I mentioned, with Donna Maria. There was a little table before uscovered with wines and fruits, a dish of olives, some Castile oranges, anda fresh pine. I remember it well: my eye roved over the little dessert setout in old-fashioned, rich silver dishes, then turned towards the ladyherself, with rings and brooches, earrings and chains enough to reward onefor sacking a town; and I said to myself, 'Monsoon, Monsoon, this is betterthan long marches in the Pyrenees, with a cork-tree for a bed-curtain, andwet grass for a mattress. How pleasantly one might jog on in this worldwith this little country-house for his abode, and Donna Maria for acompanion!'"I tasted the port; it was delicious. Now, I knew very little Portuguese,but I made some effort to ask if there was much of it in the cellar."She smiled, and said, 'Oh, yes.'"'What a luxurious life one might lead here!' thought I; 'and after all,perhaps Providence might remove Don Emanuel.'"I finished the bottle as I thus meditated. The next was, if possible, morecrusty."'This is a delicious retreat,' said I, soliloquizing."Donna Maria seemed to know what was passing in my mind, for she smiled,too."'Yes,' said I, in broken Portuguese, 'one ought to be very happy here,Donna Maria.'"She blushed, and I continued:--"'What can one want for more in this life? All the charms that renderedParadise what it was'--I took her hand here--'and made Adam blessed.'"'Ah, General!' said she, with a sigh, 'you are such a flatterer.'"'Who could flatter,' said I, with enthusiasm, 'when there are not wordsenough to express what he feels?' This was true, for my Portuguese was fastfailing me, 'But if I ever was happy, it is now.'"I took another pull at the port."'If I only thought,' said I, 'that my presence here was not thoughtunwelcome--'"'Fie, General,' said she, 'how could you say such a thing?'"'If I only thought I was not hated,' said I, tremblingly."'Oh!' said she, again."'Despised.'"'Oh!'"'Loathed.'[Illustration: MAJOR MONSOON AND DONNA MARIA.]"She pressed my hand, I kissed hers; she hurriedly snatched it from me, andpointed towards a lime-tree near, beneath which, in the cool enjoyment ofhis cigar, sat the spare and detested figure of Don Emanuel."'Yes,' thought I, 'there he is,--the only bar to my good fortune; wereit not for him, I should not be long before I became possessor of thisexcellent old chteau, with a most indiscretionary power over the cellar.Don Mauricius Monsoon would speedily assume his place among the grandees ofPortugal.'"I know not how long my revery lasted, nor, indeed, how the evening passed;but I remember well the moon was up, and a sky, bright with a thousandstars was shining, as I sat beside the fair Donna Maria, endeavoring, withsuch Portuguese as it had pleased fate to bestow on me, to instruct hertouching my warlike services and deeds of arms. The fourth bottle of portwas ebbing beneath my eloquence, as responsively her heart beat, when Iheard a slight rustle in the branches near. I looked, and, Heavens, what asight did I behold! There was little Don Emanuel stretched upon the grasswith his mouth wide open, his face pale as death, his arms stretched out ateither side, and his legs stiffened straight out. I ran over and asked ifhe were ill, but no answer came. I lifted up an arm, but it fell heavilyupon the ground as I let it go; the leg did likewise. I touched his nose;it was cold."'Hollo,' thought I, 'is it so? This comes of mixing water with yoursherry. I saw where it would end.'"Now, upon my life! I felt sorry for the little fellow; but somehow, onegets so familiarized with this sort of thing in a campaign that one onlyhalf feels in a case like this."'Yes,' said I, 'man is but grass; but I for one must make hay when the sunshines. Now for the Donna Maria,'--for the poor thing was asleep in thearbor all this while."'Donna,' said I, shaking her by the elbow,--'Donna, don't be shocked atwhat I'm going to say.'"'Ah, General,' said she, with a sigh, 'say no more; I must not listen toyou.'"'You don't know that,' said I, with a knowing look,--'you don't knowthat.'"'Why, what can you mean?'"'The little fellow is done for.' For the port was working strong now,and destroyed all my fine sensibility. 'Yes, Donna,' said I, 'you arefree,'--here I threw myself upon my knees,--'free to make me the happiestof commissaries and the jolliest grandee of Portugal that ever--'"'But Don Emanuel?'"'Run out, dry, empty,' inverting a finished decanter to typify my words asI spoke."'He is not dead?' said she, with a scream."'Even so,' said I, with a hiccough! 'ordered for service in a betterworld, where there are neither inspections nor arrears.'"Before the words were well out, she sprang from the bench and rushed overto the spot where the little don lay. What she said or did I know not, butthe next moment he sat bolt upright on the grass, and as he held his jawwith one hand and supported himself on the other, vented such a torrent ofabuse and insult at me, that, for want of Portuguese enough to reply, Irejoined in English, in which I swore pretty roundly for five minutes.Meanwhile the donna had summoned the servants, who removed Don Emanuel tothe house, where on my return I found my luggage displayed before the door,with a civil hint to deploy in orderly time and take ground elsewhere."In a few days, however, his anger cooled down, and I received a politenote from Donna Maria, that the don at length began to understand the joke,and begged that I would return to the chteau, and that he would expect meat dinner the same day.""With which, of course, you complied?""Which of course I did. Forgive your enemies, my dear boy,--it is onlyChristian-like; and really, we lived very happily ever after. The donna wasa mighty clever woman, and a dear good soul besides."It was late when the major concluded his story; so after wishing Ferguson agood-night, we took our leave, and retired for the night to our quarters.CHAPTER XXXVIILISBON.The tramp of horses' feet and the sound of voices beneath my window rousedme from a deep sleep. I sprang up and drew aside the curtain. What astrange confusion beset me as I looked forth! Before me lay a broad andtranquil river whose opposite shore, deeply wooded and studded with villasand cottages, rose abruptly from the water's edge; vessels of war laytranquilly in the stream, their pennants trailing in the tide. The loudboom of a morning gun rolled along the surface, awaking a hundred echoes asit passed, and the lazy smoke rested for some minutes on the glassy wateras it blended with the thin air of the morning."Where am I?" was my first question to myself, as I continued to look fromside to side, unable to collect my scattered senses.One word sufficed to recall me to myself, as I heard Power's voice, fromwithout, call out, "Charley! O'Malley, I say! Come down here!"I hurriedly threw on my clothes and went to the door."Well, Charley, I've been put in harness rather sooner than I expected.Here's old Douglas has been sitting up all night writing despatches; andI must hasten on to headquarters without a moment's delay. There's workbefore us, that's certain; but when, where, and how, of that I knownothing. You may expect the route every moment; the French are stilladvancing. Meanwhile I have a couple of commissions for you to execute.First, here's a packet for Hammersley; you are sure to meet him with theregiment in a day or two. I have some scruples about asking you this; but,confound it! you're too sensible a fellow to care--" Here he hesitated;and as I colored to the eyes, for some minutes he seemed uncertain how toproceed. At length, recovering himself, he went on: "Now for the other.This is a most loving epistle from a poor devil of a midshipman, writtenlast night by a tallow candle, in the cock-pit, containing vows of eternaladoration and a lock of hair. I promised faithfully to deliver it myself;for the 'Thunderer' sails for Gibraltar next tide, and he cannot go ashorefor an instant. However, as Sir Arthur's billet may be of more importancethan the reefer's, I must intrust its safe keeping to your hands. Now,then, don't look so devilish sleepy, but seem to understand what I amsaying. This is the address: 'La Senhora Inez da Silviero, Rua Nuova,opposite the barber's.' You'll not neglect it. So now, my dear boy, tillour next meeting, adios!""Stop! For Heaven's sake, not so fast, I pray! Where's the street?""The Rua Nuova. Remember Figaro, my boy. Cinque perruche.""But what am I to do?""To do! What a question! Anything; everything. Be a good diplomate. Speakof the torturing agony of the lover, for which I can vouch. The boy is onlyfifteen. Swear that he is to return in a month, first lieutenant of the'Thunder Bomb,' with intentions that even Madame Dalrymple would approve.""What nonsense," said I, blushing to the eyes."And if that suffice not, I know of but one resource.""Which is?""Make love to her yourself. Ay, even so. Don't look so confoundedlyvinegar; the girl, I hear, is a devilish pretty one, the house pleasant,and I sincerely wish I could exchange duties with you, leaving you to makeyour bows to his Excellency the C. O. F., and myself free to make mine toLa Senhora. And now, push along, old red cap."So saying, he made a significant cut of his whip at the Portuguese guide,and in another moment was out of sight.My first thought was one of regret at Power's departure. For some time pastwe had been inseparable companions; and notwithstanding the reckless andwild gayety of his conduct, I had ever found him ready to assist me inevery difficulty, and that with an address and dexterity a more calculatingadviser might not have possessed. I was now utterly alone; for thoughMonsoon and the adjutant were still in Lisbon, as was also Sparks, I nevercould make intimates of them.I ate my breakfast with a heavy heart, my solitary position againsuggesting thoughts of home and kindred. Just at this moment my eyes fellupon the packet destined for Hammersley; I took it up and weighed it inmy hand. "Alas!" thought I, "how much of my destiny may lie within thatenvelope! How fatally may my after-life be influenced by it!" It felt heavyas though there was something besides letters. True, too true; there wasa picture, Lucy's portrait! The cold drops of perspiration stood uponmy forehead as my fingers traced the outline of a miniature-case in theparcel. I became deadly weak, and sank, half-fainting, upon a chair. Andsuch is the end of my first dream of happiness! How have I duped, howhave I deceived myself! For, alas, though Lucy had never responded to myproffered vows of affection, yet had I ever nurtured in my heart a secrethope that I was not altogether uncared for. Every look she had given me,every word she had spoken, the tone of her voice, her step, her everygesture, were before me, all confirming my delusion, and yet,--I could bearno more, and burst into tears.The loud call of a cavalry trumpet aroused me.How long I had passed in this state of despondency I knew not; but it waslong past noon when I rallied myself. My charger was already awaiting me;and a second blast of the trumpet told that the inspection in the Plaza wasabout to commence.As I continued to dress, I gradually rallied from my depressing thoughts;and ere I belted my sabretasche, the current of my ideas had turned fromtheir train of sadness to one of hardihood and daring. Lucy Dashwood hadtreated me like a wilful schoolboy. Mayhap, I may prove myself as gallant asoldier as even him she has preferred before me.A third sound of the trumpet cut short my reflections, and I sprang intothe saddle, and hastened towards the Plaza. As I dashed along the streets,my horse, maddened with the impulse that stirred my own heart, curvettedand plunged unceasingly. As I reached the Plaza, the crowd became dense,and I was obliged to pull up. The sound of the music, the parade, the trampof the infantry, and the neighing of the horses, were, however, too muchfor my mettlesome steed, and he became nearly unmanageable; he plungedfearfully, and twice reared as though he would have fallen back. As Iscattered the foot passengers right and left with terror, my eye fell uponone lovely girl, who, tearing herself from her companion, rushed wildlytowards an open doorway for shelter; suddenly, however, changing herintention, she came forward a few paces, and then, as if overcome by fear,stood stock-still, her hands clasped upon her bosom, her eyes upturned, herfeatures deadly pale, while her knees seemed bending beneath her. Never didI behold a more beautiful object. Her dark hair had fallen loose upon hershoulder, and she stood the very idal of the "Madonna Supplicating."My glance was short as a lightning flash; for the same instant my horseswerved, and dashed forward right at the place where she was standing. Oneterrific cry rose from the crowd, who saw her danger. Beside her stood amuleteer who had drawn up his mule and cart close beside the footway forsafety; she made one effort to reach it, but her outstretched arms alonemoved, and paralyzed by terror, she sank motionless upon the pavement.There was but one course open to me now; so collecting myself for theeffort, I threw my horse upon his haunches, and then, dashing the spursinto his flanks, breasted him at the mule cart. With one spring he rose,and cleared it at a bound, while the very air rang with the acclamationsof the multitude, and a thousand bravos saluted me as I alighted upon theopposite side."Well done, O'Malley!" sang out the little adjutant, as I flew past andpulled up in the middle of the Plaza."Something devilish like Galway in that leap," said a very musical voicebeside me; and at the same instant a tall, soldier-like man, in an undressdragoon frock, touched his cap, and said, "A 14th man, I perceive, sir. MayI introduce myself? Major O'Shaughnessy."I bowed, and shook the major's proffered hand, while he continued,--"Old Monsoon mentioned your name to us this morning. You came out together,if I mistake not?""Yes; but somehow, I've missed the major since my landing.""Oh, you'll see him presently; he'll be on parade. By-the-bye, he wishesparticularly to meet you. We dine to-day at the 'Quai de Soderi,' and ifyou're not engaged--Yes, this is the person," said he, turning at themoment towards a servant, who, with a card in his hand, seemed to searchfor some one in the crowd.The man approached, and handed it to me."What can this mean?" said I. "Don Emanuel de Blacas y Silviero, RuaNuova.""Why, that's the great Portuguese contractor, the intendant of half thearmy, the richest fellow in Lisbon. Have you known him long?""Never heard of him till now.""By Jove, you're in luck! No man gives such dinners; he has such a cellar!I'll wager a fifty it was his daughter you took in the flying leap a whileago. I hear she is a beautiful creature.""Yes," thought I, "that must be it; and yet, strange enough, I think thename and address are familiar to me.""Ten to one, you've heard Monsoon speak of him; he's most intimate there.But here comes the major."And as he spoke, the illustrious commissary came forward holding a vastbundle of papers in one hand, and his snuff-box in the other, followed by along string of clerks, contractors, assistant-surgeons, paymasters, etc.,all eagerly pressing forward to be heard."It's quite impossible; I can't do it to-day. Victualling and physickingare very good things, but must be done in season. I have been up allnight at the accounts,--haven't I, O'Malley?" here he winked at me mostsignificantly; "and then I have the forage and stoppage fund to lookthrough ['we dine at six, sharp,' said he, sotto voce], which will leaveme without one minute unoccupied for the next twenty-four hours. Look toyour toggery this evening; I've something in my eye for you, O'Malley.""Officers unattached to their several corps will fall into the middle ofthe Plaza," said a deep voice among the crowd; and in obedience to theorder I rode forward and placed myself with a number of others, apparentlynewly joined, in the open square. A short, gray-haired old colonel, with adark, eagle look, proceeded to inspect us, reading from a paper as he camealong,--"Mr. Hepton, 6th Foot; commission bearing date 11th January; drilled,proceed to Ovar, and join his regiment."Mr. Gronow, Fusilier Guards, remains with the depot."Captain Mortimer, 1st Dragoons, appointed aide-de-camp to the generalcommanding the cavalry brigade."Mr. Sparks,--where is Mr. Sparks? Mr. Sparks absent from parade; make anote of it."Mr. O'Malley, 14th Light Dragoons. Mr. O'Malley,--oh, I remember! I havereceived a letter from Sir George Dashwood concerning you. You will holdyourself in readiness to march. Your friends desire that before you mayobtain any staff appointment, you should have the opportunity of seeingsome service. Am I to understand such is your wish?""Most certainly.""May I have the pleasure of your company at dinner to-day?""I regret that I have already accepted an invitation to dine with MajorMonsoon.""With Major Monsoon? Ah, indeed! Perhaps it might be as well I shouldmention,--but no matter. I wish you good-morning."So saying, the little colonel rode off, leaving me to suppose that mydinner engagement had not raised me in his estimation, though why, I couldnot exactly determine.CHAPTER XXXVIII.THE RUA NUOVA.Our dinner was a long and uninteresting one, and as I found that the majorwas likely to prefer his seat as chairman of the party to the seductionsof ladies' society, I took the first opportunity of escaping and left theroom.It was a rich moonlight night as I found myself in the street. My way,which led along the banks of the Tagus, was almost as light as in daytime,and crowded with walking parties, who sauntered carelessly along in theenjoyment of the cool, refreshing night-air. On inquiring, I discoveredthat the Rua Nuova was at the extremity of the city; but as the road ledalong by the river I did not regret the distance, but walked on withincreasing pleasure at the charms of so heavenly a climate and country.After three quarters of an hour's walk, the streets became by degrees lessand less crowded. A solitary party passed me now and then; the buzz ofdistant voices succeeded to the gay laughter and merry tones of the passinggroups, and at length my own footsteps alone awoke the echoes along thedeserted pathway. I stopped every now and then to gaze upon the tranquilriver, whose eddies were circling in the pale silver of the moonlight. Ilistened with attentive ear as the night breeze wafted to me the far-offsounds of a guitar, and the deep tones of some lover's serenade; whileagain the tender warbling of the nightingale came borne across the streamon a wind rich with the odor of the orange-tree.As thus I lingered on my way the time stole on, and it was near midnightere I had roused myself from the revery surrounding objects had thrownabout me. I stopped suddenly, and for some minutes I struggled withmyself to discover if I was really awake. As I walked along, lost in myreflections, I had entered a little garden beside the river. Fragrantplants and lovely flowers bloomed on every side; the orange, the camelia,the cactus, and the rich laurel of Portugal were blending their green andgolden hues around me, while the very air was filled with delicious music."Was it a dream? Could such ecstasy be real?" I asked myself, as the richnotes swelled upwards in their strength, and sank in soft cadence to tonesof melting harmony; now bursting forth in the full force of gladness,the voices blended together in one stream of mellow music, and suddenlyceasing, the soft but thrilling shake of a female voice rose upon the air,and in its plaintive beauty stirred the very heart. The proud tramp ofmartial music succeeded to the low wailing cry of agony; then came thecrash of battle, the clang of steel; the thunder of the fight rolled on inall its majesty, increasing in its maddening excitement till it ended inone loud shout of victory.All was still; not a breath moved, not a leaf stirred, and again was Irelapsing into my dreamy scepticism, when again the notes swelled upwardsin concert. But now their accents were changed, and in low, subdued tones,faintly and slowly uttered, the prayer of thanksgiving rose to Heaven andspoke their gratefulness. I almost fell upon my knees, and already thetears filled my eyes as I drank in the sounds. My heart was full tobursting, and even now as I write it my pulse throbs as I remember the hymnof the Abencerrages.When I rallied from my trance of excited pleasure, my first thought was,where was I, and how came I there? Before I could resolve my doubts uponthe question, my attention was turned in another direction, for closebeside me the branches moved forward, and a pair of arms were thrown aroundmy neck, while a delicious voice cried out in an accent of childish,delight, "Trovado!" At the same instant a lovely head sank upon myshoulder, covering it with tresses of long brown hair. The arms pressed mestill more closely, till I felt her very heart beating against my side."Mio fradre," said a soft, trembling voice, as her fingers played in myhair and patted my temples.What a situation mine! I well knew that some mistaken identity had been thecause, but still I could not repress my inclination to return the embrace,as I pressed my lips upon the fair forehead that leaned upon my bosom; atthe same moment she threw back her head, as if to look me more fully in theface. One glance sufficed; blushing deeply over her cheeks and neck, shesprang from my arms, and uttering a faint cry, staggered against a tree.In an instant I saw it was the lovely girl I had met in the morning; andwithout losing a second I poured out apologies for my intrusion with allthe eloquence I was master of, till she suddenly interrupted me by askingif I spoke French. Scarcely had I recommenced my excuses in that language,when a third party appeared upon the stage. This was a short, elderly man,in a green uniform, with several decorations upon his breast, and a cockedhat with a most flowing plume in his right hand."May I beg to know whom I have the honor of receiving?" inquired he, invery excellent English, as he advanced with a look of very ceremonious anddistant politeness.I immediately explained that, presuming upon the card which his servant hadpresented me, I had resolved on paying my respects when a mistake had ledme accidentally into his garden.My apologies had not come to an end when he folded me in his arms andoverwhelmed me with thanks, at the same time saying a few words inPortuguese to his daughter. She stooped down, and taking my hand gentlywithin her own, touched it with her lips.This piece of touching courtesy,--which I afterwards found meant little ornothing,--affected me deeply at the time, and I felt the blood rush to myface and forehead, half in pride, half in a sense of shame. My confusionwas, however, of short duration; for taking my arm, the old gentleman ledme along a few paces, and turning round a small clump of olives, entered alittle summer-house. Here a considerable party were assembled, which fortheir picturesque effect could scarcely have been better managed on thestage.Beneath the mild lustre of a large lamp of stained glass, half hid in theoverhanging boughs, was spread a table covered with vessels of gold andsilver plate of gorgeous richness; drinking cups and goblets of antiquepattern shone among cups of Svres china or Venetian glass; deliciousfruit, looking a thousand times more tempting for being contained inbaskets of silver foliage, peeped from amidst a profusion of fresh flowers,whose odor was continually shed around by a slight jet d'eau that playedamong the leaves. Around upon the grass, seated upon cushions or recliningon Genoa carpets, were several beautiful girls in most becoming costumes,their dark locks and darker eyes speaking of "the soft South," while theirexpressive gestures and animated looks betokened a race whose temperamentis glowing as their clime. There were several men also, the greater numberof whom appeared in uniform,--bronzed, soldier-like fellows, who hadthe jaunty air and easy carriage of their calling,--among whom was oneEnglishman, or at least so I guessed from his wearing the uniform of aheavy dragoon regiment."This is my daughter's fte," said Don Emanuel, as he ushered me into theassembly,--"her birthday; a sad day it might have been for us had it notbeen for your courage and forethought." So saying, he commenced a recitalof my adventure to the bystanders, who overwhelmed me with civil speechesand a shower of soft looks that completed the fascination of the fairyscene. Meanwhile the fair Inez had made room for me beside her, and I foundmyself at once the lion of the party, each vying with her neighborwho should show me most attention, La Senhora herself directing herconversation exclusively to me,--a circumstance which, considering theawkwardness of our first meeting, I felt no small surprise at, and whichled me, somewhat maliciously I confess, to make a half allusion to it,feeling some interest in ascertaining for whom the flattering reception wasreally intended."I thought you were Charles," said she, blushing, in answer to my question."And you are right," said I; "I am Charles.""Nay, but I meant my Charles."There was something of touching softness in the tone of these few wordsthat made me half wish I were her Charles. Whether my look evinced asmuch or not, I cannot tell, but she speedily added,--"He is my brother; he is a captain in the caadores, and I expected himhere this evening. Some one saw a figure pass the gate and conceal himselfin the trees, and I was sure it was he.""What a disappointment!" said I."Yes; was it not?" said she, hurriedly; and then, as if remembering howungracious was the speech, she blushed more deeply and hung down her head.Just at this moment, as I looked up, I caught the eye of the Englishofficer fixed steadfastly upon me. He was a tall, fine-looking fellow, ofabout two or three and thirty, with marked and handsome features, which,however, conveyed an expression of something sneering and sinister thatstruck me the moment I saw him. His glass was fixed in his eye, and Iperceived that he regarded us both with a look of no common interest. Myattention did not, however, dwell long upon the circumstance, for DonEmanuel, coming behind my shoulder, asked me if I would not take out hisdaughter in the bolero they were just forming.To my shame I was obliged to confess that I had not even seen the dance;and while I continued to express my resolve to correct the errors of myeducation, the Englishman came up and asked the senhora to be his partner.This put the very keystone upon my annoyance, and I half turned angrilyaway from the spot, when I heard her decline his invitation, and avow herdetermination not to dance.There was something which pleased me so much at this refusal, that I couldnot help turning upon her a look of most grateful acknowledgment; but as Idid so, I once more encountered the gaze of the Englishman, whose knittedbrows and compressed lips were bent upon me in a manner there was nomistaking. This was neither the fitting time nor place to seek anyexplanation of the circumstance, so, wisely resolving to wait a betteroccasion, I turned away and resumed my attentions towards my faircompanion."Then you don't care for the bolero?" said I, as she reseated herself uponthe grass."Oh, I delight in it!" said she, enthusiastically."But you refused to dance?"She hesitated, blushed, tried to mutter something, and was silent."I had determined to learn it," said I, half jestingly; "but if you willnot dance with me--""Yes; that I will,--indeed I will.""But you declined my countryman. Is it because he is inexpert?"The senhora hesitated, looked confused for some minutes; at length,coloring slightly, she said: "I have already made one rude speech to youthis evening; I fear lest I should make a second. Tell me, is CaptainTrevyllian your friend?""If you mean that gentleman yonder, I never saw him before.""Nor heard of him?""Nor that either. We are total strangers to each other.""Well, then, I may confess it. I do not like him. My father prefers himto any one else, invites him here daily, and, in fact, instals him as hisfirst favorite. But still, I cannot like him; and yet I have done my bestto do so.""Indeed!" said I, pointedly. "What are his chief demerits? Is he notagreeable? Is he not clever?""Oh, on the contrary, most agreeable, fascinating, I should say, inconversation; has travelled, seen a great deal of the world, is veryaccomplished, and has distinguished himself on several occasions. He wears,as you see, a Portuguese order.""And with all that--""And with all that, I cannot bear him. He is a duellist, a notoriousduellist. My brother, too, knows more of him, and avoids him. But let usnot speak further. I see his eyes are again fixed on us; and somehow, Ifear him, without well knowing wherefore."A movement among the party, shawls and mantillas were sought for on allsides; and the preparations for leave-taking appeared general. Before,however, I had time to express my thanks for my hospitable reception, theguests had assembled in a circle around the senhora, and toasting her witha parting bumper, they commenced in concert a little Portuguese song offarewell, each verse concluding with a good-night, which, as they separatedand held their way homewards, might now and then be heard rising upon thebreeze and wafting their last thoughts back to her. The concluding verse,which struck me much, I have essayed to translate. It ran somehow thus:--"The morning breezes chillNow close our joyous scene,And yet we linger still,Where we've so happy been.How blest were it to liveWith hearts like ours so light,And only part to giveOne long and last good-night!Good-night!"With many an invitation to renew my visit, most kindly preferred by DonEmanuel and warmly seconded by his daughter, I, too, wished my good-nightand turned my steps homeward.CHAPTER XXXIXTHE VILLA.The first object which presented itself to my eye the next morning was themidshipman's packet intrusted to my care by Power. I turned it over to readthe address more carefully, and what was my surprise to find that the namewas that of my fair friend Donna Inez."This certainly thickens the plot," thought I. "And so I have now fallenupon the real Simon Pure, and the reefer has had the good fortune todistance the dragoon. Well, thus far, I cannot say that I regret it. Now,however, for the parade, and then for the villa.""I say, O'Malley," cried out Monsoon, as I appeared on the Plaza, "I haveaccepted an invitation for you to-day. We dine across the river. Be at myquarters a little before six, and we'll go together."I should rather have declined the invitation; but not well knowing why, andhaving no ready excuse, acceded, and promised to be punctual."You were at Don Emanuel's last night. I heard of you!""Yes; I spent a most delightful evening.""That's your ground, my boy. A million of moidores, and such a campagna inValencia. A better thing than the Dalrymple affair. Don't blush. I know itall. But stay; here they come."As he spoke, the general commanding, with a numerous staff, rode forward.As they passed, I recognized a face which I had certainly seen before, andin a moment remembered it was that of the dragoon of the evening before. Hepassed quite close, and fixing his eyes steadfastly on me, evinced no signof recognition.The parade lasted above two hours; and it was with a feeling of impatienceI mounted a fresh horse to canter out to the villa. When I arrived, theservant informed me that Don Emanuel was in the city, but that the senhorawas in the garden, offering, at the same time, to escort me. Declining thishonor, I intrusted my horse to his keeping and took my way towards thearbor where last I had seen her.I had not walked many paces, when the sound of a guitar struck on my ear. Ilistened. It was the senhora's voice. She was singing a Venetian canzonettain a low, soft, warbling tone, as one lost in a revery; as though the musicwas a mere accompaniment to some pleasant thought. I peeped through thedense leaves, and there she sat upon a low garden seat, an open book on therustic table before her, beside her, embroidery, which seemed only latelyabandoned. As I looked, she placed her guitar upon the ground and began toplay with a small spaniel that seemed to have waited with impatience forsome testimony of favor. A moment more, and she grew weary of this; then,heaving a long but gentle sigh, leaned back upon her chair and seemed lostin thought. I now had ample time to regard her, and certainly never beheldanything more lovely. There was a character of classic beauty, and herbrow, though fair and ample, was still strongly marked upon the temples;the eyes, being deep and squarely set, imparted a look of intensity to herfeatures which their own softness subdued; while the short upper lip,which trembled with every passing thought, spoke of a nature tender andimpressionable, and yet impassioned. Her foot and ankle peeped from beneathher dark robe, and certainly nothing could be more faultless; while herhand, fair as marble, blue-veined and dimpled, played amidst the longtresses of her hair, that, as if in the wantonness of beauty, fellcarelessly upon her shoulders.It was some time before I could tear myself away from the fascination of somuch beauty, and it needed no common effort to leave the spot. As I made ashort dtour in the garden before approaching the arbor, she saw me as Icame forward, and kissing her hand gayly, made room for me beside her."I have been fortunate in finding you alone, Senhora," said I, as I seatedmyself by her side, "for I am the bearer of a letter to you. How far itmay interest you, I know not, but to the writer's feelings I am bound totestify.""A letter to me? You jest, surely?""That I am in earnest, this will show," said I, producing the packet.She took it from my hands, turned it about and about, examined the seal;while, half doubtingly, she said:--"The name is mine; but still--""You fear to open it; is it not so? But after all, you need not besurprised if it's from Howard; that's his name, I think.""Howard! from little Howard!" exclaimed she, enthusiastically; and tearingopen the letter, she pressed it to her lips, her eyes sparkling withpleasure and her cheek glowing as she read. I watched her as she ranrapidly over the lines; and I confess that, more than once, a pang ofdiscontent shot through my heart that the midshipman's letter could call upsuch interest,--not that I was in love with her myself, but yet, I knownot how it was, I had fancied her affections unengaged; and without askingmyself wherefore, I wished as much."Poor dear boy!" said she, as she came to the end. How these few and simplewords sank into my heart, as I remembered how they had once been uttered tomyself, and in perhaps no very dissimilar circumstances."But where is the souvenir he speaks of?" said she."The souvenir. I'm not aware--""Oh, I hope you've not lost the lock of hair he sent me!" I was quitedumfounded at this, and could not remember whether I had received it fromPower or not, so answered, at random,--"Yes; I must have left it on my table.""Promise me, then, to bring it to-morrow with you?""Certainly," said I, with something of pique in my manner. "If I find sucha means of making my visit an agreeable one, I shall certainly not omitit.""You are quite right," said she, either not noticing or not caring for thetone of my reply. "You will, indeed, be a welcome messenger. Do you know,he was one of my lovers?""One of them, indeed! Then pray how many do you number at this moment?""What a question; as if I could possibly count them! Besides, there areso many absent,--some on leave, some deserters, perhaps,--that I might bereckoning among my troops, but who, possibly, form part of the forces ofthe enemy. Do you know little Howard?""I cannot say that we are personally acquainted, but I am enabled throughthe medium of a friend to say that his sentiments are not strange tome. Besides, I have really pledged myself to support the prayer of hispetition.""How very good of you! For which reason you've forgotten, if not lost, thelock of hair.""That you shall have to-morrow," said I, pressing my hand solemnly to myheart."Well, then, don't forget it. But hush; here comes Captain Trevyllian. Soyou say Lisbon really pleases you?" said she, in a tone of voice totallychanged, as the dragoon of the preceding evening approached."Mr. O'Malley, Captain Trevyllian."We bowed stiffly and haughtily to each other, as two men salute who areunavoidably obliged to bow, with every wish on either side to avoidacquaintance. So, at least, I construed his bow; so I certainly intended myown.It requires no common tact to give conversation the appearance ofunconstraint and ease when it is evident that each person opposite islaboring under excited feelings; so that, notwithstanding the senhora'sefforts to engage our attention by the commonplaces of the day, we remainedalmost silent, and after a few observations of no interest, took ourseveral leaves. Here again a new source of awkwardness arose; for as wewalked together towards the house, where our horses stood, neither partyseemed disposed to speak."You are probably returning to Lisbon?" said he, coldly.I assented by a bow; upon which, drawing his bridle within his arm, hebowed once more, and turned away in an opposite direction; while I, glad tobe relieved of an unsought-for companionship, returned alone to the town.CHAPTER XLTHE DINNER.It was with no peculiar pleasure that I dressed for our dinner party. MajorO'Shaughnessy, our host, was one of that class of my countrymen I caredleast for,--a riotous, good-natured, noisy, loud-swearing, punch-drinkingwestern; full of stories of impossible fox hunts, and unimaginable duels,which all were acted either by himself or some member of his family. Thecompany consisted of the adjutant, Monsoon, Ferguson, Trevyllian, and someeight or ten officers with whom I was acquainted. As is usual on suchoccasions, the wine circulated freely, and amidst the din and clamor ofexcited conversation, the fumes of Burgundy, and the vapor of cigar smoke,we most of us became speedily mystified. As for me, my evil destiny wouldhave it that I was placed exactly opposite Trevyllian, with whom upon morethan one occasion I happened to differ in opinion, and the question was initself some trivial and unimportant one; yet the tone which he assumed, andof which, I too could not divest myself in reply, boded anything ratherthan an amicable feeling between us. The noise and turmoil about preventedthe others remarking the circumstance; but I could perceive in his mannerwhat I deemed a studied determination to promote a quarrel, while I feltwithin myself a most unchristian-like desire to indulge his fancy."Worse fellows at passing the bottle than Trevyllian and O'Malley there Ihave rarely sojourned with," cried the major; "look if they haven't goteight decanters between them, and here we are in a state of Africanthirst.""How can you expect him to think of thirst when such perfumed billetsas that come showering upon him?" said the adjutant, alluding to arose-colored epistle a servant had placed within my hands."Eight miles of a stone-wall country in fifteen minutes,--devil a lie init!" said O'Shaughnessy, striking the table with, his clinched fist; "showme the man would deny it.""Why, my dear fellow--""Don't be dearing me. Is it 'no' you'll be saying me?""Listen, now; there's O'Reilly, there--""Where is he?""He's under the table.""Well, it's the same thing. His mother had a fox--bad luck to you, don'tscald me with the jug--his mother had a fox-cover in Shinrohan."When O'Shaughnessy had got thus far in his narrative, I had the opportunityof opening my note, which merely contained the following words: "Come tothe ball at the Casino, and bring the Cadeau you promised."I had scarcely read this over once, when a roar of laughter at somethingsaid attracted my attention. I looked up, and perceived Trevyllian's eyesbent upon me with the fierceness of a tiger; the veins in his forehead wereswollen and distorted, and the whole expression of his face betokened rageand passion. Resolved no longer to submit to such evident determination toinsult, I was rising from my place at table, when, as if anticipatingmy intention, he pushed back his chair and left the room. Fearful ofattracting attention by immediately following him, I affected to join inthe conversation around me, while my temples throbbed, and my hands tingledwith impatience to get away."Poor McManus," said O'Shaughnessy, "rest his soul! he'd have puzzled thebench of bishops for hard words. Upon my conscience, I believe he spent hismornings looking for them in the Old Testament. Sure ye might have heardwhat happened to him at Banagher, when he commanded the Kilkennys,--yenever heard the story? Well, then, ye shall. Push the sherry along first,though,--old Monsoon there always keeps it lingering beside his left arm."Well, when Peter was lieutenant-colonel of the Kilkennys,--who, I mayremark, en passant, as the French say, were the neediest-looking devilsin the whole service,--he never let them alone from morning till night,drilling and pipe-claying and polishing them up. 'Nothing will makesoldiers of you,' said Peter, 'but, by the rock of Cashel! I'll keep youas clean as a new musket!' Now, poor Peter himself was not a very warlikefigure,--he measured five feet one in his tallest boots; but certainly ifNature denied him length of stature, she compensated for it in anotherway, by giving him a taste of the longest words in the language. An extrasyllable or so in a word was always a strong recommendation; and wheneverhe could not find one to his mind, he'd take some quaint, outlandish onethat more than once led to very awkward results. Well, the regiment was oneday drawn up for parade in the town of Banagher, and as M'Manus camedown the lines he stopped opposite one of the men whose face, hands, andaccoutrements exhibited a most woeful contempt of his orders. The fellowlooked more like a turf-stack than a light-company man."'Stand out, sir!' cried M'Manus, in a boiling passion. 'Sergeant O'Toole,inspect this individual.' Now, the sergeant was rather a favorite with Mac;for he always pretended to understand his phraseology, and in consequencewas pronounced by the colonel a very superior man for his station in life.'Sergeant,' said he, 'we shall make an exemplary illustration of our systemhere.'"'Yes, sir,' said the sergeant, sorely puzzled at the meaning of what hespoke."'Bear him to the Shannon, and lave him there.' This he said in a kindof Coriolanus tone, with a toss of his head and a wave of his rightarm,--signs, whenever he made them, incontestibly showing that furtherparley was out of the question, and that he had summed up and charged thejury for good and all."'Lave him in the river?' said O'Toole, his eyes starting from thesockets, and his whole face working in strong anxiety; 'is it lave him inthe river yer honor means?'"'I have spoken,' said the little man, bending an ominous frown upon thesergeant, which, whatever construction he may have put upon his words,there was no mistaking."'Well, well, av it's God's will he's drowned, it will not be on my head,'says O'Toole, as he marched the fellow away between two rank and file."The parade was nearly over, when Mac happened to see the sergeant comingup all splashed with water and looking quite tired."'Have you obeyed my orders?' said he."'Yes, yer honor; and tough work we had of it, for he struggled hard.'"'And where is he now?'"'Oh, troth, he's there safe. Divil a fear he'll get out.'"'Where?' said Mac."'In the river, yer honor.'"'What have you done, you scoundrel?'"'Didn't I do as you bid me?' says he; 'didn't I throw him in and lave[leave] him there?'"And faith so they did; and if he wasn't a good swimmer and got over toMoystown, there's little doubt but he'd have been drowned, and all becausePeter McManus could not express himself like a Christian."In the laughter which followed O'Shaughnessy's story I took the opportunityof making my escape from the party, and succeeded in gaining the streetunobserved. Though the note I had just read was not signed, I had no doubtfrom whom it came; so I hastened at once to my quarters, to make search forthe lock of Ned Howard's hair to which the senhora alluded. What was mymortification, however, to discover that no such thing could be foundanywhere. I searched all my drawers; I tossed about my papers and letters;I hunted every likely, every unlikely spot I could think of, but invain,--now cursing my carelessness for having lost it, now swearing mostsolemnly to myself that I never could have received it. What was to bedone? It was already late; my only thought was how to replace it. If I onlyknew the color, any other lock of hair would, doubtless, do just as well.The chances were, as Howard was young and an Englishman, that his hair waslight; light-brown, probably, something like my own. Of course it was; whydidn't that thought occur to me before? How stupid I was. So saying, Iseized a pair of scissors, and cut a long lock beside my temple; this in acalm moment I might have hesitated about. "Yes," thought I, "she'llnever discover the cheat; and besides, I do feel,--I know not exactlywhy,--rather gratified to think that I shall have left this souvenirbehind me, even though it call up other recollections than of me." Sothinking, I wrapped my cloak about me and hastened towards the Casino.CHAPTER XLI.THE ROUTE.I had scarcely gone a hundred yards from my quarters when a great tramp ofhorses' feet attracted my attention. I stopped to listen, and soon heardthe jingle of dragoon accoutrements, as the noise came near. The night wasdark but perfectly still; and before I stood many minutes I heard the tonesof a voice which I well knew could belong to but one, and that Fred Power."Fred Power!" said I, shouting at the same time at the top of myvoice,--"Power!""Ah, Charley, is that you? Come along to the adjutant-general's quarters.I'm charged with some important despatches, and can't stop till I'vedelivered them. Come along, I've glorious news for you!" So saying, hedashed spurs to his horse, and followed by two mounted dragoons, gallopedpast. Power's few and hurried words had so excited my curiosity that Iturned at once to follow him, questioning myself, as I walked along,to what he could possibly allude. He knew of my attachment to LucyDashwood,--could he mean anything of her? But what could I expect there;by what flattery could I picture to myself any chance of success in thatquarter; and yet, what other news could I care for or value than what boreupon her fate upon whom my own depended? Thus ruminating, I reached thedoor of the spacious building in which the adjutant-general had taken uphis abode, and soon found myself among a crowd of persons whom the rumor ofsome important event had assembled there, though no one could tell what hadoccurred. Before many minutes the door opened, and Power came out; bowinghurriedly to a few, and whispering a word or two as he passed down thesteps, he seized me by the arm and led me across the street. "Charley,"said he, "the curtain's rising; the piece is about to begin; a newcommander-in-chief is sent out,--Sir Arthur Wellesley, my boy, the finestfellow in England is to lead us on, and we march to-morrow. There's newsfor you!" A raw boy, unread, uninformed as I was, I knew but little of hiscareer whose name had even then shed such lustre upon our army; but thebuoyant tone of Power as he spoke, the kindling energy of his voice rousedme, and I felt every inch a soldier. As I grasped his hand in delightfulenthusiasm I lost all memory of my disappointment, and in the beating throbthat shook my head; I felt how deeply slept the ardor of military glorythat first led me from my home to see a battle-field."There goes the news!" said Frederick, pointing as he spoke to a rocketthat shot up into the sky, and as it broke into ten thousand stars,illuminated the broad stream where the ships of war lay darkly resting. Inanother moment the whole air shone with similar fires, while the deep rollof the drum sounded along the silent streets, and the city so lately sunkin sleep became, as if by magic, thronged with crowds of people; thesharp clang of the cavalry trumpet blended with the gay carol of thelight-infantry bugle, and the heavy tramp of the march was heard in thedistance. All was excitement, all bustle; but in the joyous tone of everyvoice was spoken the longing anxiety to meet the enemy. The gay, recklesstone of an Irish song would occasionally reach us, as some Connaught Rangeror some 78th man passed, his knapsack on his back; or the low monotonouspibroch of the Highlander, swelling into a war-cry, as some kilted corpsdrew up their ranks together. We turned to regain our quarters, when atthe corner of a street we came suddenly upon a merry party seated around atable before a little inn; a large street lamp, unhung for the occasion,had been placed in the midst of them, and showed us the figures of severalsoldiers in undress; at the end, and raised a little above his compeers,sat one whom, by the unfair proportion he assumed of the conversation, notless than by the musical intonation of his voice, I soon recognized as myman, Mickey Free."I'll be hanged if that's not your fellow there, Charley," said Power, ashe came to a dead stop a few yards off. "What an impertinent varlet he is;only to think of him there, presiding among a set of fellows that havefought all the battles in the Peninsular war. At this moment I'll be hangedif he is not going to sing."Here a tremendous thumping upon the table announced the fact, and after afew preliminary observations from Mike, illustrative of his respect to theservice in which he had so often distinguished himself, he began, tothe air of the "Young May Moon," a ditty of which I only recollect thefollowing verses:--"The pickets are fast retreating, boys,The last tattoo is beating, boys,So let every manFinish his can,And drink to our next merry meeting, boys.The colonel so gayly prancing, boys,Has a wonderful trick of advancing, boys,When he sings out so large,'Fix bayonets and charge!'He sets all the Frenchmen a-dancing, boys.Let Mounseer look ever so big, my boys,Who cares for fighting a fig, my boys?When we play 'Garryowen,'He'd rather go home;For somehow, he's no taste for a jig, my boys."This admirable lyric seemed to have perfect success, if one were only tojudge from the thundering of voices, hands, and drinking vessels whichfollowed; while a venerable, gray-haired sergeant rose to propose Mr.Free's health, and speedy promotion to him.We stood for several minutes in admiration of the party, when the loud rollof the drums beating to arms awakened us to the thought that our momentswere numbered."Good-night, Charley!" said Power, as he shook my hand warmly, "good-night!It will be your last night under a curtain for some months to come; makethe most of it. Adieu!"So saying, we parted; he to his quarters, and I to all the confusion of mybaggage, which lay in most admired disorder about my room.CHAPTER XLII.THE FAREWELL.The preparations for the march occupied me till near morning; and, indeed,had I been disposed to sleep, the din and clamor of the world without wouldhave totally prevented it. Before daybreak the advanced guard was alreadyin motion, and some squadrons of heavy cavalry had begun their march.I looked around my now dismantled room as one does usually for the lasttime ere leaving, and bethought me if I had not forgotten anything.Apparently all was remembered; but stay,--what is this? To be sure, howforgetful I had become! It was the packet I destined for Donna Inez, andwhich, in the confusion of the night before, I had omitted to bring to theCasino.I immediately despatched Mike to the commissary with my luggage and ordersto ascertain when we were expected to march. He soon returned with theintelligence that our corps was not to move before noon, so that I had yetsome hours to spare and make my adieux to the senhora.I cannot exactly explain the reason, but I certainly did bestow a more thancommon attention upon my toilet that morning. The senhora was nothing tome. It is true she had, as she lately most candidly informed me, a score ofadmirers, among whom I was not even reckoned; she was evidently a coquettewhose greatest pleasure was to sport and amuse herself with the passionsshe excited in others. And even if she were not,--if her heart were to bewon to-morrow,--what claim, what right, had I to seek it? My affectionswere already pledged; promised, it is true, to one who gave nothing inreturn, and who, perhaps, even loved another. Ah, there was the rub; thatone confounded suspicion, lurking in the rear, chilled my courage andwounded my spirit.If there be anything more disheartening to an Irishman, in his littleaffaires de coeur, than another, it is the sense of rivalry. Theobstinacy of fathers, the ill-will of mothers, the coldness, theindifference of the lovely object herself,--obstacles though they be,--hehas tact, spirit, and perseverance to overcome them. But when a moresuccessful candidate for the fair presents himself; when the eye thatremains downcast at his suit, lights up with animation at another'scoming; when the features whose cold and chilling apathy to him haveblended in one smile of welcome to another,--it is all up with him; he seesthe game lost, and throws his cards upon the table. And yet, why is this?Why is it that he whose birthright it would seem to be sanguine when othersdespond, to be confident when all else are hopeless,--should find hiscourage fail him here? The reason is simply--But, in good sooth, I amashamed to confess it!Having jogged on so far with my reader, in all the sober seriousness whichthe matter-of-fact material of these memoirs demands, I fear lest a seemingparadox may cause me to lose my good name for veracity; and that whilemerely maintaining a national trait of my country, I may appear to beasserting some unheard-of and absurd proposition,--so far have mere vulgarprejudices gone to sap our character as a people.The reason, then, is this,--for I have gone too far to retreat,--theIrishman is essentially bashful. Well, laugh if you wish, for I concludethat, by this time, you have given way to a most immoderate excess ofrisibility; but still, when you have perfectly recovered your composure, Ibeg to repeat,--the Irishman is essentially a bashful man!Do not for a moment fancy that I would by this imply that in any new orunexpected situation, that from any unforeseen conjuncture of events, theIrishman would feel confused or abashed, more than any other,--far from it.The cold and habitual reserve of the Englishman, the studied caution of theNorth Tweeder himself, would exhibit far stronger evidences of awkwardnessin such circumstances as these. But on the other hand, when measuring hiscapacity, his means of success, his probabilities of being preferred, withthose of the natives of any other country, I back the Irishman against theworld for distrust of his own powers, for an under-estimate of his realmerits,--in one word, for his bashfulness. But let us return to Donna Inez.As I rode up to the villa, I found the family assembled at breakfast.Several officers were also present, among whom I was not sorry to recognizemy friend Monsoon."Ah, Charley!" cried he, as I seated myself beside him, "what a pity allour fun is so soon to have an end! Here's this confounded Soult won't bequiet and peaceable; but he must march upon Oporto, and Heaven knows wherebesides, just as we were really beginning to enjoy life! I had got such acontract for blankets! And now they've ordered me to join Beresford's corpsin the mountains; and you," here he dropped his voice,--"and you weregetting on so devilish well in this quarter; upon my life, I thinkyou'd have carried the day. Old Don Emanuel--you know he's a friend ofmine--likes you very much. And then, there's Sparks--""Ay, Major, what of him? I have not seen him for some days.""Why, they've been frightening the poor devil out of his life,O'Shaughnessy and a set of them. They tried him by court-martial yesterday,and sentenced him to mount guard with a wooden sword and a shooting jacket,which he did. Old Colbourne, it seems, saw him; and faith, there would bethe devil to pay if the route had not come! Some of them would certainlyhave got a long leave to see their friends.""Why is not the senhora here, Major? I don't see her at table.""A cold, a sore throat, a wet-feet affair of last night, I believe. Passthat cold pie down here. Sherry, if you please. You didn't see Powerto-day?""No: we parted late last night; I have not been to bed.""Very bad preparation for a march; take some burned brandy in your coffee.""Then you don't think the senhora will appear?""Very unlikely. But stay, you know her room,--the small drawing-room thatlooks out upon the flower-garden; she usually passes the morning there.Leap the little wooden paling round the corner, and the chances are ten toone you find her."I saw from the occupied air of Don Antonio that there was little fear ofinterruption on his part; so taking an early moment to escape unobserved, Irose and left the room. When I sprang over the oak fence, I found myself ina delicious little garden, where roses, grown to a height never seen in ourcolder climate, formed a deep bower of rich blossom.The major was right. The senhora was in the room, and in one moment I wasbeside her."Nothing but my fears of not bidding you farewell could palliate my thusintruding, Donna Inez; but as we are ordered away--""When? Not so soon, surely?""Even so; to-day, this very hour. But you see that even in the hurry ofdeparture, I have not forgotten my trust; this is the packet I promisedyou."So saying, I placed the paper with the lock of hair within her hand, andbending downwards, pressed my lips upon her taper fingers. She hurriedlysnatched her hand away, and tearing open the enclosure, took out the lock.She looked steadily for a moment at it, then at me, and again at it, and atlength, bursting into a fit of laughing, threw herself upon a chair in avery ecstasy of mirth."Why, you don't mean to impose this auburn ringlet upon me for one of poorHoward's jetty curls? What downright folly to think of it! And then, withhow little taste the deception was practised,--upon your very temples, too!One comfort is, you are utterly spoiled by it."Here she again relapsed into a fit of laughter, leaving me perfectlypuzzled what to think of her, as she resumed:--"Well, tell me now, am I to reckon this as a pledge of your own allegiance,or am I still to believe it to be Edward Howard's? Speak, and truly.""Of my own, most certainly," said I, "if it will be accepted.""Why, after such treachery, perhaps it ought not; but still, as you havealready done yourself such injury, and look so very silly, withal--""That you are even resolved to give me cause to look more so," added I."Exactly," said she, "for here, now, I reinstate you among my true andfaithful admirers. Kneel down, Sir Knight--in token of which you will wearthis scarf--"A sudden start which the donna gave at these words brought me to my feet.She was pale as death and trembling."What means this?" said I. "What has happened?"She pointed with her finger towards the garden; but though her lips moved,no voice came forth. I sprang through the open window; I rushed into thecopse, the only one which might afford concealment for a figure, but no onewas there. After a few minutes' vain endeavor to discover any trace of anintruder, I returned to the chamber. The donna was there still, but howchanged; her gayety and animation were gone, her pale cheek and tremblinglip bespoke fear and suffering, and her cold hand lay heavily beside her."I thought--perhaps it was merely fancy--but I thought I saw Trevyllianbeside the window.""Impossible!" said I. "I have searched every walk and alley. It was nothingbut imagination,--believe me, no more. There, be assured; think no more ofit."While I endeavored thus to reassure her, I was very far from feelingperfectly at ease myself; the whole bearing and conduct of this manhad inspired me with a growing dislike of him, and I felt alreadyhalf-convinced that he had established himself as a spy upon my actions."Then you really believe I was mistaken?" said the donna, as she placed herhand within mine."Of course I do; but speak no more of it. You must not forget how few mymoments are here. Already I have heard the tramp of horses without. Ah!there they are. In a moment more I shall be missed; so, once more, fairestInez--Nay, I beg pardon if I have dared to call you thus; but think, if itbe the first it may also be the last time I shall ever speak it."Her head gently drooped, as I said these words, till it sank upon myshoulder, her long and heavy hair falling upon my neck and across my bosom.I felt her heart almost beat against my side; I muttered some words, I knownot what; I felt them like a prayer; I pressed her cold forehead to mylips, rushed from the room, cleared the fence at a spring, and was farupon the road to Lisbon ere I could sufficiently collect my senses to knowwhither I was going. Of little else was I conscious; my mind was full tobursting; and in the confusion of my excited brain, fiction and realitywere so inextricably mingled as to defy every endeavor at discrimination.But little time had I for reflection. As I reached the city, the brigade towhich I was attached was already under arms, and Mike impatiently waitingmy arrival with the horses.CHAPTER XXLIII.THE MARCH.What a strange spectacle did the road to Oliveira present upon the morningof the 7th of May! A hurried or incautious observer might, at first sight,have pronounced the long line of troops which wended their way throughthe valley as the remains of a broken and routed army, had not the ardentexpression and bright eye that beamed on every side assured him that menwho looked thus could not be beaten ones. Horse, foot, baggage, artillery,dismounted dragoons, even the pale and scarcely recovered inhabitants ofthe hospital, might have been seen hurrying on; for the order, "Forward!"had been given at Lisbon, and those whose wounds did not permit theirjoining, were more pitied for their loss than its cause. More than oneofficer was seen at the head of his troop with an arm in a sling, or abandaged forehead; while among the men similar evidences of devotionwere not unfrequent. As for me, long years and many reverses have notobliterated, scarcely blunted, the impression that sight made on me. Thesplendid spectacle of a review had often excited and delighted me, buthere there was the glorious reality of war,--the bronzed faces, the wornuniforms, the well-tattered flags, the roll of the heavy guns mingling withthe wild pibroch of the Highlander, or scarcely less wild recklessness ofthe Irish quick-step; while the long line of cavalry, their helmets andaccoutrements shining in the morning sun, brought back one's boyish dreamsof joust and tournament, and made the heart beat high with chivalrousenthusiasm."Yes," said I, half aloud, "this is indeed a realization of what I longedand thirsted for," the clang of the music and the tramp of the cavalryresponding to my throbbing pulses as we moved along."Close up, there; trot!" cried out a deep and manly voice; and immediatelya general officer rode by, followed by an aide-de-camp."There goes Cotton," said Power. "You may feel easy in your mind now,Charley; there's some work before us.""You have not heard our destination?" said I."Nothing is known for certain yet. The report goes, that Soult is advancingupon Oporto; and the chances are, Sir Arthur intends to hasten on to itsrelief. Our fellows are at Ovar, with General Murray.""I say, Charley, old Monsoon is in a devil of a flurry. He expected to havebeen peaceably settled down in Lisbon for the next six months, and he hasreceived orders to set out for Beresford's headquarters immediately; andfrom what I hear, they have no idle time.""Well, Sparks, how goes it, man? Better fun this than the cook's galley,eh?""Why, do you know, these hurried movements put me out confoundedly. I foundLisbon very interesting,--the little I could see of it last night.""Ah, my dear fellow, think of the lovely Andalusian lasses with their browntransparent skins and liquid eyes. Why, you'd have been over head and earsin love in twenty-four hours more, had we stayed.""Are they really so pretty?""Pretty! downright lovely, man. Why, they have a way of looking at you,over their fans,--just one glance, short and fleeting, but so melting,by Jove--Then their walk,--if it be not profane to call that springing,elastic gesture by such a name,--why, it's regular witchcraft. Sparks, myman, I tremble for you. Do you know, by-the-bye, that same pace of theirsis a devilish hard thing to learn. I never could come it; and yet, somehow,I was formerly rather a crack fellow at a ballet. Old Alberto used toselect me for a pas de zphyr among a host; but there's a kind of a hopand a slide and a spring,--in fact you must have been wearing petticoatsfor eighteen years, and have an Andalusian instep and an india-rubber soleto your foot, or it's no use trying it. How I used to make them laugh atthe old San Josef convent, formerly, by my efforts in the cause!""Why, how did it ever occur to you to practise it?""Many a man's legs have saved his head, Charley, and I put it to mine to doa similar office for me.""True; but I never heard of a man that performed a pas seul before theenemy.""Not exactly; but still you're not very wide of the mark. If you'll onlywait till we reach Pontalegue, I'll tell you the story; not that it's worththe delay, but talking at this brisk pace I don't admire.""You leave a detachment here, Captain Power," said an aide-de-camp, ridinghastily up; "and General Cotton requests you will send a subaltern andtwo sergeants forward towards Berar to reconnoitre the pass. Franchesca'scavalry are reported in that quarter." So speaking, he dashed spurs to hishorse, and was out of sight in an instant.Power, at the same moment, wheeled to the rear, from which he returned inan instant, accompanied by three well-mounted light dragoons. "Sparks,"said he, "now for an occasion of distinguishing yourself. You heard theorder, lose no time; and as your horse is an able one, and fresh, lose nota second, but forward."No sooner was Sparks despatched on what it was evident he felt to beanything but a pleasant duty, than I turned towards Power, and said, withsome tinge of disappointment in the tone, "Well, if you really felt therewas anything worth doing there, I flattered myself that--""Speak out man. That I should have sent you, eh? Is it not so?""Yes, you've hit it.""Well, Charley, my peace is easily made on this head. Why, I selectedSparks simply to spare you one of the most unpleasant duties that can beimposed upon a man; a duty which, let him discharge it to the uttermost,will never be acknowledged, and the slightest failure in which will beremembered for many a day against him, besides the pleasant and veryprobable prospect of being selected as a bull's eye for a French rifle, orcarried off a prisoner; eh, Charley? There's no glory in that, devil a rayof it! Come, come, old fellow, Fred Power's not the man to keep his friendout of the mle, if only anything can be made by being in it. PoorSparks, I'd swear, is as little satisfied with the arrangement as yourself,if one knew but all.""I say, Power," said a tall, dashing-looking man of about five-and-forty,with a Portuguese order on his breast,--"I say, Power, dine with us at thehalt.""With pleasure, if I may bring my young friend here.""Of course; pray introduce us.""Major Hixley, Mr. O'Malley,--a 14th man, Hixley.""Delighted to make your acquaintance, Mr. O'Malley. Knew a famous fellow inIreland of your name, a certain Godfrey O'Malley, member for some county orother.""My uncle," said I, blushing deeply, with a pleasurable feeling at eventhis slight praise of my oldest friend."Your uncle! give me your hand. By Jove, his nephew has a right to goodtreatment at my hands; he saved my life in the year '98. And how is oldGodfrey?""Quite well, when I left him some months ago; a little gout, now and then.""To be sure he has, no man deserves it better; but it's a gentlemanlikegout that merely jogs his memory in the morning of the good wine he hasdrank over night. By-the-bye, what became of a friend of his, a devilisheccentric fellow who held a command in the Austrian service?""Oh, Considine, the count?""The same.""As eccentric as ever; I left him on a visit with my uncle. And Boyle,--didyou know Sir Harry Boyle?""To be sure I did; shall I ever forget him, and his capital blunders, thatkept me laughing the whole time I spent in Ireland? I was in the house whenhe concluded a panegyric upon a friend, by calling him, 'the father to thepoor, and uncle to Lord Donoughmore.'""He was the only man who could render by a bull what it was impossible toconvey more correctly," said Power."You've heard of his duel with Dick Toler?""Never; let's hear it.""It was a bull from beginning to end. Boyle took it into his head that Dickwas a person with whom he had a serious row in Cork. Dick, on the otherhand, mistook Boyle for old Caples, whom he had been pursuing withhorse-whipping intentions for some months. They met in Kildare Street Club,and very little colloquy satisfied them that they were right in theirconjectures, each party being so eagerly ready to meet the views of theother. It never was a difficult matter to find a friend in Dublin; and todo them justice, Irish seconds, generally speaking, are perfectly free fromany imputation upon the score of mere delay. No men have less impertinentcuriosity as to the cause of the quarrel; wisely supposing that theprincipals know their own affairs best, they cautiously abstain fromindulging any prying spirit, but proceed to discharge their functions asbest they may. Accordingly, Sir Harry and Dick were 'set up,' as the phraseis, at twelve paces, and to use Boyle's own words, for I have heard himrelate the story,--"We blazed away, sir, for three rounds. I put two in his hat and one in hisneckcloth; his shots went all through the skirt of my coat."'We'll spend the day here,' says Considine, 'at this rate. Couldn't youput them closer?'"'And give us a little more time in the word,' says I."'Exactly,' said Dick."Well, they moved us forward two paces, and set to loading the pistolsagain."By this time we were so near that we had full opportunity to scan eachother's faces. Well, sir, I stared at him, and he at me."'What!' said I."'Eh!' said he."'How's this?' said I."'You're not Billy Caples?' said he."'Devil a bit!' said I, 'nor I don't think you are Archy Devine;' andfaith, sir, so it appeared, we were fighting away all the morning fornothing; for, somehow, it turned out it was neither of us!"What amused me most in this anecdote was the hearing it at such a time andplace. That poor Sir Harry's eccentricities should turn up for discussionon a march in Portugal was singular enough; but after all, life is full ofsuch incongruous accidents. I remember once supping with King Calzoo on theBlue Mountains, in Jamaica. By way of entertaining his guests, some Englishofficers, he ordered one of his suite to sing. We were of course pleased atthe opportunity of hearing an Indian war-chant, with a skull and thigh-boneaccompaniment; but what was our astonishment to hear the Indian,--aferocious-looking dog, with an awful scalp-lock, and two streaks of redpaint across his chest,--clear his voice well for a few seconds, andthen begin, without discomposing a muscle of his gravity, "The Laird ofCockpen!" I need not say that the "Great Raccoon" was a Dumfries man whohad quitted Scotland forty years before, and with characteristic prosperityhad attained his present rank in a foreign service."Halt! halt!" cried a deep-toned, manly voice in the leading column, andthe word was repeated from mouth to mouth to the rear.We dismounted, and picketing our horses beneath the broad-leaved foliageof the cork-trees, stretched ourselves out at full length upon the grass,while our messmen prepared the dinner. Our party at first consisted ofHixley, Power, the adjutant, and myself; but our number was soon increasedby three officers of the 6th Foot, about to join their regiment."Barring the ladies, God bless them!" said Power, "there are no suchpicnics as campaigning presents. The charms of scenery are greatly enhancedby their coming unexpectedly on you. Your chance good fortune in the proghas an interest that no ham-and-cold-chicken affair, prepared by yourservants beforehand, and got ready with a degree of fuss and worry thatconverts the whole party into an assembly of cooks, can ever afford; andlastly, the excitement that this same life of ours is never without, givesa zest--""There you've hit it," cried Hixley; "it's that same feeling of uncertaintythat those who meet now may ever do so again, full as it is of sorrowfulreflection, that still teaches us, as we become inured to war, to economizeour pleasures, and be happy when we may. Your health, O'Malley, and youruncle Godfrey's too.""A little more of the pastry.""What a capital guinea fowl this is!""That's some of old Monsoon's particular port.""Pass it round here. Really this is pleasant.""My blessing on the man who left that vista yonder! See what a gloriousvalley stretches out there, undulating in its richness; and look at thosedark trees, where just one streak of soft sunlight is kissing their tops,giving them one chaste good-night--""Well done, Power!""Confound you, you've pulled me short, and I was about becoming downrightpastoral. Apropos of kissing, I understand Sir Arthur won't allow theconvents to be occupied by troops.""And apropos of convents," said I, "let's hear your story; you promised ita while ago.""My dear Charley, it's far too early in the evening for a story. I shouldrather indulge my poetic fancies here, under the shade of melancholyboughs; and besides, I am not half screwed up yet.""Come, Adjutant, let's have a song.""I'll sing you a Portuguese serenade when the next bottle comes in. Whatcapital port! Have you much of it?""Only three dozen. We got it late last night; forged an order from thecommanding officer and sent it up to old Monsoon,--'for hospital use.' Hegave it with a tear in his eye, saying, as the sergeant marched away,'Only think of such wine for fellows that may be in the next world beforemorning! It's a downright sin!'""I say, Power, there's something going on there."At this instant the trumpet sounded "boot and saddle," and like one man thewhole mass rose up, when the scene, late so tranquil, became one of excitedbustle and confusion. An aide-de-camp galloped past towards the river,followed by two orderly sergeants; and the next moment Sparks rode up, hiswhole equipment giving evidence of a hurried ride, while his cheek wasdeadly pale and haggard.Power presented to him a goblet of sherry, which, having emptied at adraught, he drew a long breath, and said, "They are coming,--coming inforce!""Who are coming?" said Power. "Take time, man, and collect yourself.""The French! I saw them a devilish deal closer than I liked. They woundedone of the orderlies and took the other prisoner.""Forward!" said a hoarse voice in the front. "March! trot!" And before wecould obtain any further information from Sparks, whose faculties seemed tohave received a terrific shock, we were once more in the saddle, and movingat a brisk pace onward.Sparks had barely time to tell us that a large body of French cavalryoccupied the pass of Berar, when he was sent for by General Cotton tofinish his report."How frightened the fellow is!" said Hixley."I don't think the worse of poor Sparks for all that," said Power. "He sawthose fellows for the first time, and no bird's-eye view of them either.""Then we are in for a skirmish, at least," said I."It would appear not, from that," said Hixley, pointing to the head of thecolumn, which, leaving the high road upon the left, entered the forest by adeep cleft that opened upon a valley traversed by a broad river."That looks very like taking up a position, though," said Power."Look,--look down yonder!" cried Hixley, pointing to a dip in the plainbeside the river. "Is there not a cavalry picket there?""Right, by Jove! I say, Fitzroy," said Power to an aide-de-camp as hepassed, "what's going on?""Soult has carried Oporto," cried he, "and Franchesca's cavalry haveescaped.""And who are these fellows in the valley?""Our own people coming up."In less than half an hour's brisk trotting we reached the stream, the banksof which were occupied by two cavalry regiments advancing to the main army;and what was my delight to find that one of them was our own corps, the14th Light Dragoons!"Hurra!" cried Power, waving his cap as he came up. "How are you,Sedgewick? Baker, my hearty, how goes it? How is Hampton and the colonel?"In an instant we were surrounded by our brother officers, who all shook mecordially by the hand, and welcomed me to the regiment with most gratifyingwarmth."One of us," said Power, with a knowing look, as he introduced me; and thefreemasonry of these few words secured me a hearty greeting."Halt! halt! Dismount!" sounded again from front to rear; and in a fewminutes we were once more stretched upon the grass, beneath the deepand mellow moonlight, while the bright stream ran placidly beside us,reflecting on its calm surface the varied groups as they lounged or sataround the blazing fires of the bivouac.CHAPTER XLIV.THE BIVOUAC.When I contrasted the gay and lively tone of the conversation which ran onaround our bivouac fire, with the dry monotony and prosaic tediousness ofmy first military dinner at Cork, I felt how much the spirit and adventureof a soldier's life can impart of chivalrous enthusiasm to even the dullestand least susceptible. I saw even many who under common circumstances,would have possessed no interest nor excited any curiosity, but now,connected as they were with the great events occurring around them,absolutely became heroes; and it was with a strange, wild throbbing ofexcitement I listened to the details of movements and marches, whoseobjects I knew not, but in which the magical words, Corunna, Vimeira,were mixed up, and gave to the circumstances an interest of the highestcharacter. How proud, too, I felt to be the companion-in-arms of suchfellows! Here they sat, the tried and proved soldiers of a hundred fights,treating me as their brother and their equal. Who need wonder if I felta sense of excited pleasure? Had I needed such a stimulant, that nightbeneath the cork-trees had been enough to arouse a passion for the army inmy heart, and an irrepressible determination to seek for a soldier's glory."Fourteenth!" called out a voice from the wood behind; and in a momentafter, the aide-de-camp appeared with a mounted orderly."Colonel Merivale?" said he, touching his cap to the stalwart, soldier-likefigure before him.The colonel bowed."Sir Stapleton Cotton desires me to request that at an early hour to-morrowyou will occupy the pass, and cover the march of the troops. It is hiswish that all the reinforcements should arrive at Oporto by noon. I needscarcely add that we expect to be engaged with the enemy."These few words were spoken hurriedly, and again saluting our party, heturned his horse's head and continued his way towards the rear."There's news for you, Charley," said Power, slapping me on the shoulder."Lucy Dashwood or Westminster Abbey!""The regiment was never in finer condition, that's certain," said thecolonel, "and most eager for a brush with the enemy.""How your old friend, the count, would have liked this work!" said Hixley."Gallant fellow he was.""Come," cried Power, "here's a fresh bowl coming. Let's drink the ladies,wherever they be; we most of us have some soft spot on that score.""Yes," said the adjutant, singing,--"Here's to the maiden of blushing fifteen;Here's to the damsel that's merry;Here's to the flaunting extravagant quean--""And," sang Power, interrupting,--"Here's to the 'Widow of Derry.'""Come, come, Fred, no more quizzing on that score. It's the only thing evergives me a distaste to the service,--the souvenir of that adventure. WhenI reflect what I might have been, and think what I am; when I contrast aBrussels carpet with wet grass, silk hangings with a canvas tent, Sneyd'sclaret with ration brandy, and Sir Arthur for a Commander-in-Chief viceBoggs, a widow--""Stop there!" cried Hixley. "Without disparaging the fair widow, there'snothing beats campaigning, after all. Eh, Fred?""And to prove it," said the colonel, "Power will sing us a song."Power took his pencil from his pocket, and placing the back of a letteracross his shako, commenced inditing his lyric, saying, as he did so, "I'myour man in five minutes. Just fill my glass in the mean time.""That fellow beats Dibdin hollow," whispered the adjutant. "I'll be hangedif he'll not knock you off a song like lightning.""I understand," said Hixley, "they have some intention at the Horse Guardsof having all the general orders set to popular tunes, and sung at everymess in the service. You've heard that, I suppose, Sparks?""I confess I had not before.""It will certainly come very hard upon the subalterns," continued Hixley,with much gravity. "They'll have to brush up their sol mi fas. All thesolos are to be their part.""What rhymes with slaughter?" said Power."Brandy-and-water," said the adjutant."Now, then," said Power, "are you all ready?""Ready.""You must chorus, mind; and mark me, take care you give the hip-hip-hurrawell, as that's the whole force of the chant. Take the time from me. Nowfor it. Air, 'Garryowen,' with spirit, but not too quick."Now that we've pledged each eye of blue,And every maiden fair and true,And our green island home,--to youThe ocean's wave adorning,Let's give one Hip-hip-hip-hurra!And, drink e'en to the coming day,When, squadron square,We'll all be there,To meet the French in the morning."May his bright laurels never fade,Who leads our fighting fifth brigade,Those lads so true in heart and blade,And famed for danger scorning.So join me in one Hip-hurra!And drink e'en to the coming day,When, squadron square,We'll all be there,To meet the French in the morning."And when with years and honors crowned,You sit some homeward hearth around,And hear no more the stirring soundThat spoke the trumpet's warning,You'll fill and drink, one Hip-hurra!And pledge the memory of the day,When, squadron square,They all were there,To meet the French in the morning.""Gloriously done, Fred!" cried Hixley. "If I ever get my deserts in thisworld, I'll make you Laureate to the Forces, with a hogshead of your ownnative whiskey for every victory of the army.""A devilish good chant," said Merivale, "but the air surpasses anything Iever heard,--thoroughly Irish, I take it.""Irish! upon my conscience, I believe you!" shouted O'Shaughnessy, with anenergy of voice and manner that created a hearty laugh on all sides. "It'sfew people ever mistook it for a Venetian melody. Hand over the punch,--thesherry, I mean. When I was in the Clare militia, we always went in todinner to 'Tatter Jack Walsh,' a sweet air, and had 'Garryowen' for aquick-step. Ould M'Manus, when he got the regiment, wanted to change: hesaid, they were damned vulgar tunes, and wanted to have 'Rule Britannia,'or the 'Hundredth Psalm;' but we would not stand it; there would have beena mutiny in the corps.""The same fellow, wasn't he, that you told the story of, the other evening,in Lisbon?" said I."The same. Well, what a character he was! As pompous and conceited a littlefellow as ever you met with; and then, he was so bullied by his wife, healways came down to revenge it on the regiment. She was a fine, showy,vulgar woman, with a most cherishing affection for all the good things inthis life, except her husband, whom she certainly held in due contempt. 'Yelittle crayture,' she'd say to him with a sneer, 'it ill becomes youto drink and sing, and be making a man of yourself. If you were likeO'Shaughnessy there, six foot three in his stockings--'Well, well, it lookslike boasting; but no matter. Here's her health, anyway.""I knew you were tender in that quarter," said Power, "I heard it whenquartered in Limerick.""May be you heard, too, how I paid off Mac, when he came down on a visit tothat county?""Never: let's hear it now.""Ay, O'Shaughnessy, now's your time; the fire's a good one, the night fine,and liquor plenty.""I'm convanient," said O'Shaughnessy, as depositing his enormous legs oneach side of the burning fagots, and placing a bottle between his knees hebegan his story:--"It was a cold rainy night in January, in the year '98, I took my place inthe Limerick mail, to go down for a few days to the west country. As thewaiter of the Hibernian came to the door with a lantern, I just caught aglimpse of the other insides; none of whom were known to me, except ColonelM'Manus, that I met once in a boarding-house in Molcsworth Street. I didnot, at the time, think him a very agreeable companion; but when morningbroke, and we began to pay our respects to each other in the coach, Ileaned over, and said, 'I hope you're well, Colonel M'Manus,' just by wayof civility like. He didn't hear me at first; so that I said it again, alittle louder."I wish you saw the look he gave me; he drew himself up to the height ofhis cotton umbrella, put his chin inside his cravat, pursed up his dry,shrivelled lips, and with a voice he meant to be awful, replied:--"'You appear to have the advantage of me.'"'Upon my conscience, you're right,' said I, looking down at myself, andthen over at him, at which the other travellers burst out a laughing,--'Ithink there's few will dispute that point.' When the laugh was over, Iresumed,--for I was determined not to let him off so easily. 'Sure I metyou at Mrs. Cayle's,' said I; 'and, by the same token, it was a Friday, Iremember it well,--may be you didn't pitch into the salt cod? I hope itdidn't disagree with you?'"'I beg to repeat, sir, that you are under a mistake,' said he."'May be so, indeed,' said I. 'May be you're not Colonel M'Manus at all;may be you wasn't in a passion for losing seven-and-sixpence at loo withMrs. Moriarty; may be you didn't break the lamp in the hall with yourumbrella, pretending you touched it with your head, and wasn't within threefoot of it; may be Counsellor Brady wasn't going to put you in the box ofthe Foundling Hospital, if you wouldn't behave quietly in the streets--'"Well, with this the others laughed so heartily, that I could not go on;and the next stage the bold colonel got outside with the guard and nevercame in till we reached Limerick. I'll never forget his face, as he gotdown at Swinburne's Hotel. 'Good-by, Colonel,' said I; but he wouldn't takethe least notice of my politeness, but with a frown of utter defiance, heturned on his heel and walked away."'I haven't done with you yet,' says I; and, faith, I kept my word."I hadn't gone ten yards down the street, when I met my old friend DarbyO'Grady."'Shaugh, my boy,' says he,--he called me that way for shortness,--'dinewith me to-day at Mosey's; a green goose and gooseberries; six to aminute.'"'Who have you?' says I."'Tom Keane and the Wallers, a counsellor or two, and one M'Manus, fromDublin.'"'The colonel?'"'The same,' said he."'I'm there, Darby!' said I; 'but mind, you never saw me before.'"'What?' said he."'You never set eyes on me before; mind that.'"'I understand,' said Darby, with a wink; and we parted."I certainly was never very particular about dressing for dinner, but onthis day I spent a considerable time at my toilet; and when I looked in myglass at its completion, was well satisfied that I had done myself justice.A waistcoat of brown rabbit-skin with flaps, a red worsted comforterround my neck, an old gray shooting-jacket with a brown patch on the arm,corduroys, and leather gaiters, with a tremendous oak cudgel in my hand,made me a most presentable figure for a dinner party."'Will I do, Darby?' says I, as he came into my room before dinner."'If it's for robbing the mail you are,' says he, 'nothing could be better.Your father wouldn't know you!'"'Would I be the better of a wig?'"'Leave your hair alone,' said he. 'It's painting the lily to alter it.'"'Well, God's will be done,' says I, 'so come now.'"Well, just as the clock struck six I saw the colonel coming out of hisroom, in a suit of most accurate sable, stockings, and pumps. Down-stairshe went, and I heard the waiter announce him."'Now's my time,' thought I, as I followed slowly after."When I reached the door I heard several voices within, among which Irecognized some ladies. Darby had not told me about them. 'But no matter,'said I; 'it's all as well;' so I gave a gentle tap at the door with myknuckles."'Come in,' said Darby."I opened the door slowly, and putting in only my head and shoulders took acautious look round the room."'I beg pardon, gentlemen,' said I, 'but I was only looking for one ColonelM'Manus, and as he is not here--'"'Pray walk in, sir,' said O'Grady, with a polite bow. 'Colonel M'Manusis here. There's no intrusion whatever. I say, Colonel,' said he turninground, 'a gentleman here desires to--'"'Never mind it now,' said I, as I stepped cautiously into the room, 'he'sgoing to dinner; another time will do just as well.'"'Pray come in!'"'I could not think of intruding--'"'I must protest,' said M'Manus, coloring up, 'that I cannot understandthis gentleman's visit.'"'It is a little affair I have to settle with him,' said I, with a fiercelook that I saw produced its effect."'Then perhaps you would do me the very great favor to join him at dinner,'said O'Grady. 'Any friend of Colonel M'Manus--'"'You are really too good,' said I; 'but as an utter stranger--'"'Never think of that for a moment. My friend's friend, as the adage says.'"'Upon my conscience, a good saying,' said I, 'but you see there's anotherdifficulty. I've ordered a chop and potatoes up in No. 5.'"'Let that be no obstacle,' said O'Grady. 'The waiter shall put it in mybill; if you will only do me the pleasure.'"'You're a trump,' said I. 'What's your name?'"'O'Grady, at your service.'"'Any relation of the counsellor?' said I. 'They're all one family, theO'Gradys. I'm Mr. O'Shaughnessy, from Ennis; won't you introduce me to theladies?'"While the ceremony of presentation was going on I caught one glance atM'Manus, and had hard work not to roar out laughing. Such an expression ofsurprise, amazement, indignation, rage, and misery never was mixed up inone face before. Speak he could not; and I saw that, except for myself, hehad neither eyes, ears, nor senses for anything around him. Just at thismoment dinner was announced, and in we went. I never was in such spirits inmy life; the trick upon M'Manus had succeeded perfectly; he believed in hisheart that I had never met O'Grady in my life before, and that upon thefaith of our friendship, I had received my invitation. As for me, I sparedhim but little. I kept up a running fire of droll stories, had the ladiesin fits of laughing, made everlasting allusions to the colonel; and, ina word, ere the soup had disappeared, except himself, the company wasentirely with me."'O'Grady,' said I, 'forgive the freedom, but I feel as if we were oldacquaintances.'"'As Colonel M'Manus's friend,' said he, 'you can take no liberty here towhich you are not perfectly welcome.'"'Just what I expected,' said I. 'Mac and I,'--I wish you saw his face whenI called him Mac,--'Mac and I were schoolfellows five-and-thirty years ago;though he forgets me, I don't forget him,--to be sure it would be hard forme. I'm just thinking of the day Bishop Oulahan came over to visit thecollege. Mac was coming in at the door of the refectory as the bishop wasgoing out. "Take off your caubeen, you young scoundrel, and kneel down forhis reverence to bless you," said one of the masters, giving his hat a blowat the same moment that sent it flying to the other end of the room, andwith it, about twenty ripe pears that Mac had just stolen in the orchard,and had in his hat. I wish you only saw the bishop; and Mac himself, he wasa picture. Well, well, you forget it all now, but I remember it as if itwas only yesterday. Any champagne, Mr. O'Grady? I'm mighty dry.'"'Of course,' said Darby. 'Waiter, some champagne here.'[Illustration: THE SALUTATION.]"'Ah, it's himself was the boy for every kind of fun and devilment, quietand demure as he looks over there. Mac, your health. It's not every day ofthe week we get champagne.'"He laid down his knife and fork as I said this; his face and temples grewdeep purple; his eyes started as if they would spring from his head; and heput both his hands to his forehead, as if trying to assure himself that itwas not some horrid dream."'A little slice more of the turkey,' said I, 'and then, O'Grady, I'll tryyour hock. It's a wine I'm mighty fond of, and so is Mac there. Oh, it'sseldom, to tell you the truth, it troubles us. There, fill up the glass;that's it. Here now, Darby,--that's your name, I think,--you'll not thinkI'm taking a liberty in giving a toast? Here then, I'll give M'Manus'shealth, with all the honors; though it's early yet, to be sure, but we'lldo it again, by-and-by, when the whiskey comes. Here's M'Manus's goodhealth; and though his wife, they say, does not treat him well, and keepshim down--'"The roar of laughing that interrupted me here was produced by theexpression of poor Mac's face. He had started up from the table, andleaning with both his hands upon it, stared round upon the company like amaniac,--his mouth and eyes wide open, and his hair actually bristling withamazement. Thus he remained for a full minute, gasping like a fish ina landing-net. It seemed a hard struggle for him to believe he was notderanged. At last his eyes fell upon me; he uttered a deep groan, and witha voice tremulous with rage, thundered out,--"'The scoundrel! I never saw him before.'"He rushed from the room, and gained the street. Before our roar oflaughter was over he had secured post-horses, and was galloping towardsEnnis at the top speed of his cattle."He exchanged at once into the line; but they say that he caught a glimpseof my name in the army list, and sold out the next morning; be that as itmay, we never met since."I have related O'Shaughnessy's story here, rather from the memory I have ofhow we all laughed at it at the time, than from any feeling as to its realdesert; but when I think of the voice, look, accent, and gesture of thenarrator, I can scarcely keep myself from again giving way to laughter.CHAPTER XLV.THE DOURO.Never did the morning break more beautifully than on the 12th of May, 1809.Huge masses of fog-like vapor had succeeded to the starry, cloudless night,but one by one, they moved onwards towards the sea, disclosing as theypassed long tracts of lovely country, bathed in a rich golden glow. Thebroad Douro, with its transparent current, shone out like a bright-coloredribbon, meandering through the deep garment of fairest green; the darklyshadowed mountains which closed the background loomed even larger than theywere; while their summits were tipped with the yellow glory of the morning.The air was calm and still, and the very smoke that arose from thepeasant's cot labored as it ascended through the perfumed air, and save theripple of the stream, all was silent as the grave.The squadron of the 14th, with which I was, had diverged from the roadbeside the river, and to obtain a shorter path, had entered the skirts ofa dark pine wood; our pace was a sharp one; an orderly had been alreadydespatched to hasten our arrival, and we pressed on at a brisk trot. Inless than an hour we reached the verge of the wood, and as we rode out uponthe plain, what a spectacle met our eyes! Before us, in a narrow valleyseparated from the river by a low ridge, were picketed three cavalryregiments; their noiseless gestures and perfect stillness be-speaking atonce that they were intended for a surprise party. Farther down the stream,and upon the opposite side, rose the massive towers and tall spires ofOporto, displaying from their summits the broad ensign of France; while faras the eye could reach, the broad dark masses of troops might be seen; theintervals between their columns glittering with the bright equipments oftheir cavalry, whose steel caps and lances were sparkling in the sun-beams.The bivouac fires were still smouldering, and marking where some part ofthe army had passed the night; for early as it was, it was evident thattheir position had been changed; and even now, the heavy masses of darkinfantry might be seen moving from place to place, while the long line ofthe road to Vallonga was marked with a vast cloud of dust. The French drumand the light infantry bugle told, from time to time, that orders werepassing among the troops; while the glittering uniform of a staff officer,as he galloped from the town, bespoke the note of preparation."Dismount! Steady; quietly, my lads," said the colonel, as he alighted uponthe grass. "Let the men have their breakfast."The little amphitheatre we occupied hid us entirely from all observationon the part of the enemy, but equally so excluded us from perceiving theirmovements. It may readily be supposed then, with what impatience we waitedhere, while the din and clangor of the French force, as they marched andcountermarched so near us, were clearly audible. The orders were, however,strict that none should approach the bank of the river, and we layanxiously awaiting the moment when this inactivity should cease. More thanone orderly had arrived among us, bearing despatches from headquarters; butwhere our main body was, or what the nature of the orders, no one couldguess. As for me, my excitement was at its height, and I could not speakfor the very tension of my nerves. The officers stood in little groups oftwo and three, whispering anxiously together; but all I could collect was,that Soult had already begun his retreat upon Amarante, and that, with thebroad stream of the Douro between us, he defied our pursuit."Well, Charley," said Power, laying his arm upon my shoulder, "the Frenchhave given us the slip this time; they are already in march, and even if wedared force a passage in the face of such an enemy, it seems there is not aboat to be found. I have just seen Hammersley.""Indeed! Where is he?" said I."He's gone back to Villa de Conde; he asked after you most particularly.Don't blush, man; I'd rather back your chance than his, notwithstanding thelong letter that Lucy sends him. Poor fellow, he has been badly wounded,but, it seems, declines going back to England.""Captain Power," said an orderly, touching his cap, "General Murray desiresto see you."Power hastened away, but returned in a few moments."I say, Charley, there's something in the wind here. I have just beenordered to try where the stream is fordable. I've mentioned your name tothe general, and I think you'll be sent for soon. Good-by."I buckled on my sword, and looking to my girths, stood watching the groupsaround me; when suddenly a dragoon pulled his horse short up, and asked aman near me if Mr. O'Malley was there."Yes; I am he.""Orders from General Murray, sir," said the man, and rode off at a canter.I opened and saw that the despatch was addressed to Sir Arthur Wellesley,with the mere words, "With haste!" on the envelope.Now, which way to turn I knew not; so springing into the saddle, I gallopedto where Colonel Merivale was standing talking to the colonel of a heavydragoon regiment."May I ask, sir, by which road I am to proceed with this despatch?""Along the river, sir," said the heavy ------, a large dark-browed man,with a most forbidding look. "You'll soon see the troops; you'd better stiryourself, sir, or Sir Arthur is not very likely to be pleased with you."Without venturing a reply to what I felt a somewhat unnecessary taunt, Idashed spurs into my horse, and turned towards the river. I had not gainedthe bank above a minute, when the loud ringing of a rifle struck upon myear; bang went another, and another. I hurried on, however, at the top ofmy speed, thinking only of my mission and its pressing haste. As I turnedan angle of the stream, the vast column of the British came in sight, andscarcely had my eye rested upon them when my horse staggered forwards,plunged twice with his head nearly to the earth, and then, rearing madlyup, fell backwards to the ground. Crushed and bruised as I felt by my fall,I was soon aroused to the necessity of exertion; for as I disengaged myselffrom the poor beast, I discovered he had been killed by a bullet in thecounter; and scarcely had I recovered my legs when a shot struck my shakoand grazed my temples. I quickly threw myself to the ground, and creepingon for some yards, reached at last some rising ground, from which I rolledgently downwards into a little declivity, sheltered by the bank from theFrench fire.When I arrived at headquarters, I was dreadfully fatigued and heated;but resolving not to rest till I had delivered my despatches, I hastenedtowards the convent of La Sierra, where I was told the commander-in-chiefwas.As I came into the court of the convent, filled with general officers andpeople of the staff, I was turning to ask how I should proceed, when Hixleycaught my eye."Well, O'Malley, what brings you here?""Despatches from General Murray.""Indeed; oh, follow me."He hurried me rapidly through the buzzing crowd, and ascending a largegloomy stair, introduced me into a room, where about a dozen persons inuniform were writing at a long deal table."Captain Gordon," said he, addressing one of them, "despatches requiringimmediate attention have just been brought by this officer."Before the sentence was finished the door opened, and a short, slight man,in a gray undress coat, with a white cravat and a cocked hat, entered. Thedead silence that ensued was not necessary to assure me that he was one inauthority,--the look of command his bold, stern features presented; thesharp, piercing eye, the compressed lip, the impressive expression of thewhole face, told plainly that he was one who held equally himself andothers in mastery."Send General Sherbroke here," said he to an aide-de-camp. "Let the lightbrigade march into position;" and then turning suddenly to me, "Whosedespatches are these?""General Murray's, sir."I needed no more than that look to assure me that this was he of whom I hadheard so much, and of whom the world was still to hear so much more.He opened them quickly, and glancing his eye across the contents, crushedthe paper in his hand. Just as he did so, a spot of blood upon the envelopeattracted his attention."How's this,--are you wounded?""No, sir; my horse was killed--""Very well, sir; join your brigade. But stay, I shall have orders for you.Well, Waters, what news?"This question was addressed to an officer in a staff uniform, who enteredat the moment, followed by the short and bulky figure of a monk, his shavencrown and large cassock strongly contrasting with the gorgeous glitter ofthe costumes around him."I say, who have we here?""The Prior of Amarante, sir," replied Waters, "who has just come over. Wehave already, by his aid, secured three large barges--""Let the artillery take up position in the convent at once," said SirArthur, interrupting. "The boats will be brought round to the small creekbeneath the orchard. You, sir," turning to me, "will convey to GeneralMurray--but you appear weak. You, Gordon, will desire Murray to effect acrossing at Avintas with the Germans and the 14th. Sherbroke's divisionwill occupy the Villa Nuova. What number of men can that seminary take?""From three to four hundred, sir. The padre mentions that all the vigilanceof the enemy is limited to the river below the town.""I perceive it," was the short reply of Sir Arthur, as placing his handscarelessly behind his back, he walked towards the window, and looked outupon the river.All was still as death in the chamber; not a lip murmured. The feeling ofrespect for him in whose presence we were standing checked every thought ofutterance; while the stupendous gravity of the events before us engrossedevery mind and occupied every heart. I was standing near the window;the effect of my fall had stunned me for a time, but I was graduallyrecovering, and watched with a thrilling heart the scene before me. Greatand absorbing as was my interest in what was passing without, it wasnothing compared with what I felt as I looked at him upon whom our destinywas then hanging. I had ample time to scan his features and canvass theirevery lineament. Never before did I look upon such perfect impassibility;the cold, determined expression was crossed by no show of passion orimpatience. All was rigid and motionless, and whatever might have been theworkings of the spirit within, certainly no external sign betrayed them;and yet what a moment for him must that have been! Before him, separated bya deep and rapid river, lay the conquering legions of France, led on by onesecond alone to him whose very name had been the prestige of victory.Unprovided with every regular means of transport, in the broad glare ofday, in open defiance of their serried ranks and thundering artillery,he dared the deed. What must have been his confidence in the soldiers hecommanded! What must have been his reliance upon his own genius! As suchthoughts rushed through my mind, the door opened and an officer enteredhastily, and whispering a few words to Colonel Waters, left the room."One boat is already brought up to the crossing-place, and entirelyconcealed by the wall of the orchard.""Let the men cross," was the brief reply.No other word was spoken as, turning from the window, he closed histelescope, and followed by all the others, descended to the courtyard.This simple order was enough; an officer with a company of the Buffsembarked, and thus began the passage of the Douro.So engrossed was I in my vigilant observation of our leader, that I wouldgladly have remained at the convent, when I received an order to join mybrigade, to which a detachment of artillery was already proceeding.As I reached Avintas all was in motion. The cavalry was in readiness besidethe river; but as yet no boats had been discovered, and such was theimpatience of the men to cross, it was with difficulty they were preventedtrying the passage by swimming, when suddenly Power appeared followed byseveral fishermen. Three or four small skiffs had been found, half sunkin mud, among the rushes, and with such frail assistance we commenced tocross."There will be something to write home to Galway soon, Charley, or I'mterribly mistaken," said Fred, as he sprang into the boat beside me. "Was Inot a true prophet when I told you 'We'd meet the French in the morning?'""They're at it already," said Hixley, as a wreath of blue smoke floatedacross the stream below us, and the loud boom of a large gun resoundedthrough the air.Then came a deafening shout, followed by a rattling volley of small arms,gradually swelling into a hot sustained fire, through which the cannonpealed at intervals. Several large meadows lay along the river-side, whereour brigade was drawn up as the detachments landed from the boats; andhere, although nearly a league distant from the town, we now heard the dinand crash of battle, which increased every moment. The cannonade from theSierra convent, which at first was merely the fire of single guns, nowthundered away in one long roll, amidst which the sounds of falling wallsand crashing roofs were mingled. It was evident to us, from the continualfire kept up, that the landing had been effected; while the swelling tideof musketry told that fresh troops were momentarily coming up.In less than twenty minutes our brigade was formed, and we now only waitedfor two light four-pounders to be landed, when an officer galloped up inhaste, and called out,--"The French are in retreat!" and pointing at the same moment to theVallonga road, we saw a long line of smoke and dust leading from the town,through which, as we gazed, the colors of the enemy might be seen as theydefiled, while the unbroken lines of the wagons and heavy baggage provedthat it was no partial movement, but the army itself retreating."Fourteenth, threes about! close up! trot!" called out the loud and manlyvoice of our leader, and the heavy tramp of our squadrons shook the veryground as we advanced towards the road to Vallonga.As we came on, the scene became one of overwhelming excitement; themasses of the enemy that poured unceasingly from the town could now bedistinguished more clearly; and amidst all the crash of gun-carriages andcaissons, the voices of the staff officers rose high as they hurried alongthe retreating battalions. A troop of flying artillery galloped forthat top speed, and wheeling their guns into position with the speed oflightning, prepared, by a flanking fire, to cover the retiring column. Thegunners sprang from their seats, the guns were already unlimbered, when SirGeorge Murray, riding up at our left, called out,--"Forward! close up! Charge!"The word was scarcely spoken when the loud cheer answered the welcomesound, and the same instant the long line of shining helmets passed withthe speed of a whirlwind; the pace increased at every stride, the ranksgrew closer, and like the dread force of some mighty engine we fell uponthe foe. I have felt all the glorious enthusiasm of a fox-hunt, when theloud cry of the hounds, answered by the cheer of the joyous huntsman,stirred the very heart within, but never till now did I know how far higherthe excitement reaches, when man to man, sabre to sabre, arm to arm, weride forward to the battle-field. On we went, the loud shout of "Forward!"still ringing in our ears. One broken, irregular discharge from the Frenchguns shook the head of our advancing column, but stayed us not as wegalloped madly on.I remember no more. The din, the smoke, the crash, the cry for quarter,mingled with the shout of victory, the flying enemy, the agonizing shrieksof the wounded,--all are commingled in my mind, but leave no trace ofclearness or connection between them; and it was only when the columnwheeled to reform behind the advancing squadrons, that I awoke from mytrance of maddening excitement, and perceived that we had carried theposition and cut off the guns of the enemy."Well done, 14th!" said an old gray-headed colonel, as he rode along ourline,--"gallantly done, lads!" The blood trickled from a sabre cut on histemple, along his cheek, as he spoke; but he either knew it not or heededit not."There go the Germans!" said Power, pointing to the remainder of ourbrigade, as they charged furiously upon the French infantry, and rode themdown in masses.Our guns came up at this time, and a plunging fire was opened upon thethick and retreating ranks of the enemy. The carnage must have beenterrific, for the long breaches in their lines showed where the squadronsof the cavalry had passed, or the most destructive tide of the artilleryhad swept through them. The speed of the flying columns grew momentarilymore; the road became blocked up, too, by broken carriages and wounded; andto add to their discomfiture, a damaging fire now opened from the town uponthe retreating column, while the brigade of Guards and the 29th pressedhotly on their rear.The scene was now beyond anything maddening in its interest. From the wallsof Oporto the English infantry poured forth in pursuit, while the wholeriver was covered with boats as they still continued to cross over. Theartillery thundered from the Sierra to protect the landing, for it was evenstill contested in places; and the cavalry, charging in flank, swept thebroken ranks and bore down upon the squares.It was now, when the full tide of victory ran highest in our favor, that wewere ordered to retire from the road. Column after column passed before us,unmolested and unassailed, and not even a cannon-shot arrested their steps.Some unaccountable timidity of our leader directed this movement; andwhile before our very eyes the gallant infantry were charging the retiringcolumns, we remained still and inactive.How little did the sense of praise we had already won repay us for theshame and indignation we experienced at this moment, as with burning checkand compressed lip we watched the retreating files. "What can he mean?""Is there not some mistake?" "Are we never to charge?" were the mutteredquestions around, as a staff officer galloped up with the order to takeground still farther back, and nearer to the river.The word was scarcely spoken when a young officer, in the uniform of ageneral, dashed impetuously up; he held his plumed cap high above his head,as he called out, "14th, follow me! Left face! wheel! charge!"So, with the word, we were upon them. The French rear-guard was at thismoment at the narrowest part of the road, which opened by a bridge upon alarge open space; so that, forming with a narrow front and favored by adeclivity in the ground, we actually rode them down. Twice the Frenchformed, and twice were they broken. Meanwhile the carnage was dreadfulon both sides, our fellows dashing madly forward where the ranks werethickest, the enemy resisting with the stubborn courage of men fighting fortheir last spot of ground. So impetuous was the charge of our squadrons,that we stopped not till, piercing the dense column of the retreating mass,we reached the open ground beyond. Here we wheeled and prepared once moreto meet them, when suddenly some squadrons of cuirassiers debouched fromthe road, and supported by a field-piece, showed front against us. This wasthe moment that the remainder of our brigade should have come to our aid,but not a man appeared. However, there was not an instant to be lost;already the plunging fire of the four-pounder had swept through our files,and every moment increased our danger."Once more, my lads, forward!" cried out our gallant leader, Sir CharlesStewart, as waving his sabre, he dashed into the thickest of the fray.So sudden was our charge that we were upon them before they were prepared.And here ensued a terrific struggle; for as the cavalry of the enemy gaveway before us, we came upon the close ranks of the infantry at half-pistoldistance, who poured a withering volley into us as we approached. But whatcould arrest the sweeping torrent of our brave fellows, though every momentfalling in numbers?Harvey, our major, lost his arm near the shoulder. Scarcely an officerwas not wounded. Power received a deep sabre-cut in the cheek from anaide-de-camp of General Foy, in return for a wound he gave the general;while I, in my endeavor to save General Laborde when unhorsed, was cut downthrough the helmet, and so stunned that I remembered no more around me. Ikept my saddle, it is true, but I lost every sense of consciousness, myfirst glimmering of reason coming to my aid as I lay upon the river bankand felt my faithful follower Mike bathing my temples with water, as hekept up a running fire of lamentations for my being murthered so young.[Illustration: THE SKIRMISH.]"Are you better, Mister Charles? Spake to me, alanah! Say that you're notkilt, darling; do now. Oh, wirra! what'll I ever say to the master? and youdoing so beautiful! Wouldn't he give the best baste in his stable to belooking at you to-day? There, take a sup; it's only water. Bad luck tothem, but it's hard work beatin' them. They 're only gone now. That'sright; now you're coming to.""Where am I, Mike?""It's here you are, darling, resting yourself.""Well, Charley, my poor fellow, you've got sore bones, too," cried Power,as, his face swathed in bandages and covered with blood, he lay down on thegrass beside me. "It was a gallant thing while it lasted, but has cost usdearly. Poor Hixley--""What of him?" said I, anxiously."Poor fellow, he has seen his last battle-field! He fell across me as wecame out upon the road. I lifted him up in my arms and bore him along abovefifty yards; but he was stone dead. Not a sigh, not a word escaped him;shot through the forehead." As he spoke, his lips trembled, and his voicesank to a mere whisper at the last words: "You remember what he said lastnight. Poor fellow, he was every inch a soldier."Such was his epitaph.I turned my head towards the scene of our late encounter. Some dismountedguns and broken wagons alone marked the spot; while far in the distance,the dust of the retreating columns showed the beaten enemy as they hurriedtowards the frontiers of Spain.CHAPTER XLVI.THE MORNING.There are few sadder things in life than the day after a battle. Thehigh-beating hope, the bounding spirits, have passed away, and in theirstead comes the depressing reaction by which every overwrought excitementis followed. With far different eyes do we look upon the compact ranks andglistening files,--With helm arrayed,And lance and blade,And plume in the gay wind dancing!and upon the cold and barren heath, whose only memory of the past is theblood-stained turf, a mangled corpse, the broken gun, the shattered wall,the well-trodden earth where columns stood, the cut-up ground where cavalryhad charged,--these are the sad relics of all the chivalry of yesterday.The morning which followed the battle of the Douro was one of the mostbeautiful I ever remember. There was that kind of freshness and elasticityin the air which certain days possess, and communicate by some magic theirproperties to ourselves. The thrush was singing gayly out from every groveand wooded dell; the very river had a sound of gladness as it rippled onagainst its sedgy banks; the foliage, too, sparkled in the fresh dew, as inits robes of holiday, and all looked bright and happy.We were picketed near the river, upon a gently rising ground, from whichthe view extended for miles in every direction. Above us, the stream camewinding down amidst broad and fertile fields of tall grass and waving corn,backed by deep and mellow woods, which were lost to the view upon thedistant hills; below, the river, widening as it went, pursued a straightercourse, or turned with bolder curves, till, passing beneath the town, itspread into a large sheet of glassy water as it opened to the sea. The sunwas just rising as I looked upon this glorious scene, and already the tallspires of Oporto were tipped with a bright rosy hue, while the massivetowers and dark walls threw their lengthened shadows far across the plain.The fires of the bivouac still burned, but all slept around them. Not asound was heard save the tramp of a patrol or the short, quick cry ofthe sentry. I sat lost in meditation, or rather in that state of dreamythoughtfulness in which the past and present are combined, and the absentare alike before us as are the things we look upon.One moment I felt as though I were describing to my uncle the battle of theday before, pointing out where we stood, and how we charged; then againI was at home, beside the broad, bleak Shannon, and the brown hills ofScariff. I watched with beating heart the tall Sierra, where our path layfor the future, and then turned my thoughts to him whose name was so soonto be received in England with a nation's pride and gratitude, and pantedfor a soldier's glory.As thus I followed every rising fancy, I heard a step approach; it was afigure muffled in a cavalry cloak, which I soon perceived to be Power."Charley!" said he, in a half-whisper, "get up and come with me. You areaware of the general order, that while in pursuit of an enemy, all militaryhonors to the dead are forbidden; but we wish to place our poor comrade inthe earth before we leave."I followed down a little path, through a grave of tall beech-trees, thatopened upon a little grassy terrace beside the river. A stunted olive-treestood by itself in the midst, and there I found five of our brotherofficers standing, wrapped in their wide cloaks. As we pressed each other'shands, not a word was spoken. Each heart was full; and hard features thatnever quailed before the foe were now shaken with the convulsive spasm ofagony or compressed with stern determination to seem calm.A cavalry helmet and a large blue cloak lay upon the grass. The narrowgrave was already dug beside it; and in the deathlike stillness around, theservice for the dead was read. The last words were over. We stooped andplaced the corpse, wrapped up in the broad mantle, in the earth; wereplaced the mould, and stood silently around the spot. The trumpet of ourregiment at this moment sounded the call; its clear notes rang sharplythrough the thin air,--it was the soldier's requiem! and we turned awaywithout speaking, and returned to our quarters.I had never known poor Hixley till a day or two before; but, somehow, mygrief for him was deep and heartfelt. It was not that his frank and manlybearing, his bold and military air, had gained upon me. No; these wereindeed qualities to attract and delight me, but he had obtained a strongerand faster hold upon my affections,--he spoke to me of home.Of all the ties that bind us to the chance acquaintances we meet with inlife, what can equal this one? What a claim upon your love has he who can,by some passing word, some fast-flitting thought, bring back the days ofyour youth! What interest can he not excite by some anecdote of your boyishdays, some well-remembered trait of youthful daring, or early enterprise!Many a year of sunshine and of storm have passed above my head; I have notbeen without my moments of gratified pride and rewarded ambition; but myheart has never responded so fully, so thankfully, so proudly to these,such as they were, as to the simple, touching words of one who knew myearly home, and loved its inmates."Well, Fitzroy, what news?" inquired I, roused from my musing, as anaide-de-camp galloped up at full speed."Tell Merivale to get the regiment under arms at once. Sir Arthur Wellesleywill be here in less than half an hour. You may look for the routeimmediately. Where are the Germans quartered?""Lower down; beside that grove of beech-trees, next the river."Scarcely was my reply spoken, when he dashed spurs into his horse, and wassoon out of sight. Meanwhile the plain beneath me presented an animated andsplendid spectacle. The different corps were falling into position to theenlivening sounds of their quick-step, the trumpets of the cavalry rangloudly through the valley, and the clatter of sabres and sabretaschesjoined with the hollow tramp of the horses, as the squadron came up.I had not a moment to lose; so hastening back to my quarters, I found Mikewaiting with my horse."Captain Power's before you, sir," said he, "and you'll have to make haste.The regiments are under arms already."From the little mound where I stood, I could see the long line of cavalryas they deployed into the plain, followed by the horse artillery, whichbrought up the rear."This looks like a march," thought I, as I pressed forward to join mycompanions.I had not advanced above a hundred yards through a narrow ravine when themeasured tread of infantry fell upon my ears. I pulled up to slacken mypace, just as the head of a column turned round the angle of the road, andcame in view. The tall caps of a grenadier company was the first thing Ibeheld, as they came on without roll of drum and sound of fife. I watchedwith a soldier's pride the manly bearing and gallant step of the dense massas they defiled before me. I was struck no less by them than by a certainlook of a steady but sombre cast which each man wore."What can this mean?" thought I.My first impression was, that a military execution was about to take place,the next moment solved my doubt; for as the last files of the grenadierswheeled round, a dense mass behind came in sight, whose unarmed hands, anddowncast air, at once bespoke them prisoners-of-war.What a sad sight it was! There was the old and weather-beaten grenadier,erect in frame and firm in step, his gray mustache scarcely concealingthe scowl that curled his lip, side by side with the young and daringconscript, even yet a mere boy; their march was regular, their gazesteadfast,--no look of flinching courage there. On they came, a longunbroken line. They looked not less proudly than their captors around them.As I looked with heavy heart upon them, my attention was attracted to onewho marched alone behind the rest. He was a middle-sized but handsome youthof some eighteen years at most; his light helmet and waving plume bespokehim a chasseur  cheval, and I could plainly perceive, in his carelesshalf-saucy air, how indignantly he felt the position to which the fate ofwar had reduced him. He caught my eyes fixed upon him, and for an instantturned upon me a gaze of open and palpable defiance, drawing himself upto his full height, and crossing his arms upon his breast; but probablyperceiving in my look more of interest than of triumph, his countenancesuddenly changed, a deep blush suffused his cheek, his eye beamed with asoftened and kindly expression, and carrying his hand to his helmet, hesaluted me, saying, in a voice of singular sweetness,--"Je vous souhaite un meilleur sort, camarade."I bowed, and muttering something in return, was about to make some inquiryconcerning him, when the loud call of the trumpet rang through the valley,and apprised me that, in my interest for the prisoners, I had forgotten allelse, and was probably incurring censure for my absence.CHAPTER XLVII.THE REVIEW.When I joined the group of my brother officers, who stood gayly chattingand laughing together before our lines, I was much surprised--nay almostshocked--to find how little seeming impression had been made upon them, bythe sad duty we had performed that morning.When last we met, each eye was downcast, each heart was full,--sorrow forhim we had lost from among us forever, mingling with the awful sense ofour own uncertain tenure here, had laid its impress on each brow; butnow, scarcely an hour elapsed, and all were cheerful and elated. The lastshovelful of earth upon the grave seemed to have buried both the dead andthe mourning. And such is war, and such the temperament it forms! Events sostrikingly opposite in their character and influences succeed so rapidlyone upon another that the mind is kept in one whirl of excitement, and atlength accustoms itself to change with every phase of circumstances; andbetween joy and grief, hope and despondency, enthusiasm and depression,there is neither breadth nor interval,--they follow each other as naturallyas morning succeeds to night.I had not much time for such reflections; scarcely had I saluted theofficers about me, when the loud prolonged roll of the drums along the lineof infantry in the valley, followed by the sharp clatter of muskets as theywere raised to the shoulder, announced the troops were under arms, and thereview begun."Have you seen the general order this morning, Power?" inquired an oldofficer beside me."No; they say, however, that ours are mentioned.""Harvey is going on favorably," cried a young cornet, as he galloped up toour party."Take ground to the left!" sung out the clear voice of the colonel, ashe rode along in front. "Fourteenth, I am happy to inform you that yourconduct has met approval in the highest quarter. I have just received thegeneral orders, in which this occurs:--"'THE TIMELY PASSAGE OF THE DOURO, AND SUBSEQUENT MOVEMENTS UPON THEENEMY'S FLANK, BY LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SHERBROKE, WITH THE GUARDS AND 29THREGIMENT, AND THE BRAVERY OF THE TWO SQUADRONS OF THE 14TH LIGHTDRAGOONS, UNDER THE COMMAND OF MAJOR HARVEY, AND LED BY THE HONORABLEBRIGADIER-GENERAL CHARLES STEWART, OBTAINED THE VICTORY'--Mark that, mylads! obtained the victory--'WHICH HAS CONTRIBUTED SO MUCH TO THE HONOR OFTHE TROOPS ON THIS DAY.'"The words were hardly spoken, when a tremendous cheer burst from the wholeline at once."Steady, Fourteenth! steady, lads!" said the gallant old colonel, as heraised his hand gently; "the staff is approaching."At the same moment, the white plumes appeared, rising above the brow ofthe hill. On they came, glittering in all the splendor of aignillettes andorders; all save one. He rode foremost, upon a small, compact, black horse;his dress, a plain gray frock fastened at the waist by a red sash; hiscocked hat alone bespoke, in its plume, the general officer. He gallopedrapidly on till he came to the centre of the line; then turning shortround, he scanned the ranks from end to end with an eagle glance."Colonel Merivale, you have made known to your regiment my opinion of them,as expressed in general orders?"The colonel bowed low in acquiescence."Fitzroy, you have got the memorandum, I hope?"The aide-de-camp here presented to Sir Arthur a slip of paper, which hecontinued to regard attentively for some minutes."Captain Powel,--Power, I mean. Captain Power!"Power rode out from the line."Your very distinguished conduct yesterday has been reported to me. I shallhave sincere pleasure in forwarding your name for the vacant majority."You have forgotten, Colonel Merivale, to send in the name of the officerwho saved General Laborde's life.""I believe I have mentioned it, Sir Arthur," said the colonel: "Mr.O'Malley.""True, I beg pardon; so you have--Mr. O'Malley; a very young officerindeed,--ha, an Irishman! The south of Ireland, eh?""No, sir, the west.""Oh, yes! Well, Mr. O'Malley, you are promoted. You have the lieutenancyin your own regiment. By-the-bye, Merivale," here his voice changed into ahalf-laughing tone, "ere I forget it, pray let me beg of you to look intothis honest fellow's claim; he has given me no peace the entire morning."As he spoke, I turned my eyes in the direction he pointed, and to my utterconsternation, beheld my man Mickey Free standing among the staff, theposition he occupied, and the presence he stood in, having no moreperceptible effect upon his nerves than if he were assisting at an Irishwake; but so completely was I overwhelmed with shame at the moment,that the staff were already far down the lines ere I recovered myself-possession, to which, certainly, I was in some degree recalled byMaster Mike's addressing me in a somewhat imploring voice:--"Arrah, spake for me, Master Charles, alanah; sure they might do somethingfor me now, av it was only to make me a ganger."Mickey's ideas of promotion, thus insinuatingly put forward, threw thewhole party around us into one burst of laughter."I have him down there," said he, pointing, as he spoke, to a thick groveof cork-trees at a little distance."Who have you got there, Mike?" inquired Power."Devil a one o' me knows his name," replied he; "may be it's Bony himself.""And how do you know he's there still?""How do I know, is it? Didn't I tie him last night?"Curiosity to find out what Mickey could possibly allude to, induced Powerand myself to follow him down the slope to the clump of trees I havementioned. As we came near, the very distinct denunciations that issuedfrom the thicket proved pretty clearly the nature of the affair. It wasnothing less than a French officer of cavalry that Mike had unhorsed in themle, and wishing, probably, to preserve some testimony of his prowess,had made prisoner, and tied fast to a cork-tree, the preceding evening."Sacrebleu!" said the poor Frenchman, as we approached, "ce sont dessauvages!""Av it's making your sowl ye are," said Mike, "you're right; for may bethey won't let me keep you alive."Mike's idea of a tame prisoner threw me into a fit of laughing, while Powerasked,--"And what do you want to do with him, Mickey?""The sorra one o' me knows, for he spakes no dacent tongue. Thighum thu,"said he, addressing the prisoner, with a poke in the ribs at the samemoment. "But sure, Master Charles, he might tache me French."There was something so irresistibly ludicrous in his tone and look ashe said these words, that both Power and myself absolutely roared withlaughter. We began, however, to feel not a little ashamed of our positionin the business, and explained to the Frenchman that our worthy countrymanhad but little experience in the usages of war, while we proceeded tounbind him and liberate him from his miserable bondage."It's letting him loose, you are, Captain? Master Charles, take care.Be-gorra, av you had as much trouble in catching him as I had, you'd thinktwice about letting him out. Listen to me, now," here he placed his closedfist within an inch of the poor prisoner's nose,--"listen to me! Av you saypeas, by the morreal, I'll not lave a whole bone in your skin."With some difficulty we persuaded Mike that his conduct, so far fromleading to his promotion, might, if known in another quarter, procure himan acquaintance with the provost-marshal; a fact which, it was plain toperceive, gave him but a very poor impression of military gratitude."Oh, then, if they were in swarms fornent me, devil receave the prisonerI'll take again!"So saying, he slowly returned to the regiment; while Power and I, havingconducted the Frenchman to the rear, cantered towards the town to learn thenews of the day.The city on that day presented a most singular aspect. The streets, filledwith the town's-people and the soldiery, were decorated with flags andgarlands; the cafs were crowded with merry groups, and the sounds ofmusic and laughter resounded on all sides. The houses seemed to bequite inadequate to afford accommodation to the numerous guests; and inconsequence, bullock cars and forage; wagons were converted into temporaryhotels, and many a jovial party were collected in both. Military music,church bells, drinking choruses, were all commingled in the din andturmoil; processions in honor of "Our Lady of Succor" were jammed up amongbacchanalian orgies, and their very chant half drowned in the cries of thewounded as they passed on to the hospitals. With difficulty we pushed ourway through the dense mob, as we turned our steps towards the seminary. Weboth felt naturally curious to see the place where our first detachmentlanded, and to examine the opportunities of defence it presented. Thebuilding itself was a large and irregular one of an oblong form, surroundedby a high wall of solid masonry, the only entrance being by a heavy irongate.At this spot the battle appeared to have raged with violence; one side ofthe massive gate was torn from its hinges and lay flat upon the ground; thewalls were breached in many places; and pieces of torn uniforms, brokenbayonets, and bruised shakos attested that the conflict was a close one.The seminary itself was in a falling state; the roof, from which Pagethad given his orders, and where he was wounded, had fallen in. The Frenchcannon had fissured the building from top to bottom, and it seemed onlyawaiting the slightest impulse to crumble into ruin. When we regarded thespot, and examined the narrow doorway which opening upon a flight of a fewsteps to the river, admitted our first party, we could not help feelingstruck anew with the gallantry of that mere handful of brave fellows whothus threw themselves amidst the overwhelming legions of the enemy, and atonce, without waiting for a single reinforcement, opened a fire upon theirranks. Bold as the enterprise unquestionably was, we still felt with whatconsummate judgment it had been planned; a bend of the river concealedentirely the passage of the troops, the guns of the Sierras covered theirlanding and completely swept one approach to the seminary. The French,being thus obliged to attack by the gate, were compelled to make aconsiderable dtour before they reached it, all of which gave timefor our divisions to cross; while the brigade of Guards, under GeneralSherbroke, profiting by the confusion, passed the river below the town, andtook the enemy unexpectedly in the rear.Brief as was the struggle within the town, it must have been a terrificone. The artillery were firing at musket range; cavalry and infantry werefighting hand to hand in narrow streets, a destructive musketry pouring allthe while from windows and house-tops.At the Amarante gate, where the French defiled, the carnage was also great.Their light artillery unlimbered some guns here to cover the columns asthey deployed, but Murray's cavalry having carried these, the flank of theinfantry became entirely exposed to the galling fire of small-arms fromthe seminary, and the far more destructive shower of grape that pouredunceasingly from the Sierra.Our brigade did the rest; and in less than one hour from the landing of thefirst man, the French were in full retreat upon Vallonga."A glorious thing, Charley," said Power, after a pause, "and a proudsouvenir for hereafter."A truth I felt deeply at the time, and one my heart responds to not lessfully as I am writing.CHAPTER XLVIII.THE QUARREL.On the evening of the 12th, orders were received for the German brigade andthree squadrons of our regiment to pursue the French upon the Terracintheroad by daybreak on the following morning.I was busily occupied in my preparations for a hurried march when Mike cameup to say that an officer desired to speak with me; and the moment afterCaptain Hammersley appeared. A sudden flush colored his pale and sicklyfeatures, as he held out his hand and said,--"I've come to wish you joy, O'Malley. I just this instant heard of yourpromotion. I am sincerely glad of it; pray tell me the whole affair.""That is the very thing I am unable to do. I have some very vague,indistinct remembrance of warding off a sabre-cut from the head of awounded and unhorsed officer in the mle of yesterday, but more I knownot. In fact, it was my first duty under fire. I've a tolerably clearrecollection of all the events of the morning, but the word 'Charge!' oncegiven, I remember very little more. But you, where have you been? How havewe not met before?""I've exchanged into a heavy dragoon regiment, and am now employed upon thestaff.""You are aware that I have letters for you?""Power hinted, I think, something of the kind. I saw him very hurriedly."These words were spoken with an effort at nonchalance that evidently costhim much.As for me, my agitation was scarcely less, as fumbling for some seconds inmy portmanteau, I drew forth the long destined packet. As I placed it inhis hands, he grew deadly pale, and a slight spasmodic twitch in his upperlip bespoke some unnatural struggle. He broke the seal suddenly, and as hedid so, the morocco case of a miniature fell upon the ground; his eyes ranrapidly across the letter; the livid color of his lips as the blood forceditself to them added to the corpse-like hue of his countenance."You, probably, are aware of the contents of this letter, Mr. O'Malley,"said he, in an altered voice, whose tones, half in anger, half insuppressed irony, cut to my very heart."I am in complete ignorance of them," said I, calmly."Indeed, sir!" replied he, with a sarcastic curl of his mouth as he spoke."Then, perhaps, you will tell me, too, that your very success is a secretto you--""I'm really not aware--""You think, probably, sir, that the pastime is an amusing one, to interferewhere the affections of others are concerned. I've heard of you, sir. Yourconduct at Lisbon is known to me; and though Captain Trevyllian may bear--""Stop, Captain Hammersley!" said I, with a tremendous effort to becalm,--"stop! You have said enough, quite enough, to convince me of whatyour object was in seeking me here to-day. You shall not be disappointed. Itrust that assurance will save you from any further display of temper.""I thank you, most humbly I thank you for the quickness of yourapprehension; and I shall now take my leave. Good-evening, Mr. O'Malley. Iwish you much joy; you have my very fullest congratulations upon all yourgood fortune."The sneering emphasis the last words were spoken with remained fixed in mymind long after he took his departure; and, indeed, so completely did thewhole seem like a dream to me that were it not for the fragments of theminiature that lay upon the ground where he had crushed them with his heel,I could scarcely credit myself that I was awake.My first impulse was to seek Power, upon whose judgment and discretion Icould with confidence rely.I had not long to wait; for scarcely had I thrown my cloak around me, whenhe rode up. He had just seen, Hammersley, and learned something of ourinterview."Why, Charley, my dear fellow, what is this? How have you treated poorHammersley?""Treated him! Say, rather, how has he treated me!"I here entered into a short but accurate account of our meeting, duringwhich Power listened with great composure; while I could perceive, from thequestions he asked, that some very different impression had been previouslymade upon his mind."And this was all that passed?""All.""But what of the business at Lisbon?""I don't understand.""Why, he speaks,--he has heard some foolish account of your having madesome ridiculous speech there about your successful rivalry of him inIreland. Lucy Dashwood, I suppose, is referred to. Some one has beengood-natured enough to repeat the thing to him.""But it never occurred. I never did.""Are you sure, Charley?""I am sure. I know I never did.""The poor fellow! He has been duped. Come, Charley, you must not take itill. Poor Hammersley has never recovered a sabre-wound he received somemonths since upon the head; his intellect is really affected by it. Leaveit all to me. Promise not to leave your quarters till I return, and I'llput everything right again."I gave the required pledge; while Power, springing into the saddle, left meto my own reflections.My frame of mind as Power left me was by no means an enviable one. Aquarrel is rarely a happy incident in a man's life, still less is it sowhen the difference arises with one we are disposed to like and respect.Such was Hammersley. His manly, straightforward character had won my esteemand regard, and it was with no common scrutiny I taxed my memory to thinkwhat could have given rise to the impression he labored under of myhaving injured him. His chance mention of Trevyllian suggested to me somesuspicion that his dislike of me, wherefore arising I knew not, might haveits share in the matter; and in this state of doubt and uncertainty I pacedimpatiently up and down, anxiously watching for Power's return in the hopeof at length getting some real insight into the difficulty.My patience was fast ebbing, Power had been absent above an hour, and noappearance of him could I detect, when suddenly the tramp of a horse camerapidly up the hill. I looked out and saw a rider coming forward at a veryfast pace. Before I had time for even a guess as to who it was, he drewup, and I recognized Captain Trevyllian. There was a certain look of easyimpertinence and half-smiling satisfaction about his features I had neverseen before, as he touched his cap in salute, and said,--"May I have the honor of a few words' conversation with you?"I bowed silently, while he dismounted, and passing his bridle beneath hisarm, walked on beside me."My friend Captain Hammersley has commissioned me to wait upon you aboutthis unpleasant affair--""I beg pardon for the interruption, Captain Trevyllian, but as I have yetto learn to what you or your friend alludes, perhaps it may facilitatematters if you will explicitly state your meaning."He grew crimson on the cheek as I said this, while, with a voice perfectlyunmoved, he continued,--"I am not sufficiently in my friend's confidence to know the whole of theaffair in question, nor have I his permission to enter into any of it, heprobably presuming, as I certainly did myself, that your sense of honorwould have deemed further parley and discussion both unnecessary andunseasonable.""In fact, then, if I understand, it is expected that I should meet CaptainHammersley for some reason unknown--""He certainly desires a meeting with you," was the dry reply."And as certainly I shall not give it, before understanding upon whatgrounds.""And such I am to report as your answer?" said he, looking at me at themoment with an expression of ill-repressed triumph as he spoke.There was something in these few words, as well as in the tone in whichthey were spoken, that sunk deeply in my heart. Was it that by some trickof diplomacy he was endeavoring to compromise my honor and character? Wasit possible that my refusal might be construed into any other than thereal cause? I was too young, too inexperienced in the world to decide thequestion for myself, and no time was allowed me to seek another's counsel.What a trying moment was that for me; my temples throbbed, my heart beatalmost audibly, and I stood afraid to speak; dreading on the one hand lestmy compliance might involve me in an act to embitter my life forever, andfearful on the other, that my refusal might be reported as a trait ofcowardice.He saw, he read my difficulty at a glance, and with a smile of mostsupercilious expression, repeated coolly his former question. In an instantall thought of Hammersley was forgotten. I remembered no more. I saw himbefore me, he who had, since my first meeting, continually contrived topass some inappreciable slight upon me. My eyes flashed, my hands tingledwith ill-repressed rage, as I said,--"With Captain Hammersley I am conscious of no quarrel, nor have I evershown by any act or look an intention to provoke one. Indeed, suchdemonstrations are not always successful; there are persons most rigidlyscrupulous for a friend's honor, little disposed to guard their own.""You mistake," said he, interrupting me, as I spoke these words with a lookas insulting as I could make it,--"you mistake. I have sworn a solemn oathnever to send a challenge."The emphasis upon the word "send," explained fully his meaning, when Isaid,--"But you will not decline--""Most certainly not," said he, again interrupting, while with sparkling eyeand elated look he drew himself up to his full height. "Your friend is--""Captain Power; and yours--""Sir Harry Beaufort. I may observe that, as the troops are in marchingorder, the matter had better not be delayed.""There shall be none on my part.""Nor mine!" said he, as with a low bow and a look of most ineffabletriumph, he sprang into his saddle; then, "Au revoir, Mr. O'Malley," saidhe, gathering up his reins. "Beaufort is on the staff, and quartered atOporto." So saying, he cantered easily down the slope, and once more I wasalone.CHAPTER XLIX.THE ROUTE CONTINUED.I was leisurely examining my pistols,--poor Considine's last present to meon leaving home,--when an orderly sergeant rode up, and delivered into myhands the following order:--Lieutenant O'Malley will hold himself in immediate readiness toproceed on a particular service. By order of his Excellency theCommander of the Forces.[Signed]    S. GORDON, Military Secretary."What can this mean?" thought I. "It is not possible that any rumor of myintended meeting could have got abroad, and that my present destinationcould be intended as a punishment?"I walked hurriedly to the door of the little hut which formed my quarters;below me in the plain, all was activity and preparation, the infantry weredrawn up in marching order, baggage wagons, ordnance stores, and artilleryseemed all in active preparation, and some cavalry squadrons might bealready seen with forage allowances behind the saddle, as if only waitingthe order to set out. I strained my eyes to see if Power was coming, but nohorseman approached in the direction. I stood, and I hesitated whether Ishould not rather seek him at once, than continue to wait on in my presentuncertainty; but then, what if I should miss him? And I had pledged myselfto remain till he returned.While I deliberated thus with myself, weighing the various chances for andagainst each plan, I saw two mounted officers coming towards me at a brisktrot. As they came nearer, I recognized one as my colonel, the other was anofficer of the staff.Supposing that their mission had some relation to the order I had so latelyreceived, and which until now I had forgotten, I hastily returned andordered Mike to my presence."How are the horses, Mike?" said I."Never better, sir. Badger was wounded slightly by a spent shot in thecounter, but he's never the worse this morning, and the black horse iscapering like a filly.""Get ready my pack, feed the cattle, and be prepared to set out at amoment's warning.""Good advice, O'Malley," said the colonel, as he overheard the lastdirection to my servant. "I hope the nags are in condition?""Why yes, sir, I believe they are.""All the better; you've a sharp ride before you. Meanwhile let me introducemy friend; Captain Beaumont, Mr. O'Malley. I think we had better beseated.""These are your instructions, Mr. O'Malley," said Captain Beaumont,unfolding a map as he spoke. "You will proceed from this with half a troopof our regiment by forced marches towards the frontier, passing throughthe town of Calenco and Guarda and the Estrella pass. On arriving at theheadquarters of the Lusitanian Legion, which you will find there, you areto put yourself under the orders of Major Monsoon, commanding that force.Any Portuguese cavalry he may have with him will be attached to yours andunder your command; your rank for the time being that of captain. You will,as far as possible, acquaint yourself with the habits and capabilities ofthe native cavalry, and make such report as you judge necessary thereuponto his Excellency the commander of the forces. I think it only fair to addthat you are indebted to my friend Colonel Merivale for the very flatteringposition thus opened to your skill and enterprise.""My dear Colonel, let me assure you--""Not a word, my boy. I knew the thing would suit you, and I am sure Ican count upon your not disappointing my expectations of you. Sir Arthurperfectly remembers your name. He only asked two questions,--"'Is he well mounted?'"'Admirably,' was my answer."'Can you depend upon his promptitude?'"'He'll leave in half an hour.' "So you see, O'Malley, I have alreadypledged myself for you. And now I must say adieu; the regiments are aboutto take up a more advanced position, so good-by. I hope you'll have apleasant time of it till we meet again.""It is now twelve o'clock, Mr. O'Malley," said Beaumont; "we may rely uponyour immediate departure. Your written instructions and despatches will behere within a quarter of an hour."I muttered something,--what, I cannot remember; I bowed my thanks to myworthy colonel, shook his hand warmly, and saw him ride down the hilland disappear in the crowd of soldiery beneath, before I could recall myfaculties and think over my situation.Then all at once did the full difficulty of my position break upon me. IfI accepted my present employment I must certainly fail in my engagement toTrevyllian. But I had already pledged myself to its acceptance. What was tobe done? No time was left for deliberation. The very minutes I should havespent in preparation were fast passing. Would that Power might appear!Alas, he came not! My state of doubt and uncertainty increased everymoment; I saw nothing but ruin before me, even at a moment when fortunepromised most fairly for the future, and opened a field of enterprise myheart had so often and so ardently desired. Nothing was left me but tohasten to Colonel Merivale and decline my appointment; to do so was toprejudice my character in his estimation forever, for I dared not allegemy reasons, and in all probability my conduct might require my leaving thearmy."Be it so, then," said I, in an accent of despair; "the die is cast."I ordered my horse round; I wrote a few words to Power to explain myabsence should he come while I was away, and leaped into the saddle. As Ireached the plain my pace became a gallop, and I pressed my horse with allthe impatience my heart was burning with. I dashed along the lines towardsOporto, neither hearing nor seeing aught around me, when suddenly the clankof cavalry accoutrements behind induced me to turn my head, and I perceivedan orderly dragoon at full gallop in pursuit. I pulled up till he camealongside."Lieutenant O'Malley, sir," said the man, saluting, "these despatches arefor you."I took them hurriedly, and was about to continue my route, when theattitude of the dragoon arrested my attention. He had reined in his horseto the side of the narrow causeway, and holding him still and steadily, satmotionless as a statue. I looked behind and saw the whole staff approachingat a brisk trot. Before I had a moment for thought they were beside me."Ah, O'Malley," cried Merivale, "you have your orders; don't wait; hisExcellency is coming up.""Get along, I advise you," said another, "or you'll catch it, as some of ushave done this morning.""All is right, Charley; you can go in safety," said a whispering voice, asPower passed in a sharp canter.That one sentence was enough; my heart bounded like a deer, my cheek beamedwith the glow of delighted pleasure, I closed my spurs upon my gallant grayand dashed across the plain.When I arrived at my quarters the men were drawn up in waiting, andprovided with rations for three days' march; Mike was also prepared for theroad, and nothing more remained to delay me."Captain Power has been here, sir, and left a note."I took it and thrust it hastily into my sabretasche. I knew from thefew words he had spoken that my present step involved me in no illconsequences; so giving the word to wheel into column, I rode to the frontand set out upon my march to Alcantara.CHAPTER L.THE WATCH-FIRE.There are few things so inspiriting to a young soldier as the beingemployed with a separate command; the picket and outpost duty have a charmfor him no other portion of his career possesses. The field seems open forindividual boldness and heroism; success, if obtained, must redound to hisown credit; and what can equal, in its spirit-stirring enthusiasm, thatfirst moment when we become in any way the arbiter of our own fortunes?Such were my happy thoughts, as with a proud and elated heart I set forthupon my march. The notice the commander-in-chief had bestowed upon me hadalready done much; it had raised me in my own estimation, and implantedwithin me a longing desire for further distinction. I thought, too, ofthose far, far away, who were yet to hear of my successes.I fancied to myself how they would severally receive the news. My pooruncle, with tearful eye and quivering lip, was before me, as I saw him readthe despatch, then wipe his glasses, and read on, till at last, with onelong-drawn breath, his manly voice, tremulous with emotion, would breakforth: "My boy! my own Charley!" Then I pictured Considine, with porterect and stern features, listening silently; not a syllable, not a motionbetraying that he felt interested in my fate, till as if impatient, atlength he would break in: "I knew it,--I said so; and yet you thought tomake him a lawyer!" And then old Sir Harry, his warm heart glowing withpleasure, and his good-humored face beaming with happiness, how many ablunder he would make in retailing the news, and how many a hearty laughhis version of it would give rise to!I passed in review before me the old servants, as they lingered in theroom to hear the story. Poor old Matthew, the butler, fumbling with hiscorkscrew to gain a little time; then looking in my uncle's face, halfentreatingly, as he asked: "Any news of Master Charles, sir, from thewars?"While thus my mind wandered back to the scenes and faces of my early home,I feared to ask myself how she would feel to whom my heart was nowturning. Too deeply did I know how poor my chances were in that quarter tonourish hope, and yet I could not bring myself to abandon it altogether.Hammersley's strange conduct suggested to me that he, at least, could notbe my rival; while I plainly perceived that he regarded me as his.There was a mystery in all this I could not fathom, and I ardently longedfor my next meeting with Power, to learn the nature of his interview, andalso in what manner the affair had been arranged.Such were my passing thoughts as I pressed forward. My men, picked no lessfor themselves than their horses, came rapidly along; and ere evening, wehad accomplished twelve leagues of our journey.The country through which we journeyed, though wild and romantic in itscharacter, was singularly rich and fertile,--cultivation reaching to thevery summits of the rugged mountains, and patches of wheat and Indian cornpeeping amidst masses of granite rock and tangled brushwood. The vineand the olive grew wild on every side; while the orange and the arbutus,loading the air with perfume, were mingled with prickly pear-trees andvariegated hollies. We followed no regular track, but cantered along overhill and valley, through forest and prairie, now in long file through sometall field of waving corn, now in open order upon some level plain,--ourPortuguese guide riding a little in advance of us, upon a jet-black mule,carolling merrily some wild Gallician melody as he went.As the sun was setting, we arrived beside a little stream that flowingalong a rocky bed, skirted a vast forest of tall cork-trees. Here we calleda halt, and picketing our horses, proceeded to make our arrangements for abivouac.Never do I remember a more lovely night. The watch-fires sent up adelicious odor from the perfumed shrubs; while the glassy water reflectedon its still surface the starry sky that, unshadowed and unclouded,stretched above us. I wrapped myself in my trooper's mantle, and lay downbeneath a tree,--but not to sleep. There was a something so exciting, andwithal so tranquillizing, that I had no thought of slumber, but fell intoa musing revery. There was a character of adventure in my position thatcharmed me much. My men were gathered in little groups beside the fires;some sunk in slumber, others sat smoking silently, or chatting, in a lowundertone, of some bygone scene of battle or bivouac; here and there werepicketed the horses; the heavy panoply and piled carbines flickering in thered glare of the watch-fires, which ever and anon threw a flitting glowupon the stern and swarthy faces of my bold troopers. Upon the treesaround, sabres and helmets, holsters and cross-belts, were hung likearmorial bearings in some antique hall, the dark foliage spreading itsheavy shadow around us. Farther off, upon a little rocky ledge, the erectfigure of the sentry, with his short carbine resting in the hollow of hisarm, was seen slowly pacing in measured tread, or standing for a momentsilently, as he looked upon the fair and tranquil sky,--his thoughtsdoubtless far, far away, beyond the sea, to some humble home, where,--"The hum of the spreading sycamore,That grew beside his cottage door,"was again in his ears, while the merry laugh of his children stirred hisbold heart. It was a Salvator-Rosa scene, and brought me back in fancy tothe bandit legends I had read in boyhood. By the uncertain light of thewood embers I endeavored to sketch the group that lay before me.The night wore on. One by one the soldiers stretched themselves to sleep,and all was still. As the hours rolled by a drowsy feeling crept graduallyover me. I placed my pistols by my side, and having replenished the fire bysome fresh logs, disposed myself comfortably before it.It was during that half-dreamy state that intervenes between waking andsleep that a rustling sound of the branches behind attracted my attention.The air was too calm to attribute this to the wind, so I listened for someminutes; but sleep, too long deferred, was over-powerful, and my head sankupon my grassy pillow, and I was soon sound asleep. How long I remainedthus, I know not; but I awoke suddenly. I fancied some one had shaken merudely by the shoulder; but yet all was tranquil. My men were sleepingsoundly as I saw them last. The fires were becoming low, and a gray streakin the sky, as well as a sharp cold feeling of the air, betokened theapproach of day. Once more I heaped some dry branches together, and wasagain about to stretch myself to rest, when I felt a hand upon my shoulder.I turned quickly round, and by the imperfect light of the fire, saw thefigure of a man standing motionless beside me; his head was bare, and hishair fell in long curls upon his shoulders; one hand was pressed upon hisbosom, and with the other he motioned me to silence. My first impressionwas that our party were surprised by some French patrol; but as I lookedagain, I recognized, to my amazement, that the individual before me was theyoung French officer I had seen that morning a prisoner beside the Douro."How came you here?" said I, in a low voice, to him in French."Escaped; one of my own men threw himself between me and the sentry; I swamthe Douro, received a musket-ball through my arm, lost my shako, and here Iam!""You are aware you are again a prisoner?""If you desire it, of course I am," said he, in a voice full of feelingthat made my very heart creep. "I thought you were a party of Lorge'sDragoons, scouring the country for forage; tracked you the entire day, andhave only now come up with you."The poor fellow, who had neither eaten nor drunk since daybreak, woundedand footsore, had accomplished twelve leagues of a march only once more tofall into the hands of his enemies. His years could scarcely have numberednineteen; his countenance was singularly prepossessing; and though bleedingand torn, with tattered uniform, and without a covering to his head, therewas no mistaking for a moment that he was of gentle blood. Noiselessly andcautiously I made him sit down beside the fire, while I spread before himthe sparing remnant of my last night's supper, and shared my solitarybottle of sherry with him.From the moment he spoke, I never entertained a thought of making him aprisoner; but as I knew not how far I was culpable in permitting, if notactually facilitating, his escape, I resolved to keep the circumstance asecret from my party, and if possible, get him away before daybreak.No sooner did he learn my intentions regarding him, than in an instantall memory of his past misfortune, all thoughts of his present destitutecondition, seemed to have fled; and while I dressed his wound and bound uphis shattered arm, he chattered away as unconcernedly about the pastand the future as though seated beside the fire of his own bivouac, andsurrounded by his own brother officers."You took us by surprise the other day," said he. "Our marshal looked forthe attack from the mouth of the river; we received information that yourships were expected there. In any case, our retreat was an orderly one, andmust have been effected with slight loss."I smiled at the self-complacency of this reasoning, but did not contradicthim."Your loss must indeed have been great; your men crossed under the fire ofa whole battery.""Not exactly," said I; "our first party were quietly stationed in Oportobefore you knew anything about it.""Ah, sacr Dieu! Treachery!" cried he, striking his forehead with hisclinched fist."Not so; mere daring,--nothing more. But come, tell me something of yourown adventures. How were you taken?""Simply thus,--I was sent to the rear with orders to the artillery to cuttheir traces, and leave the guns; and when coming back, my horse grew tiredin the heavy ground, and I was spurring him to the utmost, when one of yourheavy dragoons--an officer, too--dashed at me, and actually rode me down,horse and all. I lay for some time bruised by the fall, when an infantrysoldier passing by seized me by the collar, and brought me to the rear. Nomatter, however, here I am now. You will not give me up; and perhaps I mayone day live to repay the kindness.""You have not long joined?""It was my first battle; my epaulettes were very smart things yesterday,though they do look a little passs to-day. You are advancing, Isuppose?"I smiled without answering this question."Ah, I see you don't wish to speak. Never mind, your discretion is thrownaway upon me; for if I rejoined my regiment to-morrow, I should haveforgotten all you told me,--all but your great kindness." These last wordshe spoke, bowing slightly his head, and coloring as he said them."You are a dragoon, I think?" said I, endeavoring to change the topic."I was, two days ago, chasseur  cheval, a sous-lieutenant, in theregiment of my father, the General St. Croix.""The name is familiar to me," I replied, "and I am sincerely happy to be ina position to serve the son of so distinguished an officer.""The son of so distinguished an officer is most deeply obliged, but wisheswith all his heart and soul he had never sought glory under such veryexcellent auspices. You look surprised, mon cher; but let me tell you,my military ardor is considerably abated in the last three days. Hunger,thirst, imprisonment, and this"--lifting his wounded limb as he spoke--"aresharp lessons in so short a campaign, and for one too, whose life hithertohad much more of ease than adventure to boast of. Shall I tell you how Ibecame a soldier?""By all means; give me your glass first; and now, with a fresh log to thefire, I'm your man.""But stay; before I begin, look to this."The blood was flowing rapidly from his wound, which with some difficulty Isucceeded in stanching. He drank off his wine hastily, held out his glassto be refilled, and then began his story."You have never seen the Emperor?""Never.""Sacrebleu! What a man he is! I'd rather stand under the fire of yourgrenadiers, than meet his eye. When in a passion, he does not say much, itis true; but what he does, comes with a kind of hissing, rushing sound,while the very fire seems to kindle in his look. I have him before me thisinstant, and though you will confess that my present condition has nothingvery pleasing in it, I should be sorry indeed to change it for the lasttime I stood in his presence."Two months ago I sported the gay light-blue and silver of a page to theEmperor, and certainly, what with balls, bonbons, flirtation, gossip,and champagne suppers, led a very gay, reckless, and indolent life of it.Somehow,--I may tell you more accurately at another period, if we evermeet,--I got myself into disgrace, and as a punishment, was orderedto absent myself from the Tuileries, and retire for some weeks toFontainebleau. Siberia to a Russian would scarcely be a heavier inflictionthan was this banishment to me. There was no court, no levee, no militaryparade, no ball, no opera. A small household of the Emperor's chosenservants quietly kept house there. The gloomy walls re-echoed to no music;the dark alleys of the dreary garden seemed the very impersonation ofsolitude and decay. Nothing broke the dull monotony of the tiresome day,except when occasionally, near sunset, the clash of the guard would beheard turning out, and the clank of presenting arms, followed by the rollof a heavy carriage into the gloomy courtyard. One lamp, shining like astar, in a small chamber on the second floor, would remain till near four,sometimes five o'clock in the morning. The same sounds of the guard andthe same dull roll of the carriage would break the stillness of the earlymorning; and the Emperor--for it was he--would be on his road back toParis."We never saw him,--I say we, for like myself some half-dozen others werealso there, expiating their follies by a life of cheerless ennui."It was upon a calm evening in April, we sat together chatting over thevarious misdeeds which had consigned us to exile, when some one proposed,by way of passing the time, that we should visit the small flower-gardenthat was parted off from the rest, and reserved for the Emperor alone. Itwas already beyond the hour he usually came; besides that, even should hearrive, there was abundant time to get back before he could possibly reachit. The garden we had often seen, but there was something in the fact thatour going there was a transgression that so pleased us all that we agreedat once and set forth. For above an hour we loitered about the lonely anddeserted walks, where already the Emperor's foot-tracks had worn a markedpathway, when we grew weary and were about to return, just as one of theparty suggested, half in ridicule of the sanctity of the spot, that weshould have a game of leap-frog ere we left it. The idea pleased us and wasat once adopted. Our plan was this,--each person stationed himself in someby-walk or alley, and waited till the other, whose turn it was, came andleaped over him; so that, besides the activity displayed, there was aknowledge of the locale necessary; for to any one passed over a forfeitwas to be paid. Our game began at once, and certainly I doubt if ever thosegreen alleys and shady groves rang to such hearty laughter. Here would beseen a couple rolling over together on the grass; there some luckless wightcounting out his pocket-money to pay his penalty. The hours passed quietlyover, and the moon rose, and at last it came to my turn to make the tour ofthe garden. As I was supposed to know all its intricacies better than therest, a longer time was given for them to conceal themselves; at length theword was given, and I started."Anxious to acquit myself well, I hurried along at top speed, but guess mysurprise to discover that nowhere could I find one of my companions. Downone walk I scampered, up another, across a third, but all was still andsilent; not a sound, not a breath, could I detect. There was still one partof the garden unexplored; it was a small open space before a little pondwhich usually contained the gold fish the Emperor was so fond of. ThitherI bent my steps, and had not gone far when in the pale moonlight I saw, atlength, one of my companions waiting patiently for my coming, his headbent forward and his shoulders rounded. Anxious to repay him for my owndisappointment, I crept silently forward on tiptoe till quite near him,when, rushing madly on, I sprang upon his back; just, however, as I rose toleap over, he raised his head, and, staggered by the impulse of my spring,he was thrown forward, and after an ineffectual effort to keep his legsfell flat upon his face in the grass. Bursting with laughter, I fell overhim on the ground, and was turning to assist him, when suddenly he sprangupon his feet, and--horror of horrors!--it was Napoleon himself; hisusually pale features were purple with rage, but not a word, not a syllableescaped him."'Qui tes vous?' said he, at length."'St. Croix, Sire,' said I, still kneeling before him, while my very heartleaped into my mouth."'St. Croix! toujours St. Croix! Come here; approach me,' cried he, in avoice of stifled passion."I rose; but before I could take a step forward he sprang at me, andtearing off my epaulettes trampled them beneath his feet, and then heshouted out, rather than spoke, the word 'Allez!'"I did not wait for a second intimation, but clearing the paling at aspring, was many a mile from Fontainebleau before daybreak."CHAPTER LI.THE MARCH.Twice the rveil sounded; the horses champed impatiently their heavybits; my men stood waiting for the order to mount, ere I could arousemyself from the deep sleep I had fallen into. The young Frenchman and hisstory were in my dreams, and when I awoke, his figure, as he lay sleepingbeside the wood embers, was the first object I perceived. There he lay,to all seeming as forgetful of his fate as though he still inhabited thegorgeous halls and gilded saloons of the Tuileries; his pale and handsomefeatures wore even a placid smile as, doubtless, some dream of other daysflitted across him; his long hair waved in luxurious curls upon his neck,and his light-brown mustache, slightly curled at the top, gave to hismild and youthful features an air of saucy fiert that heightened theireffect. A narrow blue ribbon which he wore round his throat gently peepedfrom his open bosom. I could not resist the curiosity I felt to see what itmeant, and drawing it softly forth, I perceived that a small miniature wasattached to it. It was beautifully painted, and surrounded with brilliantsof some value. One glance showed me,--for I had seen more than oneengraving before of her,--that it was the portrait of the EmpressJosephine. Poor boy! he doubtless was a favorite at court; indeed,everything in his air and manner bespoke him such. I gently replaced theprecious locket and turned from the spot to think over what was best tobe done for him. Knowing the vindictive feeling of the Portuguese towardstheir invaders, I feared to take Pietro, our guide, into my confidence. Iaccordingly summoned my man Mike to my aid, who, with all his country'sreadiness, soon found out an expedient. It was to pretend to Pietro thatthe prisoner was merely an English officer who had made his escape from theFrench army, in which, against his will, he had been serving for some time.This plan succeeded perfectly; and when St. Croix, mounted upon one of myled horses, set out upon his march beside me, none was more profuse of hisattentions than the dark-brown guide whose hatred of a Frenchman was beyondbelief.By thus giving him safe conduct through Portugal, I knew that when wereached the frontier he could easily manage to come up with some part ofMarshal Victor's force, the advanced guard of which lay on the left bank ofthe Tagus.To me the companionship was the greatest boon; the gay and buoyant spiritthat no reverse of fortune, no untoward event, could subdue, lightened manyan hour of the journey; and though at times the gasconading tone of theFrenchman would peep through, there was still such a fund of good-temperedraillery in all he said that it was impossible to feel angry with him.His implicit faith in the Emperor's invincibility also amused me. Of theunbounded confidence of the nation in general, and the army particularly,in Napoleon, I had till then no conception. It was not that in the profoundskill and immense resources of the general they trusted, but they actuallyregarded him as one placed above all the common accidents of fortune, andrevered him as something more than human."Il viendra et puis--" was the continued exclamation of the youngFrenchman. Any notion of our successfully resisting the overwhelming mightof the Emperor, he would have laughed to scorn, and so I let him go onprophesying our future misfortunes till the time when, driven back uponLisbon, we should be compelled to evacuate the Peninsula, and underfavor of a convention be permitted to return to England. All this wassufficiently ridiculous, coming from a youth of nineteen, wounded, inmisery, a prisoner; but further experience of his nation has shown methat St. Croix was not the exception, but the rule. The conviction in theultimate success of their army, whatever be the merely momentary mishap, isthe one present thought of a Frenchman; a victory with them is a conquest;a defeat,--if they are by any chance driven to acknowledge one,--afatalit.I was too young a man, and still more, too young a soldier, to bear withthis absurd affectation of superiority as I ought, and consequently wasglad to wander, whenever I could, from the contested point of our nationalsuperiority to other topics. St. Croix, although young, had seen much ofthe world as a page in the splendid court of the Tuileries; the scenespassing before his eyes were calculated to make a strong impression; andby many an anecdote of his former life, he lightened the road as we passedalong.[Illustration: A TOUCH AT LEAP-FROG WITH NAPOLEON.]"You promised, by-the-bye, to tell me of your banishment. How did thatoccur, St. Croix?""Ah, par Dieu! that was an unfortunate affair for me; then began all mymishaps. But for that, I should never have been sent to Fontainebleau;never have played leap-frog with the Emperor; never have been sent asoldier into Spain. True," said he, laughing, "I should never have had thehappiness of your acquaintance. But still, I'd much rather have met youfirst in the Place des Victoires than in the Estrella Mountains.""Who knows?" said I; "perhaps your good genius prevailed in all this.""Perhaps," said he, interrupting me; "that's exactly what the Empresssaid,--she was my godmother,--'Jules will be a Marchal de France yet.'But certainly, it must be confessed, I have made a bad beginning. However,you wish to hear of my disgrace at court. Allans donc. But had we notbetter wait for a halt?""Agreed," said I; "and so let us now press forward."CHAPTER LII.THE PAGE.Under the deep shade of some tall trees, sheltered from the noonday sun, welay down to rest ourselves and enjoy a most patriarchal dinner,--some drybiscuits, a few bunches of grapes, and a little weak wine, savoring more ofthe borachio-skin than the vine-juice, were all we boasted; yet they werenot ungrateful at such a time and place."Whose health did you pledge then?" inquired St. Croix, with ahalf-malicious smile, as I raised the glass silently to my lips.I blushed deeply, and looked confused."A ses beux yeux! whoever she be," said he, gayly tossing off his wine;"and now, if you feel disposed, I'll tell you my story. In good truth, itis not worth relating, but it may serve to set you asleep, at all events."I have already told you I was a page. Alas, the impressions you may feelof that functionary, from having seen Cherubino, give but a faint notion ofhim when pertaining to the household of the Emperor Napoleon."The farfallone amoroso basked in the soft smiles and sunny looks of theCountess Almaviva; we met but the cold, impassive look of Talleyrand, thepiercing and penetrating stare of Savary, or the ambiguous smile, halfmenace, half mockery, of Monsieur Fouch. While on service, our days werepassed in the antechamber, beside the salle d'audience of the Emperor,reclining against the closed door, watching attentively for the gentletinkle of the little bell which summoned us to open for the exit of somehaughty diplomate, or the entre of some redoubted general. Thus passedwe the weary hours; the illustrious visitors by whom we were surroundedhad no novelty, consequently no attraction for us, and the names alreadyhistorical were but household words with us."We often remarked, too, the proud and distant bearing the Emperor assumedtowards those of his generals who had been his former companions-in-arms.Whatever familiarity or freedom may have existed in the campaign or in thebattle-field, the air of the Tuileries certainly chilled it. I have oftenheard that the ceremonious observances and rigid etiquette of the oldBourbon court were far preferable to the stern reserve and unbendingstiffness of the imperial one."The antechamber is but the reflection of the reception-room; and whateverbe the whims, the caprices, the littleness of the Great Man, they arespeedily assumed by his inferiors, and the dark temper of one casts alowering shadow on every menial by whom he is surrounded."As for us, we were certainly not long in catching somewhat of the spiritof the Emperor; and I doubt much if the impertinence of the waiting-roomwas not more dreaded and detested than the abrupt speech and searching lookof Napoleon himself."What a malicious pleasure have I not felt in arresting the step of M. deTalleyrand, as he approached the Emperor's closet! With what easy insolencehave I lisped out, 'Pardon, Monsieur, but his Majesty cannot receive you,'or 'Monsieur le Due, his Majesty has given no orders for your admission.'How amusing it was to watch the baffled look of each, as he retired oncemore to his place among the crowd, the wily diplomate covering his chagrinwith a practised smile, while the stern marshal would blush to his veryeyes with indignation! This was the great pleasure our position affordedus, and with a boyish spirit of mischief, we cultivated it to perfection,and became at last the very horror and detestation of all who frequentedthe levees; and the ambassador whose fearless voice was heard among thecouncils of kings became soft and conciliating in his approaches to us; andthe hardy general who would have charged upon a brigade of artillery wastimid as a girl in addressing us a mere question."Among the amiable class thus characterized I was most conspicuous,preserving cautiously a tone of civility that left nothing openly tocomplain of. I assumed an indifference and impartiality of manner that noexigency of affairs, no pressing haste, could discompose or disturb; andmy bow of recognition to Soult or Massena was as coolly measured as mymonosyllabic answer was accurately conned over."Upon ordinary occasions the Emperor at the close of each person's audiencerang his little bell for the admission of the next in order as they arrivedin the waiting-room; yet when anything important was under consideration, alist was given us in the morning of the names to be presented in rotation,which no casual circumstance was ever suffered to interfere with."It is now about four months since, one fine morning, such a list wasplaced within my hands. His Majesty was just then occupied with an inquiryinto the naval force of the kingdom; and as I cast my eyes carelesslyover the names, I read little else than Vice-Admiral So-and-so, CommanderSuch-a-one, and Chef d'Escardron Such-another, and the levee presentedaccordingly, instead of its usual brilliant array of gorgeous uniform andaiguilletted marshals, the simple blue-and-gold of the naval service."The marine was not in high favor with the Emperor; and truly, my receptionof these unfrequent visitors was anything but flattering. The early partof the morning was, as usual, occupied by the audience of the Minister ofPolice, and the Duc de Bassano, who evidently, from the length of timethey remained, had matter of importance to communicate. Meanwhile theantechamber filled rapidly, and before noon was actually crowded. It wasjust at this moment that the folding-door slowly opened, and a figureentered, such as I had never before seen in our brilliant saloon. He was aman of five or six and fifty, short, thickset, and strongly built, with abronzed and weather-beaten face, and a broad open forehead deeply scarredwith a sabre-cut; a shaggy gray mustache curled over and concealed hismouth, while eyebrows of the same color shaded his dark and piercing eyes.His dress was a coarse cut of blue cloth such as the fishermen wear inBretagne, fastened at the waist by a broad belt of black leather, fromwhich hung a short-bladed cutlass; his loose trousers, of the samematerial, were turned up at the ankles to show a pair of strong legscoarsely cased in blue stockings and thick-soled shoes. A broad-leavedoil-skin hat was held in one hand, and the other stuck carelessly in hispocket, as he entered. He came in with a careless air, and familiarlysaluting one or two officers in the room, he sat himself down near thedoor, appearing lost in his own reflections."'Who can you be, my worthy friend?' was my question to myself as Isurveyed this singular apparition. At the same time, casting my eyes downthe list, I perceived that several pilots of the coast of Havre, Calais,and Boulogne had been summoned to Paris to give some information upon thesoundings and depth of water along the shore."'Ha,' thought I, 'I have it. The good man has mistaken his place,and instead of remaining without, has walked boldly forward to theantechamber.'"There was something so strange and so original in the grim look of the oldfellow, as he sat there alone, that I suffered him to remain quietly in hisdelusion, rather than order him back to the waiting-room without; besides,I perceived that a kind of sensation was created among the others by hisappearance there, which amused me greatly."As the day wore on, the officers formed into little groups of three orfour, chatting together in an undertone,--all save the old pilot. He hadtaken a huge tobacco-box from his capacious breast-pocket, and insertingan immense piece of the bitter weed in his mouth, began to chew itas leisurely as though he were walking the quarter-deck. The coolinsouciance of such a proceeding amused me much, and I resolved to drawhim out a little. His strong, broad Breton features, his deep voice, hisdry, blunt manner, were all in admirable keeping with his exterior."'Par Dieu, my lad,' said he, after chatting some time, 'had you notbetter tell the Emperor that I am waiting? It's now past noon, and I musteat something.'"'Have a little patience,' said I; 'his Majesty is going to invite you todinner.'"'Be it so,' said he, gravely; 'provided the hour be an early one, I'm hisman.'"With difficulty did I keep down my laughter as he said this, andcontinued."'So you know the Emperor already, it seems?'"'Yes, that I do! I remember him when he was no higher than yourself.'"'How delighted he'll be to find you here! I hope you have brought up someof your family with you, as the Emperor would be so flattered by it?'"'No, I've left them at home. This place don't suit us over well. We haveplenty to do besides spending our time and money among all you fine folkshere.'"'And not a bad life of it, either,' added I, 'fishing for cod andherrings,--stripping a wreck now and then.'"He stared at me, as I said this, like a tiger on the spring, but spoke nota word."'And how many young sea-wolves may you have in your den at home?'"'Six; and all of them able to carry you with one hand, at arm's length.'"'I have no doubt. I shall certainly not test their ability. But youyourself,--how do you like the capital?'"'Not over well; and I'll tell you why--'"As he said this the door of the audience-chamber opened, and the Emperorappeared. His eyes flashed fire as he looked hurriedly around the room."'Who is in waiting here?'""'I am, please your Majesty,' said I, bowing deeply, as I started from myseat."'And where is the Admiral Truguet? Why was he not admitted?'"'Not present, your Majesty,' said I, trembling with fear."'Hold there, young fellow; not so fast. Here he is.'"'Ah, Truguet, mon ami!' cried the Emperor, placing both hands on the oldfellow's shoulders, 'how long have you been in waiting?'"'Two hours and a half,' said he, producing in evidence a watch like asaucer."'What, two hours and a half, and I not know it!'"'No matter; I am always happy to serve your Majesty. But if that finefellow had not told me that you were going to ask me to dinner--'"'He! He said so, did he?' said Napoleon, turning on me a glance like awild beast. 'Yes, Truguet, so I am; you shall dine with me to-day. And you,sir,' said he, dropping his voice to a whisper, as he came closer towardsme,--'and you have dared to speak thus? Call in a guard there. Capitaine,put this person under arrest; he is disgraced. He is no longer page of thepalace. Out of my presence! away, sir!'"The room wheeled round; my legs tottered; my senses reeled; and I saw nomore."Three weeks' bread and water in St. Plagie, however, brought me to myrecollection; and at last my kind, my more than kind friend, the Empress,obtained my pardon, and sent me to Fontainebleau, till the Emperor shouldforget all about it. How I contrived again to refresh his memory I havealready told you; and certainly you will acknowledge that I have not beenfortunate in my interviews with Napoleon."I am conscious how much St. Croix's story loses in my telling. The simpleexpressions, the grace of the narrative, were its charm: and these, alas!I can neither translate nor imitate, no more than I can convey the strangemixture of deep feeling and levity, shrewdness and simplicity, thatconstituted the manner of the narrator.With many a story of his courtly career he amused me as we trotted along;when, towards nightfall of the third day, a peasant informed us that abody of French cavalry occupied the convent of San Cristoval, about threeleagues off. The opportunity of his return to his own army pleased him farless than I expected. He heard, without any show of satisfaction, that thetime of his liberation had arrived; and when the moment of leave-takingdrew near, he became deeply affected."Eh, bien, Charles," said he, smiling sadly through his dimmed andtearful eyes. "You've been a kind friend to me. Is the time never to comewhen I can repay you?""Yes, yes; we'll meet again, be assured of it. Meanwhile there is one wayyou can more than repay anything I have done for you.""Oh, name it at once!""Many a brave fellow of ours is now, and doubtless many more will be,prisoners with your army in this war. Whenever, therefore, your lot bringsyou in contact with such--""They shall be my brothers," said he, springing towards me and throwing hisarms round my neck. "Adieu, adieu!" With that he rushed from the spot, andbefore I could speak again, was mounted upon the peasant's horse and wavinghis hand to me in farewell.I looked after him as he rode at a fast gallop down the slope of the greenmountain, the noise of the horse's feet echoing along the silent plain. Iturned at length to leave the spot, and then perceived for the firsttime that when taking his farewell of me he had hung around my neck hisminiature of the Empress. Poor boy! How sorrowful I felt thus to rob him ofwhat he had held so dear! How gladly would I have overtaken him to restoreit! It was the only keepsake he possessed; and knowing that I would notaccept it if offered, he took this way of compelling me to keep it.Through the long hours of the summer's night I thought of him; and whenat last I slept, towards morning, my first thought on waking was of thesolitary day before me. The miles no longer slipped imperceptibly along; nolonger did the noon and night seem fast to follow. Alas, that one shouldgrow old! The very sorrows of our early years have something soft andtouching in them. Arising less from deep wrong than slight mischances, thegrief they cause comes ever with an alloy of pleasant thoughts, tellingof the tender past, and amidst the tears called up, forming some brightrainbow of future hope.Poor St. Croix had already won greatly upon me, and I felt lonely anddesolate when he departed.CHAPTER LIII.ALVAS.Nothing of incident marked our farther progress towards the frontier ofSpain, and at length we reached the small town of Alvas. It was past sunsetas we arrived, and instead of the usual quiet and repose of a littlevillage, we found the streets crowded with people, on horseback and onfoot; mules, bullocks, carts, and wagons blocked up the way, and the oathsof the drivers and the screaming of women and children resounded on allsides.With what little Spanish I possessed I questioned some of those near me,and learned, in reply, that a dreadful engagement had taken place that daybetween the advanced guard of the French, under Victor, and the Lusitanianlegion; that the Portuguese troops had been beaten and completely routed,losing all their artillery and baggage; that the French were rapidlyadvancing, and expected hourly to arrive at Alvas, in consequence of whichthe terror-stricken inhabitants were packing up their possessions andhurrying away.Here, then, was a point of considerable difficulty for me at once. Myinstructions had never provided for such a conjuncture, and I was totallyunable to determine what was best to be done; both my men and their horseswere completely tired by a march of fourteen leagues, and had a pressingneed of some rest; on every side of me the preparations for flight wereproceeding with all the speed that fear inspires; and to my urgent requestfor some information as to food and shelter, I could obtain no other replythan muttered menaces of the fate before me if I remained, and exaggeratedaccounts of French cruelty.Amidst all this bustle and confusion a tremendous fall of heavy rain setin, which at once determined me, come what might, to house my party, andprovide forage for our horses.As we pushed our way slowly through the encumbered streets, looking onevery side for some appearance of a village inn, a tremendous shout rose inour rear, and a rush of the people towards us induced us to supposethat the French were upon us. For some minutes the din and uproar wereterrific,--the clatter of horses' feet, the braying of trumpets, theyelling of the mob, all mingling in one frightful concert.I formed my men in close column, and waited steadily for the attack,resolving, if possible, to charge through the advancing files,--any retreatthrough the crowded and blocked-up thoroughfares being totally out of thequestion. The rain was falling in such torrents that nothing could be seena few yards off, when suddenly a pause of a few seconds occurred, and fromthe clash of accoutrements, and the hoarse tones of a loud voice, I judgedthat the body of men before us were forming for attack.Resolving, therefore, to take them by surprise, I gave the word to charge,and spurring our jaded cattle, onward we dashed. The mob fled right andleft from us as we came on; and through the dense mist we could justperceive a body of cavalry before us.In an instant we were among them; down they went on every side, men andhorses rolling pell-mell over each other; not a blow, not a shot strikingus as we pressed on. Never did I witness such total consternation; somethrew themselves from their horses, and fled towards the houses; othersturned and tried to fall back, but the increasing pressure from behind heldthem, and finally succeeded in blocking us up among them.It was just at this critical moment that a sudden gleam of light from awindow fell upon the disordered mass, and to my astonishment, I need notsay to my delight, I perceived that they were Portuguese troops. BeforeI had well time to halt my party, my convictions were pretty wellstrengthened by hearing a well-known voice in the rear of the mass callout,--"Charge, ye devils! charge, will ye? Illustrious Hidalgos! cut them down;los infidelos, sacrificados los! Scatter them like chaff!"One roar of laughter was my only answer to this energetic appeal for mydestruction, and the moment after the dry features and pleasant face of oldMonsoon beamed on me by the light of a pine-torch he carried in his righthand.[Illustration: MAJOR MONSOON TRYING TO CHARGE.]"Are they prisoners? Have they surrendered?" inquired he, riding up. "It iswell for them; we'd have made mince-meat of them otherwise; now they shallbe well treated, and ransomed if they prefer.""Gracios excellenze!" said I, in a feigned voice."Give up your sword," said the major, in an undertone."You behaved gallantly, but you fought against invincibles. Lord love them!but they are the most terrified invincibles."I nearly burst aloud at this."It was a close thing which of us ran first," muttered the major, as heturned to give some directions to an aide-de-camp. "Ask them who they are,"said he, in Spanish.By this time I came close alongside of him, and placing my mouth close tohis ear, holloed out,--"Monsoon, old fellow, how goes the King of Spain's sherry?""Eh, what! Why, upon my life, and so it is,--Charley, my boy, so it's you,is it? Egad, how good; and we were so near being the death of you! My poorfellow, how came you here?"A few words of explanation sufficed to inform the major why we were there,and still more to comfort him with the assurance that he had not beencharging the general's staff, and the conmander-in-chief himself."Upon my life, you gave me a great start; though as long as I thought youwere French, it was very well.""True, Major, but certainly the invincibles were merciful as they werestrong.""They were tired, Charley, nothing more; why, lad, we've been fightingsince daybreak,--beat Victor at six o'clock, drove him back behind theTagus; took a cold dinner, and had at him again in the afternoon. Lord loveyou! we've immortalized ourselves. But you must never speak of this littlebusiness here; it tells devilish ill for the discipline of your fellows,upon my life it does."This was rather an original turn to give the transaction, but I did notoppose; and thus chatting, we entered the little inn, where, confidenceonce restored, some semblance of comfort already appeared."And so you're come to reinforce us?" said Monsoon; "there was neveranything more opportune,--though we surprised ourselves today with valor, Idon't think we could persevere.""Yes, Major, the appointment gave me sincere pleasure; I greatly desiredto see a little service under your orders. Shall I present you with mydespatches?""Not now, Charley,--not now, my lad. Supper is the first thing at thismoment; besides, now that you remind me, I must send off a despatch myself,Upon my life, it's a great piece of fortune that you're here; you shall besecretary at war, and write it for me. Here now--how lucky that I thoughtof it, to be sure! And it was just a mere chance; one has so many things--"Muttering such broken, disjointed sentences, the major opened a largeportfolio with writing materials, which he displayed before me as he rubbedhis hands with satisfaction, and said, "Write away, lad.""But, my dear Major, you forget; I was not in the action. You mustdescribe; I can only follow you.""Begin then thus:--HEADQUARTERS, ALVAS, JUNE 26.YOUR EXCELLENCY,--Having learned from Don Alphonzo Xavieroda Minto, an officer upon my personal staff--"Luckily sober at that moment--"That the advanced guard of the eighth corps of the Frencharmy--"Stay, though, was it the eighth? Upon my life, I'm not quite clear as tothat; blot the word a little and go on--"That the--corps, under Marshal Victor, had commenced a forwardmovement towards Alcantara, I immediately ordered a flankmovement of the light infantry regiment to cover the bridge over theTagus. After breakfast--"I'm afraid, Major, that is not precise enough.""Well--"About eleven o'clock, the French skirmishers attacked, and drovein our pickets that were posted in front of our position, and followingrapidly up with cavalry, they took a few prisoners, and killed oldAlphonzo,--he ran like a man, they say, but they caught him inthe rear."You needn't put that in, if you don't like."I now directed a charge of the cavalry brigade, under DonAsturias Y'Hajos, that cut them up in fine style. Our artillery,posted on the heights, mowing away at their columns like fun.Victor didn't like this, and got into a wood, when we all wentto dinner; it was about two o'clock then.After dinner, the Portuguese light corps, under Silva da Onorha,having made an attack upon the enemy's left, without my orders,got devilish well trounced, and served them right; but coming upto their assistance, with the heavy brigade of guns, and the cavalry,we drove back the French, and took several prisoners, none of whomwe put to death."Dash that--Sir Arthur likes respect for the usages of war. Lord, how dryI'm getting!"The French were soon seen to retire their heavy guns, andspeedily afterwards retreated. We pursued them for some time, butthey showed fight; and as it was getting dark, I drew off my forces,and came here to supper. Your Excellency will perceive, by theenclosed return, that our loss has been considerable.I send this despatch by Don Emanuel Forgales, whose services--"I back him for mutton hash with onions against the whole regiment--"--have been of the most distinguished nature, and beg to recommendhim to your Excellency's favor.I have the honor, etc."Is it finished, Charley? Egad, I'm glad of it, for here comes supper."The door opened as he spoke, and displayed a tempting tray of smokingviands, flanked by several bottles,--an officer of the major's staffaccompanied it, and showed, by his attentions to the etiquette of thetable and the proper arrangement of the meal, that his functions in hissuperior's household were more than military.We were speedily joined by two others in rich uniform, whose names I nowforget, but to whom the major presented me in all form,--introducing me,as well as I could interpret his Spanish, as his most illustrious ally andfriend Don Carlos O'Malley.CHAPTER LIV.THE SUPPER.I have often partaken of more luxurious cookery and rarer wines; but neverdo I remember enjoying a more welcome supper than on this occasion.Our Portuguese guests left us soon, and the major and myself were oncemore tte-a-tte beside a cheerful fire; a well-chosen array of bottlesguaranteeing that for some time at least no necessity of leave-takingshould arise from any deficiency of wine."That sherry is very near the thing, Charley; a little, a very littlesharp, but the after-taste perfect. And now, my boy, how have you beendoing since we parted?""Not so badly, Major. I have already got a step in promotion. The affair atthe Douro gave me a lieutenancy.""I wish you joy with all my heart. I'll call you captain always whileyou're with me. Upon my life I will. Why, man, they style me yourExcellency here. Bless your heart, we are great folk among the Portuguese,and no bad service, after all.""I should think not, Major. You seem to have always made a good thing ofit.""No, Charley; no, my boy. They overlook us greatly in general ordersand despatches. Had the brilliant action of to-day been fought by theBritish--But no matter, they may behave well in England, after all; andwhen I'm called to the Upper House as Baron Monsoon of the Tagus,--is thatbetter than Lord Alcantara?""I prefer the latter.""Well, then, I'll have it. Lord! what a treaty I'll move for with Portugal,to let us have wine cheap. Wine, you know, as David says, gives us apleasant countenance; and oil,--I forget what oil does. Pass over thedecanter. And how is Sir Arthur, Charley? A fine fellow, but sadlydeficient in the knowledge of supplies. Never would have made any characterin the commissariat. Bless your heart, he pays for everything here as if hewere in Cheapside.""How absurd, to be sure!""Isn't it, though? That was not my way, when I was commissary-general abouta year or two ago. To be sure, how I did puzzle them! They tried to auditmy accounts, and what do you think I did? I brought them in three thousandpounds in my debt. They never tried on that game any more. 'No, no,' saidthe Junta, 'Beresford and Monsoon are great men, and must be treated withrespect!' Do you think we'd let them search our pockets? But the roguesdoubled on us after all; they sent us to the northward,--a poor country--""So that, except a little commonplace pillage of the convents andnunneries, you had little or nothing?""Exactly so; and then I got a great shock about that time that affected myspirits for a considerable while.""Indeed, Major, some illness?""No, I was quite well; but--Lord, how thirsty it makes me to think of it;my throat is absolutely parched--I was near being hanged!""Hanged!""Yes. Upon my life it's true,--very horrible, ain't it? It had a greateffect upon my nervous system; and they never thought of any little pensionto me as a recompense for my sufferings.""And who was barbarous enough to think of such a thing, Major?""Sir Arthur Wellesley himself,--none other, Charley?""Oh, it was a mistake, Major, or a joke.""It was devilish near being a practical one, though. I'll tell you how itoccurred. After the battle of Vimeira, the brigade to which I was attachedhad their headquarters at San Pietro, a large convent where all the churchplate for miles around was stored up for safety. A sergeant's guard wasaccordingly stationed over the refectory, and every precaution taken toprevent pillage, Sir Arthur himself having given particular orders on thesubject. Well, somehow,--I never could find out how,--but in leaving theplace, all the wagons of our brigade had got some trifling articles ofsmall value scattered, as it might be, among their stores,--gold cups,silver candlesticks, Virgin Marys, ivory crucifixes, saints' eyes set intopazes, and martyrs' toes in silver filagree, and a hundred other similarthings."One of these confounded bullock-cars broke down just at the angle of theroad where the commander-in-chief was standing with his staff to watch thetroops defile, and out rolled, among bread rations and salt beef, a wholeavalanche of precious relics and church ornaments. Every one stood aghast!Never was there such a misfortune. No one endeavored to repair the mishap,but all looked on in terrified amazement as to what was to follow."'Who has the command of this detachment?' shouted out Sir Arthur, in avoice that made more than one of us tremble."'Monsoon, your Excellency,--Major Monsoon, of the Portuguese brigade.'"'The d--d old rogue, I know him!' Upon my life that's what he said. 'Hanghim up on the spot,' pointing with his finger as he spoke; 'we shall seeif this practice cannot be put a stop to.' And with these words he rodeleisurely away, as if he had been merely ordering dinner for a small party."When I came up to the place the halberts were fixed, and Gronow, with acompany of the Fusiliers, under arms beside them."'Devilish sorry for it, Major,' said he; 'It's confoundedly unpleasant;but can't be helped. We've got orders to see you hanged.'"Faith, it was just so he said it, tapping his snuff-box as he spoke, andlooking carelessly about him. Now, had it not been for the fixed halbertsand the provost-marshal, I'd not have believed him; but one glance at them,and another at the bullock-cart with all the holy images, told me at oncewhat had happened."'He only means to frighten me a little? Isn't that all, Gronow?' cried I,in a supplicating voice."'Very possibly, Major,' said he; 'but I must execute my orders.'"'You'll surely not--' Before I could finish, up came Dan Mackinnon,cantering smartly."'Going to hang old Monsoon, eh, Gronow? What fun!'"'Ain't it, though,' said I, half blubbering."'Well, if you're a good Catholic, you may have your choice of a saint,for, by Jupiter, there's a strong muster of them here.' This cruel allusionwas made in reference to the gold and silver effigies that lay scatteredabout the highway."'Dan,' said I, in a whisper, 'intercede for me. Do, like a good, kindfellow. You have influence with Sir Arthur.'"'You old sinner,' said he, 'it's useless.'"'Dan, I'll forgive you the fifteen pounds.'"'That you owe me,' said Dan, laughing."'Who'll ever be the father to you I have been? Who'll mix your punch withburned Madeira, when I'm gone?' said I."'Well, really, I am sorry for you, Monsoon. I say, Gronow, don't tuck himup for a few minutes; I'll speak for the old villain, and if I succeed,I'll wave my handkerchief.'"Well, away went Dan at a full gallop. Gronow sat down on a bank, andI fidgeted about in no very enviable frame of mind, the confoundedprovost-marshal eying me all the while."'I can only give you five minutes more, Major,' said Gronow, placing hiswatch beside him on the grass. I tried to pray a little, and said three orfour of Solomon's proverbs, when he again called out: 'There, you see itwon't do! Sir Arthur is shaking his head.'"'What's that waving yonder?'"'The colors of the 6th Foot. Come, Major, off with your stock.'"'Where is Dan now; what is he doing?'--for I could see nothing myself."'He's riding beside Sir Arthur. They all seem laughing.'"'God forgive them! what an awful retrospect this will prove to some ofthem.'"'Time's up!' said Gronow, jumping up, and replacing his watch in hispocket."'Provost-Marshal, be quick now--'"'Eh! what's that?--there, I see it waving! There's a shout too!'"'Ay, by Jove! so it is; well, you're saved this time, Major; that's thesignal.'"So saying, Gronow formed his fellows in line and resumed his march quitecoolly, leaving me alone on the roadside to meditate over martial law andmy pernicious taste for relics."Well, Charley, this gave me a great shock, and I think, too, it must havehad a great effect upon Sir Arthur himself; but, upon my life, he haswonderful nerves. I met him one day afterwards at dinner in Lisbon; helooked at me very hard for a few seconds: 'Eh, Monsoon! Major Monsoon, Ithink?'"'Yes, your Excellency,' said I, briefly; thinking how painful it must befor him to meet me."'Thought I had hanged you,--know I intended it,--no matter. A glass ofwine with you?'"Upon my life, that was all; how easily some people can forgive themselves!But Charley, my hearty, we are getting on slowly with the tipple; are theyall empty? So they are! Let us make a sortie on the cellar; bring a candlewith you, and come along."We had scarcely proceeded a few steps from the door, when a most vociferoussound of mirth, arising from a neighboring apartment, arrested ourprogress."Are the dons so convivial, Major?" said I, as a hearty burst of laughterbroke forth at the moment."Upon my life, they surprise me; I begin to fear they have taken some ofour wine."We now perceived that the sounds of merriment came from the kitchen,which opened upon a little courtyard. Into this we crept stealthily, andapproaching noiselessly to the window, obtained a peep at the scene within.Around a blazing fire, over which hung by a chain a massive iron pot, sat agoodly party of some half-dozen people. One group lay in dark shadow; butthe others were brilliantly lighted up by the cheerful blaze, and showedus a portly Dominican friar, with a beard down to his waist, a buxom,dark-eyed girl of some eighteen years, and between the two, mostcomfortably leaning back, with an arm round each, no less a person than mytrusty man Mickey Free.It was evident, from the alternate motion of his head, that his attentionswere evenly divided between the church and the fair sex; although, toconfess the truth, they seemed much more favorably received by the latterthan the former,--a brown earthen flagon appearing to absorb all the worthymonk's thoughts that he could spare from the contemplation of heavenlyobjects."Mary, my darlin,' don't be looking at me that way, through the corner ofyour eye; I know you're fond of me,--but the girls always was. You thinkI'm joking, but troth I wouldn't say a lie before the holy man beside me;sure I wouldn't, Father?"The friar grunted out something in reply, not very unlike, in sound atleast, a hearty anathema."Ah, then, isn't it yourself has the illigant time of it, Father dear!"said he, tapping him familiarly upon his ample paunch, "and nothing totrouble you; the best of divarsion wherever you go, and whether it'sBadahos or Ballykilruddery, it's all one; the women is fond of ye. FatherMurphy, the coadjutor in Scariff, was just such another as yourself, andhe'd coax the birds off the trees with the tongue of him. Give us a pull atthe pipkin before it's all gone, and I'll give you a chant."With this he seized the jar, and drained it to the bottom; the smack of hislips as he concluded, and the disappointed look of the friar as he peeredinto the vessel, throwing the others, once more, into a loud burst oflaughter."And now, your rev'rance, a good chorus is all I'll ask, and you'll notrefuse it for the honor of the church."So saying, he turned a look of most droll expression upon the monk, andbegan the following ditty, to the air of "Saint Patrick was a Gentleman":--What an illegant life a friar leads,With a fat round paunch before him!He mutters a prayer and counts his beads,And all the women adore him.It's little he's troubled to work or think,Wherever devotion leads him;A "pater" pays for his dinner and drink,For the Church--good luck to her!--feeds him.From the cow in the field to the pig in the sty,From the maid to the lady in satin,They tremble wherever he turns an eye.He can talk to the Devil in Latin!He's mighty severe to the ugly and ould,And curses like mad when he's near 'em;But one beautiful trait of him I've been tould,The innocent craytures don't fear him.It's little for spirits or ghosts he cares;For 'tis true as the world supposes,With an Ave he'd make them march down-stairs,Av they dared to show their noses.The Devil himself's afraid, 'tis said,And dares not to deride him;For "angels make each night his bed,And then--lie down beside him."A perfect burst of laughter from Monsoon prevented my hearing how Mike'sminstrelsy succeeded within doors; but when I looked again, I foundthat the friar had decamped, leaving the field open to his rival,--acircumstance, I could plainly perceive, not disliked by either party."Come back, Charley, that villain of yours has given me the cramp, standinghere on the cold pavement. We'll have a little warm posset,--very small andthin, as they say in Tom Jones,--and then to bed."Notwithstanding the abstemious intentions of the major, it was daybreakere we separated, and neither party in a condition for performing upon thetight-rope.CHAPTER LV.THE LEGION.My services while with the Legion were of no very distinguished character,and require no lengthened chronicle. Their great feat of arms, the repulseof an advanced guard of Victor's corps, had taken place the very morning Ihad joined them, and the ensuing month was passed in soft repose upon theirlaurels.For the first few days, indeed, a multiplicity of cares beset the worthymajor. There was a despatch to be written to Beresford, another tothe Supreme Junta, a letter to Wilson, at that time with the corps ofobservation to the eastward. There were some wounded to be looked after, aspeech to be made to the conquering heroes themselves, and lastly, a fewprisoners were taken, whose fate seemed certainly to partake of the mostuncertain of war's proverbial chances.The despatches gave little trouble; with some very slight alterations, thegreat original, already sent forward to Sir Arthur, served as a basis forthe rest. The wounded were forwarded to Alcantara, with a medical staff; towhom Monsoon, at parting, pleasantly hinted that he expected to see all thesick at their duty by an early day, or he would be compelled to report thedoctors. The speech, which was intended as a kind of general order, hedeferred for some favorable afternoon when he could get up his Portuguese;and lastly, came the prisoners, by far the most difficult of all his cares.As for the few common soldiers taken, they gave him little uneasiness,--asSir John has it, they were "mortal men, and food for powder;" but therewas a staff-officer among them, aiguilletted and epauletted. The verydecorations he wore were no common temptation. Now, the major deliberated along time with himself, whether the usages of modern war might not admit ofthe ancient, time-honored practice of ransom. The battle, save in glory,had been singularly unproductive: plunder there was none; the fewammunition-wagons and gun-carriages were worth little or nothing; so that,save the prisoners, nothing remained. It was late in the evening--themellow hour of the major's meditations--when he ventured to open his heartto me upon the matter."I was just thinking, Charley, how very superior they were in olden timesto us moderns, in many matters, and nothing more than in their treatment ofprisoners. They never took them away from their friends and country;they always ransomed them,--if they had wherewithal to pay their way. Sogood-natured!--upon my life it was a most excellent custom! They took anylittle valuables they found about them, and then put them up at auction.Moses and Eleazar, a priest, we are told, took every piece of gold, andtheir wrought jewels,--meaning their watches, and ear-rings. You needn'tlaugh, they all wore ear-rings, those fellows did. Now, why shouldn'tI profit by their good example? I have taken Agag, the King of theAmalekites,--no, but upon my life, I have got a French major, and I'd lethim go for fifty doubloons."It was not without much laughing, and some eloquence, that I could persuadeMonsoon that Sir Arthur's military notions might not accept of even theauthority of Moses; and as our headquarters were at no great distance,the danger of such a step as he meditated was too considerable at such amoment.As for ourselves, no fatiguing drills, no harassing field-days, and noprovoking inspections interfered with the easy current of our lives.Foraging parties there were, it was true, and some occasional outpost dutywas performed. But the officers for both were selected with a tact thatproved the major's appreciation of character; for while the gay, joyousfellow that sung a jovial song and loved his liquor was certain of beingentertained at headquarters, the less-gifted and less-congenial spirit hadthe happiness of scouring the country for forage, and presenting himself asa target to a French rifle.My own endeavors to fulfil my instructions met with but littleencouragement or support; and although I labored hard at my task, I mustconfess that the soil was a most ungrateful one. The cavalry were, it istrue, composed mostly of young fellows well-appointed, and in most caseswell-mounted; but a more disorderly, careless, undisciplined set ofgood-humored fellows never formed a corps in the world.Monsoon's opinions were felt in every branch of the service, from theadjutant to the drumboy,--the same reckless, indolent, plunder-lovingspirit prevailed everywhere. And although under fire they showed no lack ofgallantry or courage, the moment of danger passed, discipline departed withit, and their only conception of benefiting by a victory consisted in theamount of pillage that resulted from it.From time to time the rumors of great events reached us. We heard thatSoult, having succeeded in re-organizing his beaten army, was, inconjunction with Ney's corps, returning from the north; that the marshalswere consolidating their forces in the neighborhood of Talavera; and thatKing Joseph himself, at the head of a large army, had marched for Madrid.Menacing as such an aspect of affairs was, it had little disturbed themajor's equanimity; and when our advanced posts reported daily theintelligence that the French were in retreat, he cared little with whatobject of concentrating they retired, provided the interval between usgrew gradually wider. His speculations upon the future were singularlyprophetic. "You'll see, Charley, what will happen; old Cuesta will pursuethem, and get thrashed. The English will come up, and perhaps get thrashedtoo; but we, God bless us! are only a small force, partially organized andill to depend on,--we'll go up the mountains till all is over!" Thus didthe major's discretion not only extend to the avoidance of danger, but heactually disqualified himself from even making its acquaintance.Meanwhile our operations consisted in making easy marches to Almarez,halting wherever the commissariat reported a well-stocked cellar orwell-furnished hen-roost, taking the primrose path in life, and being, inwords of the major, "contented and grateful, even amidst great perils!"CHAPTER LVI.THE DEPARTURE.On the morning of the 10th July a despatch reached us announcing that SirArthur Wellesley had taken up his headquarters at Placentia for the purposeof communicating with Cuesta, then at Casa del Puerto; and ordering meimmediately to repair to the Spanish headquarters and await Sir Arthur'sarrival, to make my report upon the effective state of our corps. As forme, I was heartily tired of the inaction of my present life, and much as Irelished the eccentricities of my friend the major, longed ardently for adifferent sphere of action.Not so Monsoon; the prospect of active employment and the thoughts of beingleft once more alone, for his Portuguese staff afforded him little society,depressed him greatly; and as the hour of my departure drew near, heappeared lower in spirits than I had ever seen him."I shall be very lonely without you, Charley," said he, with a sigh, as wesat the last evening together beside our cheerful wood fire. "I have littleintercourse with the dons; for my Portuguese is none of the best, and onlycomes when the evening is far advanced; and besides, the villains, I fear,may remember the sherry affair. Two of my present staff were with me then.""Is that the story Power so often alluded to, Major; the King of Spain's--""There, Charley, hush; be cautious, my boy. I'd rather not speak about thattill we get among our own fellows.""Just as you like, Major; but, do you know, I have a strong curiosity tohear the narrative.""If I'm not mistaken, there is some one listening at the door,--gently;that's it, eh?""No, we are perfectly alone; the night's early; who knows when we shallhave as quiet an hour again together? Let me hear it, by all means.""Well, I don't care; the thing, Heaven knows! is tolerably well known; soif you'll amuse yourself making a devil of the turkey's legs there, I'lltell you the story. It's very short, Charley, and there's no moral; soyou're not likely to repeat it."So saying, the major filled up his glass, drew a little closer to the fire,and began:--"When the French troops, under Laborde, were marching, upon Alcobaca,in concert with Loison's corps, I was ordered to convey a very valuablepresent of sherry the Duo d'Albu-querque was making to the SupremeJunta,--no less than ten hogsheads of the best sherry the royal cellars ofMadrid had formerly contained."It was stored in the San Vincente convent; and the Junta, knowing a littleabout monkish tastes and the wants of the Church, prudently thought itwould be quite as well at Lisbon. I was accordingly ordered, with asufficient force, to provide for its safe conduct and secure arrival, andset out upon my march one lovely morning in April with my precious convoy."I don't know, I never could understand, why temptations are thrown in ourway in this life, except for the pleasure of yielding to them. As for me,I'm a stoic when there's nothing to be had; but let me get a scent ofa well-kept haunch, the odor of a wine-bin once in my nose, I forgeteverything except appropriation. That bone smells deliciously, Charley; alittle garlic would improve it vastly."Our road lay through cross-paths and mountain tracts, for the French werescouring the country on every side, and my fellows, only twenty altogether,trembled at the very name of them; so that our only chance was to avoidfalling in with any forage parties. We journeyed along for several days,rarely making more than a few leagues between sunrise and sunset, a scoutalways in advance to assure us that all was safe. The road was a lonesomeone and the way weary, for I had no one to speak to or converse with, so Ifell into a kind of musing fit about the old wine in the great brown casks.I thought on its luscious flavor, its rich straw tint, its oily look as itflowed into the glass, the mellow after-taste warming the heart as it wentdown, and I absolutely thought I could smell it through the wood."How I longed to broach one of them, if it were only to see if my dreamsabout it were correct. 'May be it's brown sherry,' thought I, 'and I amall wrong.' This was a very distressing reflection. I mentioned it to thePortuguese intendant, who travelled with us as a kind of supercargo; butthe villain only grinned and said something about the Junta and the galleysfor life, so I did not recur to it afterwards. Well, it was upon the thirdevening of our march that the scout reported that at Merida, about a leaguedistant, he had fallen in with an English cavalry regiment, who were ontheir march to the northern provinces, and remaining that night in thevillage. As soon, therefore, as I had made all my arrangements for thenight, I took a fresh horse and cantered over to have a look at mycountrymen, and hear the news. When I arrived, it was a dark night, but Iwas not long in finding out our fellows. They were the 11th Light Dragoons,commanded by my old friend Bowes, and with as jolly a mess as any in theservice."Before half an hour's time I was in the midst of them, hearing all aboutthe campaign, and telling them in return about my convoy, dilating upon thequalities of the wine as if I had been drinking it every day at dinner."We had a very mellow night of it; and before four o'clock the seniormajor and four captains were under the table, and all the subs, in a stateunprovided for by the articles of war. So I thought I'd be going, andwishing the sober ones a good-by, set out on my road to join my own party."I had not gone above a hundred yards when I heard some one running after,and calling out my name."'I say, Monsoon; Major, confound you, pull up.'"'Well, what's the matter? Has any more lush turned up?' inquired I, for wehad drank the tap dry when I left."'Not a drop, old fellow!' said he; 'but I was thinking of what you've beensaying about that sherry.'"'Well! What then?'"'Why, I want to know how we could get a taste of it?'"'You'd better get elected one of the Cortes,' said I, laughing; 'for itdoesn't seem likely you'll do so in any other way.'"'I'm not so sure of that,' said he, smiling. 'What road do you travelto-morrow?'"'By Cavalhos and Reina.'"'Whereabouts may you happen to be towards sunset?'"'I fear we shall be in the mountains,' said I, with a knowing look, 'whereambuscades and surprise parties would be highly dangerous.'"'And your party consists of--'"'About twenty Portuguese, all ready to run at the first shot.'"'I'll do it, Monsoon; I'll be hanged if I don't.'"'But, Tom,' said I, 'don't make any blunder; only blank cartridge, myboy.'"'Honor bright!' cried he. 'Your fellows are armed of course?'"'Never think of that; they may shoot each other in the confusion. But ifyou only make plenty of noise coming on, they'll never wait for you.'"'What capital fellows they must be!'"'Crack troops, Tom; so don't hurt them. And now, good-night.'"As I cantered off, I began to think over O'Flaherty's idea; and upon mylife, I didn't half like it. He was a reckless, devil-may-care fellow; andit was just as likely he would really put his scheme into practice."When morning broke, however, we got under way again, and I amused myselfall the forenoon in detailing stories of French cruelty; so that before wehad marched ten miles, there was not a man among us not ready to run at theslightest sound of attack on any side. As evening was falling we reachedMorento, a little mountain pass which follows the course of a small river,and where, in many places, the mule carts had barely space enough to passbetween the cliffs and the stream. 'What a place for Tom O'Flaherty and hisforagers!' thought I, as we entered the little mountain gorge; but all wassilent as the grave,--except the tramp of our party, not a sound was heard.There was something solemn and still in the great brown mountain, risinglike vast walls on either side, with a narrow streak of gray sky at top andin the dark, sluggish stream, that seemed to awe us, and no one spoke. Themuleteer ceased his merry song, and did not crack or flourish his long whipas before, but chid his beasts in a half-muttered voice, and urged themfaster, to reach the village before nightfall."Egad, somehow I felt uncommonly uncomfortable; I could not divest my mindof the impression that some disaster was impending, and I wished O'Flahertyand his project in a very warm climate. 'He'll attack us,' thought I,'where we can't run; fair play forever. But if they are not able to getaway, even the militia will fight.' However, the evening crept on, and nosign of his coming appeared on any side; and to my sincere satisfaction, Icould see, about half a league distant, the twinkling light of the littlevillage where we were to halt for the night. It was just at this time thata scout I had sent out some few hundred yards in advance came galloping up,almost breathless."'The French, Captain; the French are upon us!' said he, with a face like aghost."'Whew! Which way? How many?' said I, not at all sure that he might not betelling the truth."'Coming in force!' said the fellow. 'Dragoons! By this road!'"'Dragoons? By this road?' repeated every man of the party, looking at eachother like men sentenced to be hanged."Scarcely had they spoken when we heard the distant noise of cavalryadvancing at a brisk trot. Lord, what a scene ensued! The soldiers ranhither and thither like frightened sheep; some pulled out crucifixes andbegan to say their prayers; others fired off their muskets in a panic; themule-drivers cut their traces, and endeavored to get away by riding; andthe intendant took to his heels, screaming out to us, as he went, to fightmanfully to the last, and that he'd report us favorably to the Junta."Just at this moment the dragoons came in sight; they came galloping up,shouting like madmen. One look was enough for my fellows; they sprang totheir legs from their devotions, fired a volley straight at the new moon,and ran like men."I was knocked down in the rush. As I regained my legs, Tom O'Flaherty wasstanding beside me, laughing like mad."'Eh, Monsoon! I've kept my word, old fellow! What legs they have! We shallmake no prisoners, that's certain. Now, lads, here it is! Put the horsesto, here. We shall take but one, Monsoon; so that your gallant defence ofthe rest will please the Junta. Good-night, good-night! I will drink yourhealth every night these two months.'"So saying, Tom sprang to his saddle; and in less time than I've beentelling it, the whole was over and I sitting by myself in the graymoonlight, meditating on all I saw, and now and then shouting for myPortuguese friends to come back again. They came in time, by twos andthrees; and at last the whole party re-assembled, and we set forth again,every man, from the intendant to the drummer, lauding my valor, and sayingthat Don Monsoon was a match for the Cid.""And how did the Junta behave?""Like trumps, Charley. Made me a Knight of Battalha, and kissed me on bothcheeks, having sent twelve dozen of the rescued wine to my quarters, as asmall testimony of their esteem. I have laughed very often at it since. Buthush, Charley? What's that I hear without there?""Oh, it's my fellow Mike. He asked my leave to entertain his friends beforeparting, and I perceive he is delighting them with a song.""But what a confounded air it is! Are the words Hebrew?""Irish, Major; most classical Irish, too, I'll be bound!""Irish! I've heard most tongues, but that certainly surprises me. Call himin, Charley, and let us have the canticle."In a few minutes more, Mr. Free appeared in a state of very satisfactoryelevation, his eyebrows alternately rising and falling, his mouth a littledrawn to one side, and a side motion in his knee-joints that might puzzle aphysiologist to account for."A sweet little song of yours, Mike," said the major; "a very sweet thingindeed. Wet your lips, Mickey.""Long life to your honor and Master Charles there, too, and them thatbelongs to both of yez. May a gooseberry skin make a nightcap for the manwould harm either of ye.""Thank you, Mike. And now about that song.""It's the ouldest tune ever was sung," said Mike, with a hiccough, "barringAdam had a taste for music; but the words--the poethry--is not so ould.""And how comes that?""The poethry, ye see, was put to it by one of my ancesthors,--he was agreat inventhor in times past, and made beautiful songs,--and ye'd neverguess what it's all about.""Love, mayhap?" quoth Monsoon."Sorra taste of kissing from beginning to end.""A drinking song?" said I."Whiskey is never mentioned.""Fighting is the only other national pastime. It must be in praise ofsudden death?""You're out again; but sure you'd never guess it," said Mike. "Well, yesee, here's what it is. It's the praise and glory of ould Ireland in thegreat days that's gone, when we were all Phenayceans and Armenians,and when we worked all manner of beautiful contrivances in gold andsilver,--bracelets and collars and teapots, elegant to look at,--and readRoosian and Latin, and played the harp and the barrel-organ, and eat anddrank of the best, for nothing but asking.""Blessed times, upon my life!" quoth the major; "I wish we had them backagain.""There's more of your mind," said Mike, steadying himself. "My ancesthorswas great people in them days; and sure it isn't in my present situationI'd be av we had them back again,--sorra bit, faith! It isn't, 'Comehere, Mickey, bad luck to you, Mike!' or, 'That blackguard, Mickey Free!'people'd be calling me. But no matter; here's your health again, MajorMonsoon--""Never mind vain regrets, Mike. Let us hear your song; the major has takena great fancy to it.""Ah, then, it's joking you are, Mister Charles," said Mike, affecting anair of most bashful coyness."By no means; we want to hear you sing it.""To be sure we do. Sing it by all means; never be ashamed. King David wasvery fond of singing,--upon my life he was.""But you'd never understand a word of it, sir.""No matter; we know what it's about. That's the way with the Legion; theydon't know much English, but they generally guess what I'm at."This argument seemed to satisfy all Mike's remaining scruples; so placinghimself in an attitude of considerable pretension as to grace, he began,with a voice of no very measured compass, an air of which neither by namenor otherwise can I give any conception; my principal amusement beingderived from a tol-de-rol chorus of the major, which concluded each verse,and indeed in a lower key accompanied the singer throughout.Since that I have succeeded in obtaining a free-and-easy translation of thelyric; but in my anxiety to preserve the metre and something of the spiritof the original, I have made several blunders and many anachronisms. Mr.Free, however, pronounces my version a good one, and the world must takehis word till some more worthy translator shall have consigned it toimmortal verse.With this apology, therefore, I present Mr. Free's song:AIR,--Na Guilloch y' Goulen.Oh, once we were illigint people,Though we now live in cabins of mud;And the land that ye see from the steepleBelonged to us all from the Flood.My father was then King of Connaught,My grand-aunt Viceroy of Tralee;But the Sassenach came, and signs on it,The devil an acre have we.The least of us then were all earls,And jewels we wore without name;We drank punch out of rubies and pearls,--Mr. Petrie can tell you the same.But except some turf mould and potatoes,There's nothing our own we can call;And the English,--bad luck to them!--hate us,Because we've more fun than them all!My grand-aunt was niece to Saint Kevin,That's the reason my name's Mickey Free!Priest's nieces,--but sure he's in heaven,And his failins is nothin' to me.And we still might get on without doctors,If they'd let the ould Island alone;And if purple-men, priests, and tithe-proctorsWere crammed down the great gun of Athlone.[Illustration: MR. FREE'S SONG.]As Mike's melody proceeded, the major's thorough bass waxed beautifullyless,--now and then, it's true, roused by some momentary strain, it swelledupwards in full chorus, but gradually these passing flights grew rarer, andfinally all ceased, save a long, low, droning sound, like the expiring sighof a wearied bagpipe. His fingers still continued mechanically to beat timeupon the table, and still his head nodded sympathetically to the music;his eyelids closed in sleep; and as the last verse concluded, a full-drawnsnore announced that Monsoon, if not in the land of dreams, was at least ina happy oblivion of all terrestrial concerns, and caring as little for thewoes of green Erin and the altered fortunes of the Free family as any Saxonthat ever oppressed them.There he sat, the finished decanter and empty goblet testifying that hislabors had only ceased from the pressure of necessity; but the broken,half-uttered words that fell from his lips evinced that he reposed on thelast bottle of the series."Oh, thin, he's a fine ould gentleman!" said Mike, after a pause of someminutes, during which he had been contemplating the major with all thecritical acumen Chantrey or Canova would have bestowed upon an antiquestatue,--"a fine ould gentleman, every inch of him; and it's the masterwould like to have him up at the Castle.""Quite true, Mike; but let us not forget the road. Look to the cattle, andbe ready to start within an hour."When he left the room for this purpose I endeavored to shake the major intomomentary consciousness ere we parted."Major, Major," said I, "time is up. I must start.""Yes, it's all true, your Excellency: they pillaged a little; and if theydid change their facings, there was a great temptation. All the red velvetthey found in the churches--""Good-by, old fellow, good-by!""Stand at ease!""Can't, unfortunately, yet awhile; so farewell. I'll make a capital reportof the Legion to Sir Arthur; shall I add anything particularly fromyourself?"This, and the shake that accompanied it, aroused him. He started up, andlooked about him for a few seconds."Eh, Charley! You didn't say Sir Arthur was here, did you?""No, Major; don't be frightened; he's many a league off. I asked if you hadanything to say when I met him?""Oh, yes, Charley! Tell him we're capital troops in our own little way inthe mountains; would never do in pitched battles,--skirmishing's our forte;and for cutting off stragglers, or sacking a town, back them at any odds.""Yes, yes, I know all that; you've nothing more?""Nothing," said he, once more closing his eyes and crossing his handsbefore him, while his lips continued to mutter on,--"nothing more, exceptyou may say from me,--he knows me, Sir Arthur does. Tell him to guardhimself from intemperance; a fine fellow if he wouldn't drink.""You horrid old humbug, what nonsense are you muttering there?""Yes, yes; Solomon says, 'Who hath red eyes and carbuncles?' they that mixtheir lush. Pure Sneyd never injured any one. Tell him so from me,--it'san old man's advice, and I have drunk some hogsheads of it."With these words he ceased to speak, while his head, falling gently forwardupon his chest, proclaimed him sound asleep."Adieu, then, for the last time," said I, slapping him gently on theshoulder. "And now for the road."CHAPTER LVII.CUESTA.The second day of our journey was drawing to a close as we came in view ofthe Spanish army.The position they occupied was an undulating plain beside the Teitar River;the country presented no striking feature of picturesque beauty, but thescene before us needed no such aid to make it one of the most interestingkind. From the little mountain path we travelled we beheld beneath a forceof thirty thousand men drawn up in battle array, dense columns of infantryalternating with squadrons of horse or dark masses of artillery dottedthe wide plain, the bright steel glittering in the rich sunset of a Julyevening when not a breath of air was stirring; the very banners hung downlistlessly, and not a sound broke the solemn stillness of the hour. All wassilent. So impressive and so strange was the spectacle of a vast army thusresting mutely under arms, that I reined in my horse, and almost doubtedthe reality of the scene as I gazed upon it. The dark shadows of the tallmountain were falling across the valley, and a starry sky was alreadyreplacing the ruddy glow of sunset as we reached the plain; but still nochange took place in the position of the Spanish army."Who goes there?" cried a hoarse voice, as we issued from the mountaingorge, and in a moment we found ourselves surrounded by an outpost party.Having explained, as well as I was able, who I was, and for what reason Iwas there, I proceeded to accompany the officer towards the camp.On my way thither I learned the reason of the singular display of troopswhich had been so puzzling to me. From an early hour of that day Sir ArthurWellesley's arrival had been expected, and old Cuesta had drawn up his menfor inspection, and remained thus for several hours patiently awaiting hiscoming; he himself, overwhelmed with years and infirmity, sitting upon hishorse the entire time.As it was not necessary that I should be presented to the general, myreport being for the ear of Sir Arthur himself, I willingly availed myselfof the hospitality proffered by a Spanish officer of cavalry; and havingprovided for the comforts of my tired cattle and taken a hasty supper,issued forth to look at the troops, which, although it was now growinglate, were still in the same attitude.Scarcely had I been half an hour thus occupied, when the stillness ofthe scene was suddenly interrupted by the loud report of a large gun,immediately followed by a long roll of musketry, while at the same momentthe bands of the different regiments struck up, and as if by magic a blazeof red light streamed across the dark ranks. This was effected by pinetorches held aloft at intervals, throwing a lurid glare upon the grim andswarthy features of the Spaniards, whose brown uniforms and slouching hatspresented a most picturesque effect as the red light fell upon them.The swell of the thundering cannon grew louder and nearer,--the shoulderingof muskets, the clash of sabres, and the hoarse roll of the drum, minglingin one common din. I at once guessed that Sir Arthur had arrived, and as Iturned the flank of a battalion I saw the staff approaching. Nothing can beconceived more striking than their advance. In the front rode old Cuestahimself, clad in the costume of a past century, his slashed doublet andtrunk hose reminding one of a more chivalrous period, his heavy, unwieldyfigure looming from side to side, and threatening at each moment to fallfrom his saddle. On each side of him walked two figures gorgeously dressed,whose duty appeared to be to sustain the chief in his seat. At hisside rode a far different figure. Mounted upon a slight-made, activethorough-bred, whose drawn flanks bespoke a long and weary journey, satSir Arthur Wellesley, a plain blue frock and gray trousers being hisunpretending costume; but the eagle glance which he threw around on everyside, the quick motion of his hand as he pointed hither and thither amongthe dense battalions, bespoke him every inch a soldier. Behind them camea brilliant staff, glittering in aiguillettes and golden trappings, amongwhom I recognized some well-remembered faces,--our gallant leader at theDouro, Sir Charles Stewart, among the number.As they passed the spot where I was standing, the torch of a foot soldierbehind me flared suddenly up and threw a strong flash upon the party.Cuesta's horse grew frightened, and plunged so fearfully for a minute thatthe poor old man could scarcely keep his seat. A smile shot across SirArthur's features at the moment, but the next instant he was grave andsteadfast as before.A wretched hovel, thatched and in ruins, formed the headquarters of theSpanish army, and thither the staff now bent their steps,--a supper beingprovided there for our commander-in-chief and the officers of his suite.Although not of the privileged party, I lingered round the spot for sometime, anxiously expecting to find some friend or acquaintance who mighttell me the news of our people, and what events had occurred in my absence.CHAPTER LVIII.THE LETTER.The hours passed slowly over, and I at length grew weary of waiting.For some time I had amused myself with observing the slouching gait andunsoldier-like air of the Spaniards as they lounged carelessly about,looking in dress, gesture, and appointment, far move like a guerilla than aregular force. Then again, the strange contrast of the miserable hut withfalling chimney and ruined walls, to the glitter of the mounted guard ofhonor who sat motionless beside it, served to pass the time; but as thenight was already far advanced, I turned towards my quarters, hoping thatthe next morning might gratify my curiosity about my friends.Beside the tent where I was billeted, I found Mike in waiting, who, themoment he saw me, came hastily forward with a letter in his hand. Anofficer of Sir Arthur's staff had left it while I was absent, desiringMike on no account to omit its delivery the first instant he met me.The hand--not a very legible one--was perfectly unknown to me, and theappearance of the billet such as betrayed no over-scrupulous care in thewriter.I trimmed my lamp leisurely, threw a fresh log upon the fire, disposedmyself completely at full length beside it, and then proceeded to formacquaintance with my unknown correspondent. I will not attempt anydescription of the feelings which gradually filled me as I read on; theletter itself will suggest them to those who know my story. It ran thus:--PLACENTIA, July 8, 1809.DEAR O'MALLEY,--Although I'd rather march to Lisbon barefootthan write three lines, Fred Power insists upon my turning scribe,as he has a notion you'll be up at Cuesta's headquarters about thistime. You're in a nice scrape, devil a lie in it! Here has Fredbeen fighting that fellow Trevyllian for you,--all because you wouldnot have patience and fight him yourself the morning you left theDouro,--so much for haste! Let it be a lesson to you for life.Poor Fred got the ball in his hip, and the devil a one of the doctorscan find it. But he's getting better any way, and going to Lisbonfor change of air. Meanwhile, since Power's been wounded, Trevyllian'sspeaking very hardly of you, and they all say here you mustcome back--no matter how--and put matters to rights. Fred hasplaced the thing in my hands, and I'm thinking we'd better call outthe "heavies" by turns,--for most of them stand by Trevyllian.Maurice Quill and myself sat up considering it last night; but,somehow, we don't clearly remember to-day a beautiful plan we hitupon. However, we'll have at it again this evening. Meanwhile,come over here, and let us be doing something. We hear that oldMonsoon has blown up a town, a bridge, and a big convent. Theymust have been hiding the plunder very closely, or he'd never havebeen reduced to such extremities. We'll have a brush with theFrench soon.Yours most eagerly,D. O'SHAUGHNESSY.My first thought, as I ran my eye over these lines, was to seek for Power'snote, written on the morning we parted. I opened it, and to my horrorfound that it only related to my quarrel with Hammersley. My meeting withTrevyllian had been during Fred's absence, and when he assured me that allwas satisfactorily arranged, and a full explanation tendered, that nothinginterfered with my departure,--I utterly forgot that he was only aware ofone half my troubles, and in the haste and bustle of my departure, had nota moment left me to collect myself and think calmly on the matter. The twoletters lay before me, and as I thought over the stain upon my characterthus unwittingly incurred; the blast I had thrown upon my reputation; thewound of my poor friend, who exposed himself for my sake,--I grew sick atheart, and the bitter tears of agony burst from my eyes.That weary night passed slowly over; the blight of all my prospects, whenthey seemed fairest and brightest, presented itself to me in a hundredshapes; and when, overcome by fatigue and exhaustion, I closed my eyes tosleep, it was only to follow up in my dreams my waking thoughts. Morningcame at length; but its bright sunshine and balmy air brought no comfort tome. I absolutely dreaded to meet my brother officers; I felt that in such aposition as I stood, no half or partial explanation could suffice to set meright in their estimation; and yet, what opportunity had I for aught else?Irresolute how to act, I sat leaning my head upon my hands, when I hearda footstep approach; I looked up and saw before me no other than my poorfriend Sparks, from whom I had been separated so long. Any other adviserat such a moment would, I acknowledge, have been as welcome; for thepoor fellow knew but little of the world, and still less of the service.However, one glance convinced me that his heart at least was true; and Ishook his outstretched hand with delight. In a few words he informed methat Merivale had secretly commissioned him to come over in the hope ofmeeting me; that although all the 14th men were persuaded that I was not toblame in what had occurred,--yet that reports so injurious had gone abroad,so many partial and imperfect statements were circulated, that nothing butmy return to headquarters would avail, and that I must not lose a moment inhaving Trevyllian out, with whom all the misrepresentation had originated."This, of course," said Sparks, "is to be a secret; Merivale, being ourcolonel--""Of course," said I, "he cannot countenance, much less counsel, such aproceeding; Now, then, for the road.""Yes; but you cannot leave before making your report. Gordon expects to seeyou at eleven; he told me so last night.""I cannot help it; I shall not wait; my mind is made up. My career herematters but little in comparison with this horrid charge. I shall be broke,but I shall be avenged.""Come, come, O'Malley; you are in our hands now, and you must be guided.You shall wait; you shall see Gordon. Half an hour will make your report,and I have relays of horses along the road, and we shall reach Placentia bynightfall."There was a tone of firmness in this, so unlike anything I ever looked forin the speaker, and withal so much of foresight and precaution, that Icould scarcely credit my senses as he spoke. Having at length agreed to hisproposal, Sparks left me to think over my return of the Legion, promisingthat immediately after my interview with the military secretary, we shouldstart together for headquarters.CHAPTER LXIX.MAJOR O'SHAUGHNESSY."This is Major O'Shaughnessy's quarters, sir," said a sergeant, as hestopped short at the door of a small, low house in the midst of an oliveplantation; an Irish wolf-dog--the well-known companion of the major--laystretched across the entrance, watching with eager and bloodshot eyes theprocess of cutting up a bullock, which two soldiers in undress jackets wereperforming within a few yards of the spot.Stepping cautiously across the savage-looking sentinel, I entered thelittle hall, and finding no one near, passed into a small room, the door ofwhich lay half open.A very palpable odor of cigars and brandy proclaimed, even without hispresence, that this was O'Shaughnessy's sitting-room; so I sat myself downupon an old-fashioned sofa to wait patiently for his return, which I heardwould be immediately after the evening parade. Sparks had become knocked upduring our ride, so that for the last three leagues I was alone, and likemost men in such circumstances, pressed on only the harder. Completely wornout for want of rest, I had scarcely placed myself on the sofa when Ifell sound asleep. When I awoke, all was dark around me, save the faintflickerings of the wood embers on the hearth, and for some moments I couldnot remember where I was; but by degrees recollection came, and as Ithought over my position and its possible consequences, I was again nearlydropping to sleep, when the door suddenly opened, and a heavy step soundedon the floor.I lay still and spoke not, as a large figure in a cloak approached thefire-place, and stooping down endeavored to light a candle at the fastexpiring fire.I had little difficulty in detecting the major even by the half-light; amuttered execration upon the candle, given with an energy that only anIrishman ever bestows upon slight matters, soon satisfied me on this head."May the Devil fly away with the commissary and the chandler to the forces!Ah, you've lit at last!"With these words he stood up, and his eyes falling on me at the moment,he sprang a yard or two backwards, exclaiming as he did so, "The blessedVirgin be near us, what's this?" a most energetic crossing of himselfaccompanying his words. My pale and haggard face, thus suddenly presented,having suggested to the worthy major the impression of a supernaturalvisitor, a hearty burst of laughter, which I could not resist, was my onlyanswer; and the next moment O'Shaughnessy was wrenching my hand in a grasplike a steel vice."Upon my conscience, I thought it was your ghost; and if you kept quiet alittle longer, I was going to promise you Christian burial, and as manyMasses for your soul as my uncle the bishop could say between this andEaster. How are you, my boy? A little thin, and something paler, I think,than when you left us."Having assured him that fatigue and hunger were in a great measure thecause of my sickly looks, the major proceeded to place before me thedbris of his day's dinner, with a sufficiency of bottles to satisfy amess-table, keeping up as he went a running fire of conversation."I'm as glad as if the Lord took the senior major, to see you here thisnight. With the blessing of Providence we'll shoot Trevyllian in themorning, and any more of the heavies that like it. You are an ill-treatedman, that's what it is, and Dan O'Shaughnessy says it. Help yourself, myboy; crusty old port in that bottle as ever you touched your lips to.Power's getting all right; it was contract powder, warranted not to kill.Bad luck to the commissaries once more! With such ammunition Sir Arthurdoes right to trust most to the bayonet. And how is Monsoon, the oldrogue?""Gloriously, living in the midst of wine and olives.""No fear of him, the old sinner; but he is a fine fellow, after all.Charley, you are eating nothing, boy.""To tell you the truth, I'm far more anxious to talk with you at thismoment than aught else.""So you shall: the night's young. Meanwhile, I had better not delaymatters. You want to have Trevyllian out,--is not that so?""Of course; you are aware how it happened?""I know everything. Go on with your supper, and don't mind me; I'll be backin twenty minutes or less."Without waiting for any reply, he threw his cloak around him, and strodeout of the room. Once more I was alone; but already my frame of mind wasaltered,--the cheering tone of my reckless, gallant countryman had raisedmy spirits, and I felt animated by his very manner.An hour elapsed before the major returned; and when he did come, hisappearance and gestures bespoke anger and disappointment. He threw himselfhurriedly into a seat, and for some minutes never spoke."The world's beautifully changed, anyhow, since I began it, O'Malley,--whenyou thanked a man civilly that asked you to fight him! The Devil take thecowards, say I.""What has happened? Tell me, I beseech you?""He won't fight," said the major, blurting out the words as if they wouldchoke him."He'll not fight! And why?"The major was silent. He seemed confused and embarrassed. He turned fromthe fire to the table, from the table to the fire, poured out a glass ofwine, drank it hastily off, and springing from his chair, paced the roomwith long, impatient strides."My dear O'Shaughnessy, explain, I beg of you. Does he refuse to meet mefor any reason--""He does," said the major, turning on me a look of deep feeling as hespoke; "and he does it to ruin you, my boy. But as sure as my name isDan, he'll fail this time. He was sitting with his friend Beaufort when Ireached his quarters, and received me with all the ceremonious politenesshe well knows how to assume. I told him in a few words the object of myvisit; upon which Trevyllian, standing up, referred me to his friend fora reply, and left the room. I thought that all was right, and sat down todiscuss, as I believed, preliminaries, when the cool puppy, with his backto the fire, carelessly lisped out, 'It can't be, Major; your friend is toolate.'"'Too late? too late?' said I."'Yes, precisely so; not up to time. The affair should have come off someweeks since. We won't meet him now.'"'This is really your answer?'"'This is really my answer; and not only so, but the decision of our mess.'"What I said after this he may remember; devil take me if I can. But Ihave a vague recollection of saying something that the aforesaid mess willnever petition the Horse Guards to put on their regimental colors; and hereI am--"With these words the major gulped down a full goblet of wine, and oncemore resumed his walk through the room. I shall not attempt to record thefeelings which agitated me during the major's recital. In one rapid glanceI saw the aim of my vindictive enemy. My honor, not my life, was the objecthe sought for; and ten thousand times more than ever did I pant for theopportunity to confront him in a deadly combat."Charley," said O'Shaughnessy, at length, placing his hand upon myshoulder, "you must get to bed now. Nothing more can be done to-night inany way. Be assured of one thing, my boy,--I'll not desert you; and if thatassurance can give you a sound sleep, you'll not need a lullaby."CHAPTER LX.PRELIMINARIES.I awoke refreshed on the following morning, and came down to breakfast witha lighter heart than I had even hoped for. A secret feeling that allwould go well had somehow taken possession of me, and I longed forO'Shaughnessy's coming, trusting that he might be able to confirm my hopes.His servant informed me that the major had been absent since daybreak, andleft orders that he was not to be waited for at breakfast.I was not destined, however, to pass a solitary time in his absence, forevery moment brought some new arrival to visit me; and during the morningthe colonel and every officer of the regiment not on actual duty came over.I soon learned that the feeling respecting Trevyllian's conduct was one ofunmixed condemnation among my own corps, but that a kind of party spiritwhich had subsisted for some months between the regiment he belonged to andthe 14th had given a graver character to the affair, and induced many mento take up his views of the transaction; and although I heard of none whoattributed my absence to any dislike to a meeting, yet there were severalwho conceived that, by my going at the time, I had forfeited all claim tosatisfaction at his hands."Now that Merivale is gone," said an officer to me as the colonel left theroom, "I may confess to you that he sees nothing to blame in your conductthroughout; and even had you been aware of how matters were circumstanced,your duty was too imperative to have preferred your personal considerationto it.""Does any one know where Conyers is?" said Baker."The story goes that Conyers can assist us here. Conyers is at Zaza laMayor, with the 28th; but what can he do?""That I'm not able to tell you; but I know O'Shaughnessy heard something atparade this morning, and has set off in search of him on every side.""Was Conyers ever out with Trevyllian?""Not as a principal, I believe. The report is, however, that he knows moreabout him than other people, as Tom certainly does of everybody.""It is rather a new thing for Trevyllian to refuse a meeting. They say,O'Malley, he has heard of your shooting.""No, no," said another; "he cares very little for any man's pistol. If thestory be true, he fires a second or two before his adversary; at least, itwas in that way he killed Carysfort.""Here comes the great O'Shaughnessy!" cried some one at the window; and thenext moment the heavy gallop of a horse was heard along the causeway. In aninstant we all rushed to the door to receive him."It's all right, lads!" cried he, as he came up. "We have him this time!""How?" "When?" "Why?" "In what way have you managed?" fell from a dozenvoices, as the major elbowed his way through the crowd to the sitting-room."In the first place," said O'Shanghnessy, drawing a long breath, "I havepromised secrecy as to the steps of this transaction; secondly, if Ihadn't, it would puzzle me to break it, for I'll be hanged if I know morethan yourselves. Tom Conyers wrote me a few lines for Trevyllian, andTrevyllian pledges himself to meet our friend; and that's all we need knowor care for.""Then you have seen Trevyllian this morning?""No; Beaufort met me at the village. But even now it seems this affair isnever to come off. Trevyllian has been sent with a forage party towardsLesco. However, that can't be a long absence. But, for Heaven's sake, letme have some breakfast!"While O'Shaughnessy proceeded to attack the viands before him, the otherschatted about in little groups; but all wore the pleased and happy looks ofmen who had rescued their friend from a menaced danger. As for myself, myheart swelled with gratitude to the kind fellows around me."How has Conyers assisted us at this juncture?" was my first question toO'Shaughnessy, when we were once more alone."I am not at liberty to speak on that subject, Charley. But be satisfiedthe reasons for which Trevyllian meets you are fair and honorable.""I am content.""The only thing now to be done is to have the meeting as soon as possible.""We are all agreed upon that point," said I; "and the more so as the matterhad better be decided before Sir Arthur's return.""Quite true. And now, O'Malley, you had better join your people as soon asmay be, and it will put a stop to all talking about the matter."The advice was good, and I lost no time in complying with it; and whenI joined the regiment that day at mess, it was with a light heart and acheerful spirit, for come what might of the affair, of one thing I wascertain,--my character was now put above any reach of aspersion, and myreputation beyond attack.CHAPTER LXI.ALL RIGHT.Some days after coming back to headquarters, I was returning from a visit Ihad been making to a friend at one of the outposts, when an officer whom Iknew slightly overtook me and informed me that Major O'Shaughnessy hadbeen to my quarters in search of me, and had sent persons in differentdirections to find me.Suspecting the object of the major's haste, I hurried on at once, and asI rode up to the spot, found him in the midst of a group of officers,engaged, to all appearance, in most eager conversation."Oh, here he comes!" cried he, as I cantered up. "Come, my boy, doff theblue frock as soon as you can, and turn out in your best-fitting black.Everything has been settled for this evening at seven o'clock, and we haveno time to lose.""I understand you," said I, "and shall not keep you waiting." So saying, Isprang from my saddle and hastened to my quarters. As I entered the room Iwas followed by O'Shaughnessy, who closed the door after him as he came in,and having turned the key in it, sat down beside the table, and foldinghis arms, seemed buried in reflection. As I proceeded with my toilet hereturned no answers to the numerous questions I put to him, either as tothe time of Trevyllian's return, the place of the meeting, or any otherpart of the transaction. His attention seemed to wander far from all aroundand about him; and as he muttered indistinctly to himself, the few words Icould catch bore not in the remotest degree upon the matter before us."I have written a letter or two here, Major," said I, opening mywriting-desk. "In case anything happens, you will look to a few things Ihave mentioned here. Somehow, I could not write to poor Fred Power; but youmust tell him from me that his noble conduct towards me was the last thingI spoke of.""What confounded nonsense you are talking!" said O'Shaughnessy, springingfrom his seat and crossing the room with tremendous strides, "croaking awaythere as if the bullet was in your thorax. Hang it, man, bear up!""But, Major, my dear friend, what the deuce are you thinking of? The fewthings I mentioned--""The devil! you are not going over it all again, are you?" said he, in avoice of no measured tone.I now began to feel irritated in turn, and really looked at him for someseconds in considerable amazement. That he should have mistaken thedirections I was giving him and attributed them to any cowardice was tooinsulting a thought to bear; and yet how otherwise was I to understand thevery coarse style of his interruption?At length my temper got the victory, and with a voice of most measuredcalmness, I said, "Major O'Shaughnessy, I am grateful, most deeplygrateful, for the part you have acted towards me in this difficultbusiness; at the same time, as you now appear to disapprove of my conductand bearing, when I am most firmly determined to alter nothing, I shall begto relieve you of the unpleasant office of my friend.""Heaven grant that you could do so!" said he, interrupting me, while hisclasped hands and eager look attested the vehemence of the wish. He pausedfor a moment, then, springing from his chair, rushed towards me, and threwhis arms around me. "No, my boy, I can't do it,--I can't do it. I havetried to bully myself into insensibility for this evening's work,--I haveendeavored to be rude to you, that you might insult me, and steel my heartagainst what might happen; but it won't do, Charley, it won't do."With these words the big tears rolled down his stern cheeks, and his voicebecame thick with emotion."But for me, all this need not have happened. I know it; I feel it. Ihurried on this meeting; your character stood fair and unblemished withoutthat,--at least they tell me so now; and I still have to assure you--""Come, my dear, kind friend, don't give way in this fashion. You have stoodmanfully by me through every step of the road; don't desert me on thethreshold of--""The grave, O'Malley?""I don't think so, Major; but see, half-past six! Look to these pistols forme. Are they likely to object to hair-triggers?"A knocking at the door turned off our attention, and the next momentBaker's voice was heard."O'Malley, you'll be close run for time; the meeting-place is full threemiles from this."I seized the key and opened the door. At the same instant, O'Shaughnessyrose and turned towards the window, holding one of the pistols in his hand."Look at that, Baker,--what a sweet tool it is!" said he, in a voice thatactually made me start. Not a trace of his late excitement remained; hisusually dry, half-humorous manner had returned, and his droll features wereas full of their own easy, devil-may-care fun as ever."Here comes the drag," said Baker. "We can drive nearly all the way, unlessyou prefer riding.""Of course not. Keep your hand steady, Charley, and if you don't bring himdown with that saw-handle, you're not your uncle's nephew."With these words we mounted into the tax-cart, and set off for themeeting-place.CHAPTER LXII.THE DUEL.A small and narrow ravine between the two furze-covered dells led to theopen space where the meeting had been arranged for. As we reached this,therefore, we were obliged to descend from the drag, and proceed theremainder of the way afoot. We had not gone many yards when a step washeard approaching, and the next moment Beaufort appeared. His usually easyand dgag air was certainly tinged with somewhat of constraint; andthough his soft voice and half smile were as perfect as ever, a slightlyflurried expression about the lip, and a quick and nervous motion of hiseyebrow, bespoke a heart not completely at ease. He lifted his foraging capmost ceremoniously to salute us as we came up, and casting an anxious lookto see if any others were following, stood quite still."I think it right to mention, Major O'Shaughnessy," said he, in a voice ofmost dulcet sweetness, "that I am the only friend of Captain Trevyllian onthe ground; and though I have not the slightest objection to Captain Bakerbeing present, I hope you will see the propriety of limiting the witnessesto the three persons now here.""Upon my conscience, as far as I am concerned, or my friend either, weare perfectly indifferent if we fight before three or three thousand. InIreland we rather like a crowd.""Of course, then, as you see no objection to my proposition, I may countupon your co-operation in the event of any intrusion,--I mean, that whilewe, upon our sides, will not permit any of our friends to come forward, youwill equally exert yourself with yours.""Here we are, Baker and myself, neither more nor less. We expect no one,and want no one; so that I humbly conceive all the preliminaries you aretalking of will never be required."Beaufort tried to smile, and bit his lips, while a small red spot upon hischeek spoke that some deeper feeling of irritation than the mere carelessmanner of the major could account for, still rankled in his bosom. Wenow walked on without speaking, except when occasionally some passingobservation of Beaufort upon the fineness of the evening, or the ruggednature of the road, broke the silence. As we emerged from the littlemountain pass into the open meadow land, the tall and soldier-like figureof Trevyllian was the first object that presented itself. He was standingbeside a little stone cross that stood above a holy well, and seemedoccupied in deciphering the inscription. He turned at the noise of ourapproach, and calmly waited our coming. His eye glanced quickly from thefeatures of O'Shaughnessy to those of Baker; but seeming rapidly reassuredas he walked forward, his face at once recovered its usual severity and itscold, impassive look of sternness."All right!" said Beaufort, in a whisper the tones of which I overheard, ashe drew near to his friend. Trevyllian smiled in return, but did not speak.During the few moments which passed in conversation between the seconds,I turned from the spot with Baker, and had scarcely time to address aquestion to him, when O'Shaughnessy called out, "Hollo, Baker!--come herea moment!" The three seemed now in eager discussion for some minutes, whenBaker walked towards Trevyllian, and saying something, appeared to waitfor his reply. This being obtained, he joined the others, and the momentafterwards came to where I was standing. "You are to toss for first shot,O'Malley. O'Shaughnessy has made that proposition, and the others agreethat with two crack marksmen, it is perhaps the fairest way. I suppose youhave no objection?""Of course, I shall make none. Whatever O'Shaughnessy decides for me I amready to abide by.""Well, then, as to the distance?" said Beaufort, loud enough to be heard byme where I was standing. O'Shaughnessy's reply I could not catch, but itwas evident, from the tone of both parties, that some difference existed onthe point."Captain Baker shall decide between us," said Beaufort, at length, and theyall walked away to some distance. During all the while I could perceivethat Trevyllian's uneasiness and impatience seemed extreme; he looked fromthe speakers to the little mountain pass, and strained his eyes in everydirection. It was clear that he dreaded some interruption. At last, unableany longer to control his feelings, he called out, "Beaufort, I say, whatthe devil are we waiting for now?""Nothing at present," said Beaufort, as he came forward with a dollar inhis hand. "Come, Major O'Shaughnessy, you shall call for your friend."He pitched the piece of money as he spoke high into the air, and watched itas it fell on the soft grass beneath."Head! for a thousand," cried O'Shaughnessy, running over and stoopingdown; "and head it is!""You've won the first shot," whispered Baker; "for Heaven's sake be cool!"Beaufort grew deadly pale as he bent over the crownpiece, and seemedscarcely to have courage to look his friend in his face. Not so Trevyllian;he pulled off his gloves without the slightest semblance of emotion,buttoned up his well-fitting black frock to the throat, and throwing arapid glance around, seemed only eager to begin the combat."Fifteen paces, and the words, 'One, two!'""Exactly. My cane shall mark the spot.""Devilish long paces you make them," said O'Shaughnessy, who did not seemto approve of the distance. "They have some confounded advantage in this,depend upon it," said the major, in a whisper to Baker."Are you ready?" inquired Beaufort."Ready,--quite ready!""Take your ground, then!"As Trevyllian moved forward to his place, he muttered something to hisfriend. I did not hear the first part, but the latter words which met mewere ominous enough: "For as I intend to shoot him, 'tis just as well as itis."Whether this was meant to be overheard and intimidate me I knew not;but its effect proved directly opposite. My firm resolution to hit myantagonist was now confirmed, and no compunctious visitings unnerved myarm. As we took our places some little delay again took place, the flint ofmy pistol having fallen; and thus we remained full ten or twelve secondssteadily regarding each other. At length O'Shaughnessy came forward, andputting my weapon in my hand, whispered low, "Remember, you have but onechance.""You are both ready?" cried Beaufort."Ready!""Then: One, two--"The last word was lost in the report of my pistol, which went off at theinstant. For a second the flash and smoke obstructed my view; but themoment after I saw Trevyllian stretched upon the ground, with his friendkneeling beside him. My first impulse was to rush over, for now all feelingof enmity was buried in most heartfelt anxiety for his fate; but as I wasstepping forward, O'Shaughnessy called out, "Stand fast, boy, he's onlywounded!" and the same moment he rose slowly from the ground, with theassistance of his friend, and looked with the same wild gaze around him.Such a look! I shall never forget it; there was that intense expression ofsearching anxiety, as if he sought to trace the outlines of some visionaryspirit as it receded before him. Quickly reassured, as it seemed, bythe glance he threw on all sides, his countenance lighted up, not withpleasure, but with a fiendish expression of revengeful triumph, which evenhis voice evinced as he called out: "It's my turn now."I felt the words in their full force, as I stood silently awaiting my deathwound. The pause was a long one. Twice did he interrupt his friend, as hewas about to give the word, by an expression of suffering, pressing hishand upon his side, and seeming to writhe with torture; and yet this wasmere counterfeit.O'Shaughnessy was now coming forward to interfere and prevent theseinterruptions, when Trevyllian called out in a firm tone, "I'm ready!" Atthe words, "One, two!" the pistol slowly rose; his dark eye measured mecoolly, steadily; his lip curled; and just as I felt that my last momentof life had arrived, a heavy sound of a horse galloping along the rockycauseway seemed to take off his attention. His frame trembled, his handshook, and jerking upwards his weapon, the ball passed high above my head."You bear me witness I fired in the air," said Trevyllian, while the largedrops of perspiration rolled from his forehead, and his features worked asif in a fit."You saw it, sir; and you, Beaufort, my friend, you also. Speak! Why willyou not speak?""Be calm, Trevyllian; be calm, for Heaven's sake! What's the matter withyou?"[Illustration: THE COAT OF MAIL.]"The affair is then ended," said Baker, "and most happily so. You are, Ihope, not dangerously wounded."As he spoke, Trevyllian's features grew deadly livid; his half-open mouthquivered slightly, his eyes became fixed, and his arm dropped heavilybeside him, and with a low moan he fell fainting to the ground.As we bent over him I now perceived that another person had joined ourparty; he was a short, determined-looking man of about forty, with blackeyes and aquiline features. Before I had time to guess who it might be, Iheard O'Shaughnessy address him as Colonel Conyers."He is dying!" said Beaufort, still stooping over his friend, whose coldhand he grasped within his own. "Poor, poor fellow!""He fired in the air," said Baker, as he spoke in reply to a question fromConyers.What he answered I heard not, but Baker rejoined,--"Yes, I am certain of it. We all saw it.""Had you not better examine his wounds?" said Conyers, in a tone ofsarcastic irony I could almost have struck him for. "Is your friend nothit? Perhaps he is bleeding?""Yes," said O'Shaughnessy, "let us look to the poor fellow now." So saying,with Beaufort's aid he unbuttoned his frock and succeeded in opening hiswaistcoat. There was no trace of blood anywhere, and the idea of internalhemorrhage at once occurred to us, when Conyers, stooping down, pushed measide, saying at the same time,--"Your fears for his safety need not distress you much,--look here!" As hespoke he tore open his shirt, and disclosed to our almost doubting sensesa vest of chain-mail armor fitting close next the skin and completelypistol-proof.I cannot describe the effect this sight produced upon us. Beaufort sprangto his feet with a bound as he screamed out, rather than spoke, "No manbelieves me to have been aware--""No, no, Beaufort, your reputation is very far removed from such a stain,"said Conyers.O'Shaughnessy was perfectly speechless. He looked from one to the other, asthough some unexplained mystery still remained, and only seemed restoredto any sense of consciousness as Baker said, "I can feel no pulse at hiswrist,--his heart, too, does not beat."Conyers placed his hand upon his bosom, then felt along his throat, liftedup an arm, and letting it fall heavily upon the ground, he muttered, "He isdead!"It was true. No wound had pierced him,--the pistol bullet was found withinhis clothes. Some tremendous conflict of the spirit within had snapped thecords of life, and the strong man had perished in his agony.CHAPTER LXIII.NEWS FROM GALWAY.I have but a vague and most imperfect recollection of the events whichfollowed this dreadful scene; for some days my faculties seemed stunned andparalyzed, and my thoughts clung to the minute detail of the ground,--thepersons about, the mountain path, and most of all the half-stifled cry thatspoke the broken heart,--with a tenacity that verged upon madness.A court-martial was appointed to inquire into the affair; and although Ihave been since told that my deportment was calm, and my answers were firmand collected, yet I remember nothing of the proceedings.The inquiry, through a feeling of delicacy for the friends of him who wasno more, was made as brief and as private as possible. Beaufort proved thefacts which exonerated me from any imputation in the matter; and upon thesame day the court delivered the decision: "That Lieutenant O'Malley wasnot guilty of the charges preferred against him, and that he should bereleased from arrest, and join his regiment."Nothing could be more kind and considerate than the conduct of my brotherofficers,--a hundred little plans and devices for making me forget thelate unhappy event were suggested and practised,--and I look back to thatmelancholy period, marked as it was by the saddest circumstance of my life,as one in which I received more of truly friendly companionship than evenmy palmiest days of prosperity boasted.While, therefore, I deeply felt the good part my friends were performingtowards me, I was still totally unsuited to join in the happy current oftheir daily pleasures and amusements. The gay and unreflecting character ofO'Shaughnessy, the careless merriment of my brother officers, jarred uponmy nerves, and rendered me irritable and excited; and I sought in lonelyrides and unfrequented walks, the peace of spirit that calm reflection anda firm purpose for the future rarely fail to lead to.There is in deep sorrow a touch of the prophetic. It is at seasons when theheart is bowed down with grief, and the spirit wasted with suffering, thatthe veil which conceals the future seems to be removed, and a glance, shortand fleeting as the lightning flash, is permitted us into the gloomy valleybefore us.Misfortunes, too, come not singly,--the seared heart is not suffered toheal from one affliction ere another succeeds it; and this anticipationof the coming evil is, perhaps, one of the most poignant features ofgrief,--the ever-watchful apprehension, the ever-rising question, "Whatnext?" is a torture that never sleeps.This was the frame of my mind for several days after I returned to myduty,--a morbid sense of some threatened danger being my last thought atnight and my first on awakening. I had not heard from home since my arrivalin the Peninsula; a thousand vague fancies haunted me now that somebrooding misfortune awaited me. My poor uncle never left my thoughts. Washe well; was he happy? Was he, as he ever used to be, surrounded by thefriends he loved,--the old familiar faces around the hospitable hearth hiskindliness had hallowed in my memory as something sacred? Oh, could I butsee his manly smile, or hear his voice! Could I but feel his hand upon myhead, as he was wont to press it, while words of comfort fell from hislips, and sunk into my heart!Such were my thoughts one morning as I sauntered, unaccompanied, from myquarters. I had not gone far, when my attention was aroused by the noiseof a mule-cart, whose jingling bells and clattering timbers announced itsapproach by the road I was walking. Another turn of the way brought it intoview; and I saw from the gay costume of the driver, as well as a smallorange flag which decorated the conveyance, that it was the mail-cart withletters from Lisbon.Full as my mind was with thoughts of home, I turned hastily back, andretraced my steps towards the camp. When I reached the adjutant-general'squarters, I found a considerable number of officers assembled; the reportthat the post had come was a rumor of interest to all, and accordingly,every moment brought fresh arrivals, pouring in from all sides, and eagerlyinquiring, "If the bags had been opened?" The scene of riot, confusion, andexcitement, when that event did take place, exceeded all belief, each manreading his letter half aloud, as if his private affairs and domesticconcerns must interest his neighbors, amidst a volley of exclamations ofsurprise, pleasure, or occasional anger, as the intelligence severallysuggested,--the disappointed expectants cursing their idle correspondents,bemoaning their fate about remittances that never arrived, or drafts neverhonored; while here and there some public benefactor, with an outspread"Times" or "Chronicle," was retailing the narrative of our own exploits inthe Peninsula or the more novel changes in the world of politics since weleft England. A cross-fire of news and London gossip ringing on every sidemade up a perfect Babel most difficult to form an idea of. The jargonpartook of every accent and intonation the empire boasts of; and from thesharp precision of the North Tweeder to the broad doric of Kerry, everyportion, almost every county, of Great Britain had its representative. Herewas a Scotch paymaster, in a lugubrious tone, detailing to his friend theapparently not over-welcome news that Mistress M'Elwain had just beensafely delivered of twins, which, with their mother, were doing as wellas possible. Here an eager Irishman, turning over the pages rather thanreading his letter, while he exclaimed to his friend,--"Oh, the devil a rap she's sent me. The old story about runaway tenants anddistress notices,--sorrow else tenants seem to do in Ireland than run awayevery half-year."A little apart some sentimental-looking cockney was devouring a verycrossed epistle which he pressed to his lips whenever any one looked athim; while a host of others satisfied themselves by reading in a kind ofbuzzing undertone, every now and then interrupting themselves with somebroken exclamation as commentary,--such as, "Of course she will!" "Neverknew him better!" "That's the girl for my money!" "Fifty per cent, thedevil!" and so on. At last I was beginning to weary of the scene, andfinding that there appeared to be nothing for me, was turning to leave theplace, when I saw a group of two or three endeavoring to spell out theaddress of a letter."That's an Irish post-mark, I'll swear," said one; "but who can makeanything of the name? It's devilish like Otaheite, isn't it?""I wish my tailor wrote as illegibly," said another; "I'd keep up a mostanimated correspondence with him.""Here, O'Shaughnessy, you know something of savage life,--spell us thisword here.""Show it here. What nonsense, it's as plain as the nose on my face: 'MasterCharles O'Malley, in foreign parts!'"A roar of laughter followed this announcement, which, at any other time,perhaps, I should have joined in, but which now grated sadly on my ruffledfeelings."Here, Charley, this is for you," said the major; and added in awhisper,--"and upon my conscience, between ourselves, your friend, whoeverhe is, has a strong action against his writing-master,--devil such a fistever I looked at!"One glance satisfied me as to my correspondent. It was from Father Rush,my old tutor. I hurried eagerly from the spot, and regaining my quarters,locked the door, and with a beating heart broke the seal and began, as wellas I was able, to decipher his letter. The hand was cramped and stiffenedwith age, and the bold, upright letters were gnarled and twisted like arustic fence, and demanded great patience and much time in unravelling. Itran thus:--THE PRIORY, Lady-day, 1809.MY DEAR MASTER CHARLES,--Your uncle's feet are so big andso uneasy that he can't write, and I am obliged to take up the penmyself, to tell you how we are doing here since you left us. And,first of all, the master lost the lawsuit in Dublin, all for the wantof a Galway jury,--but they don't go up to town for strong reasonsthey had; and the Curranolick property is gone to Ned M'Manus,and may the devil do him good with it! Peggy Maher left this onTuesday; she was complaining of a weakness; she's gone to consultthe doctors. I'm sorry for poor Peggy.Owen M'Neil beat the Slatterys out of Portunma on Saturday,and Jem, they say, is fractured. I trust it's true, for he never wasgood, root nor branch, and we've strong reasons to suspect him fordrawing the river with a net at night. Sir Harry Boyle sprained hiswrist, breaking open his bed-room, that he locked when he was inside.The count and the master were laughing all the evening athim. Matters are going very hard in the country,--the people payingtheir rents regularly, and not caring half as much as they usedabout the real gentry and the old families.We kept your birthday at the Castle in great style,--had themilitia band from the town, and all the tenants. Mr. James Dalydanced with your old friend Mary Green, and sang a beautiful song,and was going to raise the devil, but I interfered; he burned downhalf the blue drawing-room the last night with his tricks,--not thatyour uncle cares, God preserve him to us! it's little anything likethat would fret him. The count quarrelled with a young gentlemanin the course of the evening, but found out he was only an attorneyfrom Dublin, so he didn't shoot him; but he was ducked in the pondby the people, and your uncle says he hopes they have a true copy ofhim at home, as they'll never know the original.Peter died soon after you went away, but Tim hunts the dogsjust as well. They had a beautiful run last Wednesday, and theLord[2] sent for him and gave him a five-pound note; but he sayshe'd rather see yourself back again than twice as much. Theykilled near the big turnip-field, and all went down to see where youleaped Badger over the sunk fence,--they call it "Hammersley'sNose" ever since. Bodkin was at Ballinasloe the last fair, limpingabout with a stick; he's twice as quiet as he used to be, and neverbeat any one since that morning.Nellie Guire, at the cross-roads, wants to send you four pair ofstockings she knitted for you, and I have a keg of potteen of Barney'sown making this two months, not knowing how to send it. May beSir Arthur himself would like a taste,--he's an Irishman himself,and one we're proud of, too! The Maynooth chaps are flying allabout the country, and making us all uncomfortable,--God's will bedone, but we used to think ourselves good enough! Your foster-sister,Kitty Doolan, had a fine boy; it's to be called after you, andyour uncle's to give a christening. He bids me tell you to drawon him when you want money, and that there's 400 ready for younow somewhere in Dublin,--I forget the name, and as he's asleep, Idon't like asking him. There was a droll devil down here in thesummer that knew you well,--a Mr. Webber. The master treatedhim like the Lord Lieutenant, had dinner parties for him, andgave him Oliver Cromwell to ride over to Meelish. He is expectedagain for the cock-shooting, for the master likes him greatly. I'mdone at last, for my paper is finished and the candle just out; so withevery good wish and every good thought, remember your own oldfriend,--PETER RUSH.P.S. It's Smart and Sykes, Fleet Street, has the money.Father O'Shaughnessey, of Ennis, bids me ask if you ever met hisnephew. If you do, make him sing "Larry M'Hale." I hear it's atreat.How is Mickey Free going on? There are three decent youngwomen in the parish he promised to marry, and I suppose he's pursuingthe same game with the Portuguese. But he was neverremarkable for minding his duties. Tell him I am keeping my eyeon him.P. R.[Footnote:2 To excuse Father Rush for any apparent impiety, I must addthat, by "the Lord," he means "Lord Clanricarde."]Here concluded this long epistle; and though there were many parts I couldnot help smiling at, yet upon the whole I felt sad and dispirited. What Ihad long foreseen and anticipated was gradually accomplishing,--the wreckof an old and honored house, the fall of a name once the watch-word forall that was benevolent and hospitable in the land. The termination of thelawsuit I knew must have been a heavy blow to my poor uncle, who, everyconsideration of money apart, felt in a legal combat all the enthusiasm andexcitement of a personal conflict. With him there was less a question ofto whom the broad acres reverted, so much as whether that "scoundrel TomBasset, the attorney at Athlone, should triumph over us;" or "M'Manus livein the house as master where his father had officiated as butler." It wasat this his Irish pride took offence; and straitened circumstances andnarrowed fortunes bore little upon him in comparison with this feeling.I could see, too, that with breaking fortunes, bad health was making heavyinroads upon him; and while, with the reckless desperation of ruin, hestill kept open house, I could picture to myself his cheerful eye andhandsome smile but ill concealing the slow but certain march of a brokenheart.My position was doubly painful: for any advice, had I been calculated togive it, would have seemed an act of indelicate interference from one whowas to benefit by his own counsel; and although I had been reared andeducated as my uncle's heir, I had no title nor pretension to succeed himother than his kind feelings respecting me. I could, therefore, only lookon in silence, and watch the painful progress of our downfall without powerto arrest it.These were sad thoughts, and came when my heart was already bowed down withits affliction. That my poor uncle might be spared the misery which sooneror later seemed inevitable, was now my only wish; that he might go down tothe grave without the embittering feelings which a ruined fortune and afallen house bring home to the heart, was all my prayer. Let him but closehis eyes in the old wainscoted bed-room, beneath the old roof where hisfathers and grand-fathers have done so for centuries. Let the faithfulfollowers he has known since his childhood stand round his bed; while hisfast-failing sight recognizes each old and well-remembered object, and thesame bell which rang its farewell to the spirit of his ancestors toll forhim, the last of his race. And as for me, there was the wide world beforeme, and a narrow resting-place would suffice for a soldier's sepulchre.As the mail-cart was returning the next day to Lisbon, I immediately satdown and replied to the worthy Father's letter, speaking as encouraginglyas I could of my own prospects. I dwelt much upon what was nearest myheart, and begged of the good priest to watch over my uncle's health, tocheer his spirits and support his courage; and that I trusted the day wasnot far distant when I should be once more among them, with many a storyof fray and battle-field to enliven their firesides. Pressing him to writefrequently to me, I closed my hurried letter; and having despatched it, satsorrowfully down to muse over my fortunes.CHAPTER LXIV.AN ADVENTURE WITH SIR ARTHUR.The events of the last few days had impressed me with a weight of years.The awful circumstances of that evening lay heavily at my heart; and thoughguiltless of Trevyllian's blood, the reproach that conscience ever carrieswhen one has been involved in a death-scene never left my thoughts.For some time previously I had been depressed and disspirited, and theawful shock I had sustained broke my nerve and unmanned me greatly.There are times when our sorrows tinge all the colorings of our thoughts,and one pervading hue of melancholy spreads like a pall upon what we haveof fairest and brightest on earth. So was it now: I had lost hope andambition; a sad feeling that my career was destined to misfortune andmishap gained hourly upon me; and all the bright aspirations of a soldier'sglory, all my enthusiasm for the pomp and circumstance of glorious war,fell coldly upon my heart, and I looked upon the chivalry of a soldier'slife as the empty pageant of a dream.In this sad frame of mind, I avoided all intercourse with my brotherofficers; their gay and joyous spirits only jarred upon my broodingthoughts, and feigning illness, I kept almost entirely to my quarters.The inactivity of our present life weighed also heavily upon me. Thestirring events of a campaign--the march, the bivouac, the picket--callforth a certain physical exertion that never fails to react upon the torpidmind.Forgetting all around me, I thought of home; I thought of those whosehearts I felt were now turning towards me, and considered within myself howI could have exchanged the home, the days of peaceful happiness there, forthe life of misery and disappointment I now endured.A brooding melancholy gained daily more and more upon me. A wish, to returnto Ireland, a vague and indistinct feeling that my career was not destinedfor aught of great and good crept upon me, and I longed to sink intooblivion, forgotten and forgot.I record this painful feeling here, while it is still a painful memory, asone of the dark shadows that cross the bright sky of our happiest days.Happy, indeed, are they, as we look back to them and remember the times wehave pronounced ourselves "the most miserable of mankind." This, somehow,is a confession we never make later on in life, when real troubles and trueafflictions assail us. Whether we call in more philosophy to our aid, orthat our senses become less acute and discerning, I'm sure I know not.As for me, I confess by far the greater portion of my sorrows seemed tocome in that budding period of existence when life is ever fairest and mostcaptivating. Not, perhaps, that the fact was really so, but the spoiledand humored child, whose caprices were a law, felt heavily the threateningdifficulties of his first voyage; while as he continued to sail over theocean of life, he braved the storm and the squall, and felt only gratitudefor the favoring breeze that wafted him upon his course.What an admirable remedy for misanthropy is the being placed in asubordinate condition in life! Had I, at the period that I write, been SirArthur Wellesley; had I even been Marshal Beresford,--to all certainty I'dhave played the very devil with his Majesty's forces; I'd have brought myrascals to where they'd have been well-peppered, that's certain.But as, luckily for the sake of humanity in general and the well-being ofthe service in particular, I was merely Lieutenant O'Malley, 14th LightDragoons, the case was very different. With what heavy censure did Icondemn the commander of the forces in my own mind for his want of daringand enterprise! Whole nights did I pass in endeavoring to account for hisinactivity and lethargy. Why he did not seriatim fall upon Soult, Ney,and Victor, annihilate the French forces, and sack Madrid, I looked upon aslittle less than a riddle; and yet there he waited, drilling, exercising,and foraging, as if he were at Hounslow. Now most fortunately here again Iwas not Sir Arthur.Something in this frame of mind, I was taking one evening a solitary ridesome miles from the camp. Without noticing the circumstance, I had entereda little mountain tract, when, the ground being broken and uneven, Idismounted and proceeded a-foot, with the bridle within my arm. I had notgone far when the clatter of a horse's hoofs came rapidly towards me, andthough there was something startling in the pace over such a piece of road,I never lifted my eyes as the horseman came up, but continued my slowprogress onwards, my head sunk upon my bosom."Hallo, sir!" cried a sharp voice, whose tones seemed, somehow, not heardfor the first time. I looked up, saw a slight figure closely buttoned upin a blue horseman's cloak, the collar of which almost entirely hid hisfeatures; he wore a plain, cocked hat without a feather, and was mountedupon a sharp, wiry-looking hack."Hallo, sir! What regiment do you belong to?"As I had nothing of the soldier about me, save a blue foraging cap, todenote my corps, the tone of the demand was little calculated to elicita very polished reply; but preferring, as most impertinent, to make noanswer, I passed on without speaking."Did you hear, sir?" cried the same voice, in a still louder key. "What'syour regiment?"I now turned round, resolved to question the other in turn; when, to myinexpressible shame and confusion, he had lowered the collar of his cloak,and I saw the features of Sir Arthur Wellesley."Fourteenth Light Dragoons, sir," said I, blushing as I spoke."Have you not read the general order, sir? Why have you left the camp?"Now, I had not read a general order nor even heard one for above afortnight. So I stammered out some bungling answer."To your quarters, sir, and report yourself under arrest. What's yourname?""Lieutenant O'Malley, sir.""Well, sir, your passion for rambling shall be indulged. You shall be sentto the rear with despatches; and as the army is in advance, probably thelesson may be serviceable." So saying, he pressed spurs to his horse, andwas out of sight in a moment.CHAPTER LXV.TALAVERA.Having been despatched to the rear with orders for General Crawfurd, I didnot reach Talavera till the morning of the 28th. Two days' hard fightinghad left the contending armies still face to face, and without any decidedadvantage on either side.When I arrived upon the battle-field, the combat of the morning was over.It was then ten o'clock, and the troops were at breakfast, if the fewounces of wheat sparingly dealt out among them could be dignified by thatname. All was, however, life and animation on every side; the merry laugh,the passing jest, the careless look, bespoke the free and daring characterof the soldiery, as they sat in groups upon the grass; and except when afatigue party passed by, bearing some wounded comrade to the rear, no touchof seriousness rested upon their hardy features. The morning was indeeda glorious one; a sky of unclouded blue stretched above a landscapeunsurpassed in loveliness. Far to the right rolled on in placid stream thebroad Tagus, bathing in its eddies the very walls of Talavera, the groundfrom which, to our position, gently undulated across a plain of mostfertile richness and terminated on our extreme left in a bold height,protected in front by a ravine, and flanked by a deep and rugged valley.The Spaniards occupied the right of the line, connecting with our troops ata rising ground, upon which a strong redoubt had been hastily thrown up.The fourth division and the Guards were stationed here, next to whom cameCameron's brigade and the Germans, Mackenzie and Hill holding the extremeleft of all, which might be called the key of our position. In the valleybeneath the latter were picketed three cavalry regiments, among which I wasnot long in detecting my gallant friends of the Twenty-third.As I rode rapidly past, saluting some old familiar face at each moment, Icould not help feeling struck at the evidence of the desperate battle thatso lately had raged there. The whole surface of the hill was one mass ofdead and dying, the bearskin of the French grenadier lying side by sidewith the tartan of the Highlander. Deep furrows in the soil showed thetrack of the furious cannonade, and the terrible evidences of a bayonetcharge were written in the mangled corpses around.The fight had been maintained without any intermission from daybreaktill near nine o'clock that morning, and the slaughter on both sides wasdreadful. The mounds of fresh earth on every side told of the soldier'ssepulchre; and the unceasing tramp of the pioneers struck sadly upon theear, as the groans of the wounded blended with the funeral sounds aroundthem.In front were drawn up the dark legions of France,--massive columns ofinfantry, with dense bodies of artillery alternating along the line. They,too, occupied a gently rising ground, the valley between the two armiesbeing crossed half way by a little rivulet; and here, during the sultryheat of the morning, the troops on both sides met and mingled to quenchtheir thirst ere the trumpet again called them to the slaughter.In a small ravine near the centre of our line were drawn up Cotton'sbrigade, of whom the Fusiliers formed a part. Directly in front of thiswere Campbell's brigade, to the left of which, upon a gentle slope, thestaff were now assembled. Thither, accordingly, I bent my steps, and asI came up the little scarp, found myself among the generals of division,hastily summoned by Sir Arthur to deliberate upon a forward movement. Thecouncil lasted scarcely a quarter of an hour, and when I presented myselfto deliver my report, all the dispositions for the battle had been decidedupon, and the commander of the forces, seated upon the grass at hisbreakfast, looked by far the most unconcerned and uninterested man I hadseen that morning.He turned his head rapidly as I came up, and before the aide-de-camp couldannounce me, called out:--"Well, sir, what news of the reinforcements?""They cannot reach Talavera before to-morrow, sir.""Then, before that, we shall not want them. That will do, sir."So saying, he resumed his breakfast, and I retired, more than ever struckwith the surprising coolness of the man upon whom no disappointment seemedto have the slightest influence.I had scarcely rejoined my regiment, and was giving an account to mybrother officers of my journey, when an aide-de-camp came galloping at fullspeed down the line, and communicating with the several commanding officersas he passed.What might be the nature of the orders we could not guess at; for no wordto fall in followed, and yet it was evident something of importance wasat hand. Upon the hill where the staff were assembled no unusual bustleappeared; and we could see the bay cob of Sir Arthur still being led up anddown by the groom, with a dragoon's mantle thrown over him. The soldiers,overcome by the heat and fatigue of the morning, lay stretched around uponthe grass, and everything bespoke a period of rest and refreshment."We are going to advance, depend upon it!" said a young officer beside me;"the repulse of this morning has been a smart lesson to the French, and SirArthur won't leave them without impressing it upon them.""Hark, what's that?" cried Baker; "listen!"As he spoke, a strain of most delicious music came wafted across the plain.It was from the band of a French regiment, and mellowed by the distance,it seemed in the calm stillness of the morning air like something less ofearth than heaven. As we listened, the notes swelled upwards yet fuller;and one by one the different bands seemed to join, till at last the wholeair seemed full of the rich flood of melody.We could now perceive the stragglers were rapidly falling back, while highabove all other sounds the clanging notes of the trumpet were heard alongthe line. The hoarse drum now beat to arms; and soon after a brilliantstaff rode slowly from between two dense bodies of infantry, and advancingsome distance into the plain, seemed to reconnoitre us. A cloud of Polishcavalry, distinguished by their long lances and floating banners, loiteredin their rear.We had not time for further observation, when the drums on our side beat toarms, and the hoarse cry, "Fall in,--fall in there, lads!" resounded alongthe line.It was now one o'clock, and before half an hour the troops had resumed theposition of the morning, and stood silent and anxious spectators of thescene before them.Upon the table-land to the rear of the French position, we could descry thegorgeous tent of King Joseph, around which a large and splendidly-accoutredstaff were seen standing. Here, too, the bustle and excitement seemedconsiderable, for to this point the dark masses of the infantry seemedconverging from the extreme right; and here we could perceive the royalguards and the reserve now forming in column of attack.From the crest of the hill down to the very valley, the dark, dense ranksextended, the flanks protected by a powerful artillery and deep masses ofheavy cavalry. It was evident that the attack was not to commence on ourside, and the greatest and most intense anxiety pervaded us as to what partof our line was first to be assailed.Meanwhile Sir Arthur Wellesley, who from the height had been patientlyobserving the field of battle, despatched an aide-de-camp at full galloptowards Campbell's brigade, posted directly in advance of us. As he passedswiftly along, he called out, "You're in for it, Fourteenth; you'll have toopen the ball to-day."Scarcely were the words spoken, when a signal gun from the French boomedheavily through the still air. The last echo was growing fainter, and theheavy smoke breaking into mist, when the most deafening thunder ever myears heard came pealing around us; eighty pieces of artillery had openedupon us, sending a very tempest of balls upon our line, while midst thesmoke and dust we could see the light troops advancing at a run, followedby the broad and massive columns in all the terror and majesty of war."What a splendid attack! How gallantly they come on!" cried an old veteranofficer beside me, forgetting all rivalry in his noble admiration of ourenemy.The intervening space was soon passed, and the tirailleurs falling back asthe columns came on, the towering masses bore down upon Campbell's divisionwith a loud cry of defiance. Silently and steadily the English infantryawaited the attack, and returning the fire with one withering volley, wereordered to charge. Scarcely were the bayonets lowered, when the head of theadvancing column broke and fled, while Mackenzie's brigade, overlapping theflank, pushed boldly forward, and a scene of frightful carnage followed;for a moment a hand-to-hand combat was sustained, but the unbroken filesand impregnable bayonets of the English conquered, and the French fled,leaving six guns behind them.The gallant enemy were troops of tried and proved courage, and scarcely hadthey retreated when they again formed; but just as they prepared to comeforward, a tremendous shower of grape opened upon them from our batteries,while a cloud of Spanish horse assailed them in flank and nearly cut themin pieces.While this was passing on the right, a tremendous attack menaced the hillupon which our left was posted. Two powerful columns of French infantry,supported by some regiments of light cavalry, came steadily forward to theattack; Anson's brigade were ordered to charge.Away they went at top speed, but had not gone above a hundred yards whenthey were suddenly arrested by a deep chasm; here the German hussars pulledshort up, but the Twenty-third dashing impetuously forward; a scene ofterrific carnage ensued, men and horses rolling indiscriminately togetherunder a withering fire from the French squares. Even here, however, Britishvalor quailed not, for Major Francis Ponsonby, forming all who came up,rode boldly upon a brigade of French chasseurs in the rear. Victor, whofrom the first had watched the movement, at once despatched a lancerregiment against them, and then these brave fellows were absolutely cut toatoms, the few who escaped having passed through the French columns andreached Bassecour's Spanish division on the far right.During this time the hill was again assailed, and even more desperatelythan before; while Victor himself led on the fourth corps to an attack uponour right and centre.The Guards waited without flinching the impetuous rush of the advancingcolumns, and when at length within a short distance, dashed forward withthe bayonet, driving everything before them. The French fell back upontheir sustaining masses, and rallying in an instant, again came forward,supported by a tremendous fire from their batteries. The Guards drew back,and the German Legion, suddenly thrown into confusion, began to retirein disorder. This was the most critical moment of the day, for althoughsuccessful upon the extreme right and left of our line, our centre wasabsolutely broken. Just at this moment Gordon rode up to our brigade; hisface was pale, and his look flurried and excited."The Forty-eighth are coming; here they are,--support them, Fourteenth."These few words were all he spoke; and the next moment the measured treadof a column was heard behind us. On they came like one man, their compactand dense formation looking like some massive wall; wheeling by companies,they suffered the Guards and Germans to retire behind them, and then,reforming into line, they rushed forward with the bayonet. Our artilleryopened with a deafening thunder behind them, and then we were ordered tocharge.We came on at a trot; the Guards, who had now recovered their formation,cheered us as we proceeded. The smoke of the cannonade obscured everythinguntil we had advanced some distance, but just as we emerged beyond the lineof the gallant Forty-eighth, the splendid panorama of the battle-fieldbroke suddenly upon us."Charge, forward!" cried the hoarse voice of our colonel; and we were uponthem. The French infantry, already broken by the withering musketry of ourpeople, gave way before us, and unable to form a square, retired fightingbut in confusion, and with tremendous loss, to their position. One gloriouscheer, from left to right of our line, proclaimed the victory, while adeafening discharge of artillery from the French replied to this defiance,and the battle was over. Had the Spanish army been capable of a forwardmovement, our successes at this moment would have been much moreconsiderable; but they did not dare to change their position, and therepulse of our enemy was destined to be all our glory. The French, however,suffered much more severely than we did; and retiring during the night,fell back behind the Alberche, leaving us the victory and the battle-field.CHAPTER LXVI.NIGHT AFTER TALAVERA.The night which followed the battle was a sad one. Through the darkness,and under a fast-falling rain, the hours were spent in searching forour wounded comrades amidst the heap of slain upon the field; and thoglimmering of the lanterns, as they flickered far and near across the wideplain, bespoke the track of the fatigue parties in their mournful round;while the groans of the wounded rose amidst the silence with an accent ofheart-rending anguish; so true was it, as our great commander said, "Thereis nothing more sad than a victory, except a defeat."Around our bivouac fires, the feeling of sorrowful depression was alsoevident. We had gained a great victory, it was true: we had beaten thefar-famed legions of France upon a ground of their own choosing, led by themost celebrated of their marshals and under the eyes of the Emperor's ownbrother; but still we felt all the hazardous daring of our position, andhad no confidence whatever in the courage or discipline of our allies; andwe saw that in the very mle of the battle the efforts of the enemywere directed almost exclusively against our line, so confidently did theyundervalue the efforts of the Spanish troops. Morning broke at length, andscarcely was the heavy mist clearing away before the red sunlight, when thesounds of fife and drum were heard from a distant part of the field. Thenotes swelled or sank as the breeze rose or fell, and many a conjecture washazarded as to their meaning, for no object was well visible for more thana few hundred yards off; gradually, however, they grew nearer and nearer,and at length, as the air cleared, and the hazy vapor evaporated, thebright scarlet uniform of a British regiment was seen advancing at aquick-step.As they came nearer, the well-known march of the gallant 43d was recognizedby some of our people, and immediately the rumor fled like lightning: "Itis Crawfurd's brigade!" and so it was; the noble fellow had marched hisdivision the unparalleled distance of sixty English miles in twenty-sevenhours. Over a burning sandy soil, exposed to a raging sun, without rations,almost without water, these gallant troops pressed on in the unwearied hopeof sharing the glory of the battle-field. One tremendous cheer welcomed thehead of the column as they marched past, and continued till the last filehad deployed before us.As these splendid regiments moved by we could not help feeling whatsignal service they might have rendered us but a few hours before. Theirsoldier-like bearing, their high and effective state of discipline, theirwell-known reputation, were in every mouth; and I scarcely think that anycorps who stood the brunt of the mighty battle were the subject of moreencomium than the brave fellows who had just joined us.The mournful duties of the night were soon forgotten in the gay and buoyantsounds on every side. Congratulations, shaking of hands, kind inquiries,went round; and as we looked to the hilly ground where so lately weredrawn up in battle array the dark columns of our enemy, and where not onesentinel now remained, the proud feeling of our victory came home to ourhearts with the ever-thrilling thought, "What will they say at home?"I was standing amidst a group of my brother officers, when I received anorder from the colonel to ride down to Talavera for the return of ourwounded, as the arrival of the commander-in-chief was momentarily lookedfor. I threw myself upon my horse, and setting out at a brisk pace, soonreached the gates.On entering the town, I was obliged to dismount and proceed on foot. Thestreets were completely filled with people, treading their way amongwagons, forage carts, and sick-litters. Here was a booth filled with allimaginable wares for sale; there was a temporary gin-shop establishedbeneath a broken baggage-wagon; here might be seen a merry party throwingdice for a turkey or a kid; there, a wounded man, with bloodless cheek andtottering step, inquiring the road to the hospital. The accents ofagony mingled with the drunken chorus, and the sharp crack of theprovost-marshal's whip was heard above the boisterous revelling of thedebauchee. All was confusion, bustle, and excitement. The staff officer,with his flowing plume and glittering epaulettes, wended his way on foot,amidst the din and bustle, unnoticed and uncared for; while the littledrummer amused an admiring audience of simple country-folk by some wondroustale of the great victory.My passage through this dense mass was necessarily a slow one. No one madeway for another; discipline for the time was at an end, and with it allrespect for rank or position. It was what nothing of mere vicissitude inthe fortune of war can equal,--the wild orgies of an army the day after abattle.On turning the corner of a narrow street, my attention was attracted by acrowd which, gathered round a small fountain, seemed, as well as I couldperceive, to witness some proceeding with a more than ordinary interest.Exclamations in Portuguese, expressive of surprise and admiration, woremingled with English oaths and Irish ejaculations, while high above allrose other sounds,--the cries of some one in pain and suffering; forcing myway through the dense group, I at length reached the interior of the crowdwhen, to my astonishment, I perceived a short, fat, punchy-looking man,stripped of his coat and waist-coat, and with his shirt-sleeves rolledup to his shoulder, busily employed in operating upon a wounded soldier.Amputation knives, tourniquets, bandages, and all other imaginableinstruments for giving or alleviating torture were strewed about him, andfrom the arrangement and preparation, it was clear that he had pitched uponthis spot as an hospital for his patients. While he continued to performhis functions with a singular speed and dexterity, he never for a momentceased a running fire of small talk, now addressed to the patient inparticular, now to the crowd at large, sometimes a soliloquy to himself,and not unfrequently, abstractedly, upon things in general. These littlespecimens of oratory, delivered in such a place at such a time, and, notleast of all, in the richest imaginable Cork accent, were sufficient toarrest my steps, and I stopped for some time to observe him.The patient, who was a large, powerfully-built fellow, had been woundedin both legs by the explosion of a shell, but yet not so severely as torequire amputation."Does that plaze you, then?" said the doctor, as he applied some powerfulcaustic to a wounded vessel; "there's no satisfying the like of you. Quitewarm and comfortable ye'll be this morning after that. I saw the same shellcoming, and I called out to Maurice Blake, 'By your leave, Maurice, letthat fellow pass, he's in a hurry!' and faith, I said to myself, 'there'smore where you came from,--you're not an only child, and I never liked thefamily.' What are ye grinning for, ye brown thieves?" This was addressedto the Portuguese. "There, now, keep the limb quiet and easy. Upon myconscience, if that shell fell into ould Lundy Foot's shop this morning,there'd be plenty of sneezing in Sacksville Street. Who's next?" said he,looking round with an expression that seemed to threaten that if no woundedman was ready he was quite prepared to carve out a patient for himself. Notexactly relishing the invitation in the searching that accompanied it,I backed my way through the crowd, and continued my path towards thehospital.Here the scene which presented itself was shocking beyondbelief,--frightful and ghastly wounds from shells and cannon-shot were seenon all sides, every imaginable species of suffering that man is capable ofwas presented to view; while amidst the dead and dying, operations the mostpainful were proceeding with a haste and bustle that plainly showed howmany more waited their turn for similar offices. The stairs were blockedup with fresh arrivals of wounded men, and even upon the corridors andlanding-places the sick were strewn on all sides.I hurried to that part of the building where my own people were, and soonlearned that our loss was confined to about fourteen wounded; five of themwere officers. But fortunately, we lost not a man of our gallant fellows,and Talavera brought us no mourning for a comrade to damp the exultation wefelt in our victory.CHAPTER LXVII.THE OUTPOST.During the three days which succeeded the battle, all things remained asthey were before. The enemy had gradually withdrawn all his forces, and ourmost advanced pickets never came in sight of a French detachment. Still,although we had gained a great victory, our situation was anything butflattering. The most strenuous exertions of the commissariat were barelysufficient to provision the troops; and we had even already but too muchexperience of how little trust or reliance could be reposed in the mostlavish promises of our allies. It was true, our spirits failed us not;but it was rather from an implicit and never-failing confidence in theresources of our great leader, than that any among us could see his waythrough the dense cloud of difficulty and danger that seemed to envelop uson every side.To add to the pressing emergency of our position, we learned on the eveningof the 31st that Soult was advancing from the north, and at the headof fourteen thousand chosen troops in full march upon Placentia; thusthreatening our rear, at the very moment too, when any further advance wasevidently impossible.On the morning of the 1st of August, I was ordered, with a small party, topush forward in the direction of the Alberche, upon the left bank of whichit was reported that the French were again concentrating their forces, andif possible, to obtain information of their future movements. Meanwhile thearmy was about to fall back upon Oropesa, there to await Soult's advance,and if necessary, to give him battle; Cuesta engaging with his Spaniardsto secure Talavera, with its stores and hospitals, against any presentmovement from Victor.After a hearty breakfast, and a kind "Good-by!" from my brother officers,I set out. My road along the Tagus, for several miles of the way, was anarrow path scarped from the rocky ledge of the river, shaded by rich oliveplantations that throw a friendly shade over us during the noonday heat.We travelled along silently, sparing our cattle from time to time, butendeavoring ere nightfall to reach Torrijos, in which village we had heardseveral French soldiers were in hospital. Our information leading us tobelieve them very inadequately guarded, we hoped to make some prisoners,from whom the information we sought could in all likelihood be obtained.More than once during the day our road was crossed by parties similar toour own, sent forward to reconnoitre; and towards evening a party of the23d Light Dragoons, returning towards Talavera, informed us that the Frenchhad retired from Torrijos, which was now occupied by an English detachmentunder my old friend O'Shaughnessy.I need not say with what pleasure I heard this piece of news, and eagerlypressed forward, preferring the warm shelter and hospitable board themajor was certain of possessing, to the cold blast and dripping grass ofa bivouac. Night, however, fell fast; darkness, without an interveningtwilight, set in, and we lost our way. A bleak table-land with here andthere a stunted, leafless tree was all that we could discern by the palelight of a new moon. An apparently interminable heath uncrossed by path orfoot-track was before us, and our jaded cattle seemed to feel the drearyuncertainty of the prospect as sensitively as ourselves,--stumbling andover-reaching at every step.Cursing my ill-luck for such a misadventure, and once more picturing to mymind the bright blazing hearth and smoking supper I had hoped to partakeof, I called a halt, and prepared to pass the night. My decision washastened by finding myself suddenly in a little grove of pine-trees whoseshelter was not to be despised; besides that, our bivouac fires were nowsure of being supplied.It was fortunate the night was fine, though dark. In a calm, stillatmosphere, when not a leaf moved nor a branch stirred, we picketed ourtired horses, and shaking out their forage, heaped up in the midst ablazing fire of the fir-tree. Our humble supper was produced, and even withthe still lingering revery of the major and his happier destiny, I began tofeel comfortable.My troopers, who probably had not been flattering their imaginations withsuch gourmand reflections and views, sat happily around their cheerfulblaze, chatting over the great battle they had so lately witnessed, andmingling their stories of some comrade's prowess with sorrows for the deadand proud hopes for the future. In the midst, upon his knees besidethe flame, was Mike, disputing, detailing, guessing, and occasionallyinventing,--all his arguments only tending to one view of the late victory:"That it was the Lord's mercy the most of the 48th was Irish, or wewouldn't be sitting there now!"Despite Mr. Free's conversational gifts, however, his audience one by onedropped off in sleep, leaving him sole monarch of the watch-fire, and--whathe thought more of--a small brass kettle nearly full of brandy-and-water.This latter, I perceived, he produced when all was tranquil, and seemed,as he cast a furtive glance around, to assure himself that he was the onlycompany present.Lying some yards off, I watched him for about an hour, as he sat rubbinghis hands before the blaze, or lifting the little vessel to his lips; hisdroll features ever and anon seeming acted upon by some passing dreamof former devilment, as he smiled and muttered some sentences in anunder-voice. Sleep at length overpowered me; but my last waking thoughtswere haunted with a singular ditty by which Mike accompanied himself ashe kept burnishing the buttons of my jacket before the fire, now and theninterrupting the melody by a recourse to the copper."Well, well; you're clean enough now, and sure it's little good brighteningyou up, when you'll be as bad to-morrow. Like his father's son, devil a liein it! Nothing would serve him but his best blue jacket to fight in, as ifthe French was particular what they killed us in. Pleasant trade, upon myconscience! Well, never mind. That's beautiful sperets, anyhow. Yourhealth, Mickey Free; it's yourself that stands to me."It's little for glory I care;Sure ambition is only a fable;I'd as soon be myself as Lord Mayor,With lashings of drink on the table.I like to lie down in the sunAnd drame, when my faytures is scorchin'That when I'm too ould for more fun,Why, I'll marry a wife with a fortune."And in winter, with bacon and eggs,And a place, at the turf-fire basking,Sip my punch as I roasted my legs,Oh, the devil a more I'd be asking!For I haven't a janius for work,--It was never the gift of the Bradies,--But I'd make a most illigant Turk,For I'm fond of tobacco and ladies."This confounded refrain kept ringing through my dream, and "tobacco andladies" mingled with my thoughts of storm and battle-field long after theirvery gifted author had composed himself to slumber.Sleep, and sound sleep, came at length, and many hours elapsed ere I awoke.When I did so, my fire was reduced to its last embers. Mike, like theothers, had sunk in slumber, and midst the gray dawn that precedes themorning, I could just perceive the dark shadows of my troopers as they layin groups around.The fatigues of the previous day had so completely overcome me, that it waswith difficulty I could arouse myself so far as to heap fresh logs upon thefire. This I did with my eyes half closed, and in that listless, dreamystate which seems the twilight of sleep.I managed so much, however, and was returning to my couch beneath a tree,when suddenly an object presented itself to my eyes that absolutely rootedme to the spot. At about twenty or thirty yards distant, where but themoment before the long line of horizon terminated the view, there now stooda huge figure of some ten or twelve feet in height,--two heads, whichsurmounted this colossal personage, moved alternately from side to side,while several arms waved loosely to and fro in the most strange and uncouthmanner. My first impression was that a dream had conjured up this distortedimage; but when I had assured myself by repeated pinchings and shakingsthat I was really awake, still it remained there. I was never much givento believe in ghosts; but even had I been so, this strange apparitionmust have puzzled me as much as ever, for it could not have been therepresentative of anything I ever heard of before.A vague suspicion that some French trickery was concerned, induced me tochallenge it in French; so, without advancing a step, I halloed out, "Quiva l?"My voice aroused a sleeping soldier, who, springing up beside me, had hiscarbine at the cock; while, equally thunderstruck with myself, he gazed atthe monster."Qui va l?" shouted I again, and no answer was returned, when suddenlythe huge object wheeled rapidly around, and without waiting for any furtherparley, made for the thicket.The tramp of a horse's feet now assured me as to the nature of at leastpart of the spectacle, when click went the trigger behind me, and thetrooper's ball rushed whistling through the brushwood. In a moment thewhole party were up and stirring."This way, lads!" cried I, as drawing my sabre, I dashed into the pinewood.For a few moments all was dark as midnight; but as we proceeded farther, wecame out upon a little open space which commanded the plain beneath for agreat extent."There it goes!" said one of the men, pointing to a narrow, beaten path,in which the tall figure moved at a slow and stately pace, while still thesame wild gestures of heads and limbs continued."Don't fire, men! don't fire!" I cried, "but follow me," as I set forwardas hard as I could.As we neared it, the frantic gesticulations grew more and more remarkable,while some stray words, which we half caught, sounded like English in ourears. We were now within pistol-shot distance, when suddenly the horse--forthat much at least we were assured of--stumbled and fell forward,precipitating the remainder of the object headlong into the road.In a second we were upon the spot, when the first sounds which greeted mewere the following, uttered in an accent by no means new to me:--"Oh, blessed Virgin! Wasn't it yourself that threw me in the mud, or mynose was done for? Shaugh, Shaugh, my boy, since we are taken, tip them theblarney, and say we're generals of division!"I need not say with what a burst of laughter I received this very originaldeclaration."I ought to know that laugh," cried a voice I at once knew to be my friendO'Shaughnessy's. "Are you Charles O'Malley, by any chance in life?""The same, Major, and delighted to meet you; though, faith, we were neargiving you a rather warm reception. What, in the Devil's name, did yourepresent, just now?""Ask Maurice, there, bad luck to him. I wish the Devil had him when hepersuaded me into it.""Introduce me to your friend," replied the other, rubbing his shins as hespoke. "Mr. O'Mealey,"--so he called me,--"I think. Happy to meet you; mymother was a Ryan of Killdooley, married to a first cousin of your father'sbefore she took Mr. Quill, my respected progenitor. I'm Dr. Quill of the48th, more commonly called Maurice Quill. Tear and ages! how sore my backis! It was all the fault of the baste, Mr. O'Mealey. We set out in searchof you this morning, to bring you back with us to Torrijos, but we fell inwith a very pleasant funeral at Barcaventer, and joined them. They invitedus, I may say, to spend the day; and a very jovial day it was. I was thechief mourner, and carried a very big candle through the village, inconsideration of as fine a meat-pie, and as much lush as my grief permittedme to indulge in afterwards. But, my dear sir, when it was all finished, wefound ourselves nine miles from our quarters; and as neither of us were ina very befitting condition for pedestrian exercise, we stole one of theleaders out of the hearse,--velvet, plumes, and all,--and set off home."When we came upon your party we were not over clear whether you wereEnglish, Portuguese, or French, and that was the reason I called out toyou, 'God save all here!' in Irish. Your polite answer was a shot, whichstruck the old horse in the knee, and although we wheeled about indouble-quick, we never could get him out of his professional habits on theroad. He had a strong notion he was engaged in another funeral,--as he wasvery likely to be,--and the devil a bit faster than a dead march could weget him to, with all our thrashing. Orderly time for men in a hurry, with awhole platoon blazing away behind them! But long life to the cavalry, theynever hit anything!"While he continued to run on in this manner, we reached our watch-fire,when what was my surprise to discover, in my newly-made acquaintance, theworthy doctor I had seen a day or two before operating at the fountain atTalavera."Well, Mr. O'Mealey," said he, as he seated himself before the blaze, "Whatis the state of the larder? Anything savory,--anything drink-inspiring tobe had?""I fear, Doctor, my fare is of the very humblest; still--""What are the fluids, Charley?" cried the major; "the cruel performance Ihave been enacting on that cursed beast has left me in a fever.""This was a pigeon-pie, formerly," said Dr. Quill, investigating the ruinedwalls of a pasty; "and,--but come, here's a duck; and if my nose deceiveme not, a very tolerable ham. Peter--Larry--Patsy--What's the name of yourfamiliar there?""Mickey--Mickey Free.""Mickey Free, then; come here, avick! Devise a little drink, my son,--noneof the weakest--no lemon---hot! You understand, hot! That chap has an eyefor punch; there's no mistaking an Irish fellow, Nature has endowed themrichly,--fine features and a beautiful absorbent system! That's the gift!Just look at him, blowing up the fire,--isn't he a picture? Well, O'Mealey,I was fretting that we hadn't you up at Torrijos; we were enjoying lifevery respectably,--we established a little system of small tithes uponfowl, sheep, pigs' heads, and wine skins that throve remarkably for thetime. Here's the lush! Put it down there, Mickey, in the middle; that'sright. Your health, Shaugh. O'Mealey, here's a troop to you; and in themean time I'll give you a chant:--'Come, ye jovial souls, don't over the bowl be sleeping,Nor let the grog go round like a cripple creeping;If your care comes, up, in the liquor sink it,Pass along the lush, I'm the boy can drink it.Isn't that so, Mrs. Mary Callaghan?Isn't that so, Mrs. Mary Callaghan?'"Shaugh, my hearty, this begins to feel comfortable.""Your man, O'Mealey, has a most judicious notion of punch for a smallparty; and though one has prejudices about a table, chairs, and that sortof thing, take my word for it, it's better than fighting the French, anyday.""Well, Charley, it certainly did look quite awkward enough the other daytowards three o'clock, when the Legion fell back before that French column,and broke the Guards behind them.""Yes, you're quite right; but I think every one felt that the confusion wasbut momentary,--the gallant Forty-eighth was up in an instant.""Faith, I can answer for their alacrity!" said the doctor "I was making myway to the rear with all convenient despatch, when an aide-de-camp calledout,--"'Cavalry coming! Take care, Forty-eighth!'"'Left face, wheel! Fall in there, fall in there!' I heard on every side,and soon found myself standing in a square, with Sir Arthur himself andHill and the rest of them all around me."'Steady, men! Steady, now!' said Hill, as he rode around the ranks, whilewe saw an awful column of cuirassiers forming on the rising ground to ourleft."'Here they come!' said Sir Arthur, as the French came powdering along,making the very earth tremble beneath them."My first thought was, 'The devils are mad, and they'll ride down into us,before they know they're kilt!' And sure enough, smash into our first rankthey pitched, sabring and cutting all before them; when at last the word'Fire!' was given, and the whole head of the column broke like a shell, androlled horse over man on the earth."'Very well done! very well, indeed!' said Sir Arthur, turning as coollyround to me as if he was asking for more gravy."'Mighty well done!' said I, in reply; and resolving not to be outdone incoolness, I pulled out my snuff-box and offered him a pinch, saying, 'Thereal thing, Sir Arthur; our own countryman,--blackguard.'"He gave a little grim kind of a smile, took a pinch, and then calledout,--"'Let Sherbroke advance!' while turning again towards me, he said, 'Whereare your people, Colonel?'"'Colonel!' thought I; 'is it possible he's going to promote me?' Butbefore I could answer, he was talking to another. Meanwhile Hill came up,and looking at me steadily, burst out with,--"'Why the devil are you here, sir? Why ain't you at the rear?'"'Upon my conscience,' said I, 'that's the very thing I'm puzzling myselfabout this minute! But if you think it's pride in me, you're greatlymistaken, for I'd rather the greatest scoundrel in Dublin was kicking medown Sackville Street, than be here now!'"You'd think it was fun I was making, if you heard how they all laughed,Hill and Cameron and the others louder than any."'Who is he?' said Sir Arthur, quickly."'Dr. Quill, surgeon of the Thirty-third, where I exchanged, to be near mybrother, sir, in the Thirty-fourth.'"'A doctor,--a surgeon! That fellow a surgeon! Damn him, I took him forColonel Grosvenor! I say, Gordon, these medical officers must be docked oftheir fine feathers, there's no knowing them from the staff,--look to thatin the next general order.'"And sure enough they left us bare and naked the next morning; and if theFrench sharpshooters pick us down now, devil mend them for wasting powder,for if they look in the orderly books, they'll find their mistake.""Ah, Maurice, Maurice!" said Shaugh, with a sigh, "you'll neverimprove,--you'll never improve!""Why the devil would I?" said he. "Ain't I at the top of myprofession--full surgeon--with nothing to expect, nothing to hope for? Oh,if I had only remained in the light company, what wouldn't I be now?""Then you were not always a doctor?" said I."Upon my conscience, I wasn't," said he. "When Shaugh knew me first, I wasthe Adonis of the Roscommon militia, with more heiresses in my list thanany man in the regiment; but Shaugh and myself were always unlucky.""Poor Mrs. Rogers!" said the major, pathetically, drinking off his glassand heaving a profound sigh."Ah, the darling!" said the doctor. "If it wasn't for a jug of punch thatlay on the hall table, our fortune in life would be very different.""True for you, Maurice!" quoth O'Shaughnessy."I should like much to hear that story," said I, pushing the jug brisklyround."He'll tell it you," said O'Shaughnessy, lighting his cigar, and leaningpensively back against a tree,--"he'll tell it you.""I will, with pleasure," said Maurice. "Let Mr. Free, meantime, amusehimself with the punch-bowl, and I'll relate it."CHAPTER I.
THE DOCTOR'S TALE.[1]
"It is now some fifteen years since--if it wasn't for O'Shaughnessy's
wrinkles, I could not believe it five--we were quartered in Loughrea. There
were, besides our regiment, the Fiftieth and the Seventy-third, and a troop
or two of horse artillery, and the whole town was literally a barrack, and
as you may suppose, the pleasantest place imaginable. All the young ladies,
and indeed all those that had got their brevet some years before, came
flocking into the town, not knowing but the Devil might persuade a raw
ensign or so to marry some of them.
"Such dinner parties, such routs and balls, never were heard of west of
Athlone. The gayeties were incessant; and if good feeding, plenty of
claret, short whist, country dances, and kissing could have done the thing,
there wouldn't have been a bachelor with a red coat for six miles around.
[Footnote 1: I cannot permit the reader to fall into the same blunder,
with regard to the worthy "Maurice," as my friend Charles O'Malley has
done. It is only fair to state that the doctor in the following tale was
hoaxing the "dragoon." A braver and a better fellow than Quill never
existed, equally beloved by his brother officers, as delighted in for his
convivial talents. His favorite amusement was to invent some story or
adventure in which, mixing up his own name with that of some friend or
companion, the veracity of the whole was never questioned. Of this nature
was the pedigree he devised in the last chapter of Vol. I. to impose upon
O'Malley, who believed implicitly all he told him.]
"You know the west, O'Mealey, so I needn't tell you what the Galway girls
are like: fine, hearty, free-and-easy, talking, laughing devils, but as
deep and 'cute as a Master in Chancery; ready for any fun or merriment, but
always keeping a sly look-out for a proposal or a tender acknowledgment,
which--what between the heat of a ball-room, whiskey negus, white satin
shoes, and a quarrel with your guardian--it's ten to one you fall into
before you're a week in the same town with them.
"As for the men, I don't admire them so much: pleasant and cheerful enough
when they're handicapping the coat off your back, and your new tilbury for
a spavined pony and a cotton umbrella, but regular devils if you come to
cross them the least in life; nothing but ten paces, three shots apiece, to
begin and end with something like Roger de Coverley, when every one has a
pull at his neighbor. I'm not saying they're not agreeable, well-informed,
and mild in their habits; but they lean overmuch to corduroys and coroners'
inquests for one's taste farther south. However, they're a fine people,
take them all in all; and if they were not interfered with, and their
national customs invaded with road-making, petty-sessions, grand-jury laws,
and a stray commission now and then, they are capable of great things, and
would astonish the world.
"But as I was saying, we were ordered to Loughrea after being fifteen
months in detachments about Birr, Tullamore, Kilbeggan, and all that
country; the change was indeed a delightful one, and we soon found
ourselves the centre of the most marked and determined civilities. I told
you they were wise people in the west; this was their calculation: the
line--ours was the Roscommon militia--are here to-day, there to-morrow;
they may be flirting in Tralee this week, and fighting on the Tagus the
next; not that there was any fighting there in those times, but then there
was always Nova Scotia and St. John's, and a hundred other places that a
Galway young lady knew nothing about, except that people never came back
from them. Now, what good, what use was there in falling in love with them?
Mere transitory and passing pleasure that was. But as for us: there we
were; if not in Kilkenny we were in Cork. Safe out and come again; no
getting away under pretence of foreign service; no excuse for not marrying
by any cruel pictures of the colonies, where they make spatch-cocks of the
officers' wives and scrape their infant families to death with a small
tooth-comb. In a word, my dear O'Mealey, we were at a high premium; and
even O'Shaughnessy, with his red head and the legs you see, had his
admirers. There now, don't be angry, Dan; the men, at least, were mighty
partial to you.
"Loughrea, if it was a pleasant, was a very expensive place. White gloves
and car hire,--there wasn't a chaise in the town,--short whist, too (God
forgive me if I wrong them, but I wonder were they honest), cost money; and
as our popularity rose, our purses fell; till at length, when the one was
at the flood, the other was something very like low water.
"Now, the Roscommon was a beautiful corps; no petty jealousies, no little
squabbling among the officers, no small spleen between the major's wife
and the paymaster's sister,--all was amiable, kind, brotherly, and
affectionate. To proceed, I need only mention one fine trait of them,--no
man ever refused to indorse a brother officer's bill. To think of asking
the amount or even the date would be taken personally; and thus we went on
mutually aiding and assisting each other,--the colonel drawing on me, I
on the major, the senior captain on the surgeon, and so on, a regular
cross-fire of 'promises to pay,' all stamped and regular.
"Not but the system had its inconveniences; for sometimes an obstinate
tailor or bootmaker would make a row for his money, and then we'd be
obliged to get up a little quarrel between the drawer and the acceptor of
the bill; they couldn't speak for some days, and a mutual friend to both
would tell the creditor that the slightest imprudence on his part would
lead to bloodshed; 'and the Lord help him! if there was a duel, he'd be
proved the whole cause of it.' This and twenty other plans were employed;
and finally, the matter would be left to arbitration among our brother
officers, and I need not say, they behaved like trumps. But notwithstanding
all this, we were frequently hard pressed for cash; as the colonel said,
'It's a mighty expensive corps.' Our dress was costly; not that it had much
lace and gold on it, but that, what between falling on the road at night,
shindies at mess, and other devilment, a coat lasted no time. Wine, too,
was heavy on us; for though we often changed our wine merchant, and rarely
paid him, there was an awful consumption at the mess!
"Now, what I have mentioned may prepare you for the fact that before
we were eight weeks in garrison, Shaugh and myself, upon an accurate
calculation of our conjoint finances, discovered that except some vague
promises of discounting here and there through the town, and seven and
fourpence in specie, we were innocent of any pecuniary treasures. This was
embarrassing; we had both embarked in several small schemes of pleasurable
amusement, had a couple of hunters each, a tandem, and a running account--I
think it galloped--at every shop in the town.
"Let me pause for a moment here, O'Mealey, while I moralize a little in a
strain I hope may benefit you. Have you ever considered--of course you have
not, you're too young and unreflecting--how beautifully every climate
and every soil possesses some one antidote or another to its own noxious
influences? The tropics have their succulent and juicy fruits, cooling and
refreshing; the northern latitudes have their beasts with fur and warm skin
to keep out the frost-bites; and so it is in Ireland. Nowhere on the face
of the habitable globe does a man contract such habits of small debt, and
nowhere, I'll be sworn, can he so easily get out of any scrape concerning
them. They have their tigers in the east, their antelopes in the south,
their white bears in Norway, their buffaloes in America; but we have an
animal in Ireland that beats them all hollow,--a country attorney!
"Now, let me introduce you to Mr. Matthew Donevan. Mat, as he was
familiarly called by his numerous acquaintances, was a short, florid, rosy
little gentleman of some four or five-and-forty, with a well-curled wig of
the fairest imaginable auburn, the gentle wave of the front locks, which
played in infantine loveliness upon his little bullet forehead, contrasting
strongly enough with a cunning leer of his eye, and a certain nisi prius
laugh that however it might please a client, rarely brought pleasurable
feelings to his opponent in a cause.
"Mat was a character in his way; deep, double, and tricky in everything
that concerned his profession, he affected the gay fellow,--liked a jolly
dinner at Brown's Hotel, would go twenty miles to see a steeple-chase and
a coursing match, bet with any one when the odds were strong in his favor,
with an easy indifference about money that made him seem, when winning,
rather the victim of good luck than anything else. As he kept a rather
pleasant bachelor's house, and liked the military much, we soon became
acquainted. Upon him, therefore, for reasons I can't explain, both our
hopes reposed; and Shaugh and myself at once agreed that if Mat could not
assist us in our distresses, the case was a bad one.
"A pretty little epistle was accordingly concocted, inviting the worthy
attorney to a small dinner at five o'clock the next day, intimating that we
were to be perfectly alone, and had a little business to discuss. True to
the hour, Mat was there; and as if instantly guessing that ours was no
regular party of pleasure, his look, dress, and manner were all in keeping
with the occasion,--quiet, subdued, and searching.
"When the claret had been superseded by the whiskey, and the confidential
hours were approaching, by an adroit allusion to some heavy wager then
pending, we brought our finances upon the tapis. The thing was done
beautifully,--an easy adagio movement, no violent transition; but hang me
if old Mat didn't catch the matter at once.
"'Oh, it's there ye are, Captain!' said he, with his peculiar grin.
'Two-and-sixpence in the pound, and no assets.'
"'The last is nearer the mark, my old boy,' said Shaugh, blurting out the
whole truth at once. The wily attorney finished his tumbler slowly, as
if giving himself time for reflection, and then, smacking his lips in a
preparatory manner, took a quick survey of the room with his piercing green
eye.
"'A very sweet mare of yours that little mouse-colored one is, with the dip
in the back; and she has a trifling curb--may be it's a spavin, indeed--in
the near hind-leg. You gave five-and-twenty for her, now, I'll be bound?'
"'Sixty guineas, as sure as my name's Dan,' said Shaugh, not at all pleased
at the value put upon his hackney; 'and as to spavin and curb, I'll wager
double the sum she has neither the slightest trace of one nor the other.'
"'I'll not take the bet,' said Mat, dryly. 'Money's scarce in these parts.'
"This hit silenced us both; and our friend continued,--
"'Then there's the bay horse,--a great strapping, leggy beast he is for a
tilbury; and the hunters, worth nothing here; they don't know this country.
Them's neat pistols; and the tilbury is not bad--'
"'Confound you!' said I, losing all patience; 'we didn't ask you here to
appraise our movables. We want to raise the wind without that.'
"'I see, I perceive,' said Mat, taking a pinch of snuff very leisurely as
he spoke,--'I see. Well, that is difficult, very difficult just now. I've
mortgaged every acre of ground in the two counties near us, and a sixpence
more is not to be had that way. Are you lucky at the races?'
"'Never win a sixpence.'
"'What can you do at whist?'
"'Revoke, and get cursed by my partner; devil a more!'
"'That's mighty bad, for otherwise, we might arrange something for you.
Well, I only see one thing for it; you must marry. A wife with some money
will get you out of your present difficulties; and we'll manage that easily
enough.'
"'Come, Dan,' said I, for Shaugh was dropping asleep; 'cheer up, old
fellow. Donevan has found the way to pull us through our misfortunes. A
girl with forty thousand pounds, the best cock shooting in Ireland, an old
family, a capital cellar, all await ye,--rouse up, there!'
"'I'm convanient,' said Shaugh, with a look intended to be knowing, but
really very tipsy.
"'I didn't say much for her personal attractions, Captain,' said Mat; 'nor,
indeed, did I specify the exact sum; but Mrs. Rogers Dooley, of Clonakilty,
might be a princess--'
"'And so she shall be, Mat; the O'Shaughnessys were Kings of Ennis in the
time of Nero and I'm only waiting for a trifle of money to revive the
title. What's her name?'
"'Mrs. Rogers Dooley.'
"'Here's her health, and long life to her,--
'And may the Devil cut the toes
Of all her foes,
That we may know them by their limping.'
"This benevolent wish uttered, Dan fell flat upon the hearth-rug, and was
soon sound asleep. I must hasten on; so need only say that, before we
parted that night, Mat and myself had finished the half-gallon bottle of
Loughrea whiskey, and concluded a treaty for the hand and fortune of Mrs.
Rogers Dooley. He being guaranteed a very handsome percentage on the
property, and the lady being reserved for choice between Dan and myself,
which, however, I was determined should fall upon my more fortunate friend.
"The first object which presented itself to my aching senses the following
morning was a very spacious card of invitation from Mr. Jonas Malone,
requesting me to favor him with the seductions of my society the next
evening to a ball; at the bottom of which, in Mr. Donevan's hand, I read,--
"'Don't fail; you know who is to be there. I've not been idle since I saw
you. Would the captain take twenty-five for the mare?'
"'So far so good,' thought I, as entering O'Shaughnessy's quarters, I
discovered him endeavoring to spell out his card, which, however, had no
postscript. We soon agreed that Mat should have his price; so sending a
polite answer to the invitation, we despatched a still more civil note to
the attorney, and begged of him, as a weak mark of esteem, to accept the
mouse-colored mare as a present."
Here O'Shaughnessy sighed deeply, and even seemed affected by the souvenir.
"Come, Dan, we did it all for the best. Oh, O'Mealey, he was a cunning
fellow; but no matter. We went to the ball, and to be sure, it was a great
sight. Two hundred and fifty souls, where there was not good room for the
odd fifty; such laughing, such squeezing, such pressing of hands and waists
in the staircase, and then such a row and riot at the top,--four fiddles, a
key bugle, and a bagpipe, playing 'Haste to the wedding,' amidst the crash
of refreshment-trays, the tramp of feet, and the sounds of merriment on all
sides!
"It's only in Ireland, after all, people have fun. Old and young, merry and
morose, the gay and cross-grained, are crammed into a lively country-dance;
and ill-matched, ill-suited, go jigging away together to the blast of a bad
band, till their heads, half turned by the noise, the heat, the novelty,
and the hubbub, they all get as tipsy as if they were really deep in
liquor.
"Then there is that particularly free-and-easy tone in every one about.
Here go a couple capering daintily out of the ball-room to take a little
fresh air on the stairs, where every step has its own separate flirtation
party; there, a riotous old gentleman, with a boarding-school girl for
his partner, has plunged smack into a party at loo, upsetting cards and
counters, and drawing down curses innumerable. Here are a merry knot round
the refreshments, and well they may be; for the negus is strong punch,
and the biscuit is tipsy cake,--and all this with a running fire of good
stories, jokes, and witticisms on all sides, in the laughter for which even
the droll-looking servants join as heartily as the rest.
"We were not long in finding out Mrs. Rogers, who sat in the middle of a
very high sofa, with her feet just touching the floor. She was short,
fat, wore her hair in a crop, had a species of shining yellow skin, and a
turned-up nose, all of which were by no means prepossessing. Shaugh and
myself were too hard-up to be particular, and so we invited her to dance
alternately for two consecutive hours, plying her assiduously with negus
during the lulls in the music.
"Supper was at last announced, and enabled us to recruit for new efforts;
and so after an awful consumption of fowl, pigeon-pie, ham, and brandy
cherries, Mrs. Rogers brightened up considerably, and professed her
willingness to join the dancers. As for us, partly from exhaustion, partly
to stimulate our energies, and in some degree to drown reflection, we drank
deep, and when we reached the drawing-room, not only the agreeable guests
themselves, but even the furniture, the venerable chairs, and the stiff old
sofa seemed performing 'Sir Roger de Coverley.' How we conducted ourselves
till five in the morning, let our cramps confess; for we were both
bed-ridden for ten days after. However, at last Mrs. Rogers gave in, and
reclining gracefully upon a window-seat, pronounced it a most elegant
party, and asked me to look for her shawl. While I perambulated the
staircase with her bonnet on my head, and more wearing apparel than would
stock a magazine, Shaugh was roaring himself hoarse in the street, calling
Mrs. Rogers' coach.
"'Sure, Captain,' said the lady, with a tender leer, 'it's only a chair.'
"'And here it is,' said I, surveying a very portly-looking old sedan, newly
painted and varnished, that blocked up half the hall.
"'You'll catch cold, my angel,' said Shaugh, in a whisper, for he was
coming it very strong by this; 'get into the chair. Maurice, can't you find
those fellows?' said he to me, for the chairmen had gone down-stairs, and
were making very merry among the servants.
"'She's fast now,' said I, shutting the door to. 'Let us do the gallant
thing, and carry her home ourselves.' Shaugh thought this a great notion;
and in a minute we mounted the poles and sallied forth, amidst a great
chorus of laughing from all the footmen, maids, and teaboys that filled the
passage.
"'The big house, with the bow-window and the pillars, Captain,' said a
fellow, as we issued upon our journey. "'I know it,' said I. 'Turn to the
left after you pass the square.'
"'Isn't she heavy?' said Shaugh, as he meandered across the narrow streets
with a sidelong motion that must have suggested to our fair inside
passenger some notions of a sea voyage. In truth, I must confess our
progress was rather a devious one,--now zig-zagging from side to side, now
getting into a sharp trot, and then suddenly pulling up at a dead stop, or
running the machine chuck against a wall, to enable us to stand still and
gain breath.
"'Which way now?' cried he, as we swung round the angle of a street and
entered the large market-place; 'I'm getting terribly tired.'
"'Never give in, Dan. Think of Clonakilty and the old lady herself.' Here
I gave the chair a hoist that evidently astonished our fair friend, for a
very imploring cry issued forth immediately after.
"'To the right, quick-step, forward, charge!' cried I; and we set off at a
brisk trot down a steep narrow lane.
"'Here it is now,--the light in the window. Cheer up.'
"As I said this we came short up to a fine, portly-looking doorway, with
great stone pillars and cornice.
"'Make yourself at home, Maurice,' said he; 'bring her in.' So saying,
we pushed forward--for the door was open--and passed boldly into a great
flagged hall, silent and cold, and dark as the night itself.
"'Are you sure we're right?' said he.
"'All right,' said I; 'go ahead.'
"And so we did, till we came in sight of a small candle that burned dimly
at a distance from us.
"'Make for the light,' said I; but just as I said so Shaugh slipped and
fell flat on the flagway. The noise of his fall sent up a hundred echoes
in the silent building, and terrified us both dreadfully. After a minute's
pause, by one consent we turned and made for the door, falling almost at
every step, and frightened out of our senses, we came tumbling together
into the porch, and out in the street, and never drew breath till we
reached the barracks. Meanwhile let me return to Mrs. Rogers. The dear
old lady, who had passed an awful time since she left the ball, had just
rallied out of a fainting fit when we took to our heels; so after screaming
and crying her best, she at last managed to open the top of the chair, and
by dint of great exertions succeeded in forcing the door, and at length
freed herself from bondage. She was leisurely groping her way round it
in the dark, when her lamentations, being heard without, woke up the old
sexton of the chapel,--for it was there we placed her,--who, entering
cautiously with a light, no sooner caught a glimpse of the great black
sedan and the figure beside it than he also took to his heels, and ran like
a madman to the priest's house.
"'Come, your reverence, come, for the love of marcy! Sure didn't I see him
myself! Oh, wirra, wirra!'
"'What is it, ye ould fool?' said M'Kenny.
"'It's Father Con Doran, your reverence, that was buried last week, and
there he is up now, coffin and all, saying a midnight Mass as lively as
ever.'
"Poor Mrs. Rogers, God help her! It was a trying sight for her when the
priest and the two coadjutors and three little boys and the sexton all came
in to lay her spirit; and the shock she received that night, they say, she
never got over.
"Need I say, my dear O'Mealey, that our acquaintance with Mrs. Rogers was
closed? The dear woman had a hard struggle for it afterwards. Her character
was assailed by all the elderly ladies in Loughrea for going off in our
company, and her blue satin, piped with scarlet, utterly ruined by a deluge
of holy water bestowed on her by the pious sexton. It was in vain that she
originated twenty different reports to mystify the world; and even ten
pounds spent in Masses for the eternal repose of Father Con Doran only
increased the laughter this unfortunate affair gave rise to. As for us, we
exchanged into the line, and foreign service took us out of the road of
duns, debts, and devilment, and we soon reformed, and eschewed such low
company."
The day was breaking ere we separated; and amidst the rich and fragrant
vapors that exhaled from the earth, the faint traces of sunlight dimly
stealing told of the morning. My two friends set out for Torrijos, and I
pushed boldly forward in the direction of the Alberche.
It was a strange thing that although but two days before the roads we were
then travelling had been the line of retreat of the whole French army, not
a vestige of their equipment nor a trace of their matriel had been left
behind. In vain we searched each thicket by the wayside for some straggling
soldier, some wounded or wearied man; nothing of the kind was to be seen.
Except the deeply-rutted road, torn by the heavy wheels of the artillery,
and the white ashes of a wood fire, nothing marked their progress.
Our journey was a lonely one. Not a man was to be met with. The houses
stood untenanted; the doors lay open; no smoke wreathed from their deserted
hearths. The peasantry had taken to the mountains; and although the plains
were yellow with the ripe harvest, and the peaches hung temptingly upon the
trees, all was deserted and forsaken. I had often seen the blackened walls
and broken rafters, the traces of the wild revenge and reckless pillage of
a retiring army. The ruined castle and the desecrated altar are sad things
to look upon; but, somehow, a far heavier depression sunk into my heart
as my eye ranged over the wide valleys and broad hills, all redolent of
comfort, of beauty, and of happiness, and yet not one man to say, "This is
my home; these are my household gods." The birds carolled gayly in each
leafy thicket; the bright stream sung merrily as it rippled through the
rocks; the tall corn, gently stirred by the breeze, seemed to swell the
concert of sweet sounds; but no human voice awoke the echoes there. It
was as if the earth was speaking in thankfulness to its Maker, while
man,--ungrateful and unworthy man,--pursuing his ruthless path of
devastation and destruction, had left no being to say, "I thank Thee for
all these."
The day was closing as we drew near the Alberche, and came in sight of the
watch-fires of the enemy. Far as the eye could reach their column extended,
but in the dim twilight nothing could be seen with accuracy; yet from the
position their artillery occupied, and the unceasing din of baggage wagons
and heavy carriages towards the rear, I came to the conclusion that a still
farther retreat was meditated. A picket of light cavalry was posted upon
the river's bank, and seemed to watch with vigilance the approaches to the
stream.
Our bivouac was a dense copse of pine-trees, exactly opposite to the French
advanced posts, and there we passed the night,--fortunately a calm and
starlight one; for we dared not light fires, fearful of attracting
attention.
During the long hours I lay patiently watching the movements of the enemy
till the dark shadows hid all from sight; and even then, as my ears caught
the challenge of a sentry or the footsteps of some officer in his round,
my thoughts were riveted upon them, and a hundred vague fancies as to the
future were based upon no stronger foundation than the clink of a firelock
or the low-muttered song of a patrol.
Towards morning I slept; and when day broke my first glance was towards the
river-side. But the French were gone, noiselessly, rapidly. Like one man
that vast army had departed, and a dense column of dust towards the
horizon alone marked the long line of march where the martial legions were
retreating.
My mission was thus ended; and hastily partaking of the humble breakfast my
friend Mike provided for me, I once more set out and took the road towards
headquarters.
CHAPTER II.
THE SKIRMISH.
For several months after the battle of Talavera my life presented nothing
which I feel worth recording. Our good fortune seemed to have deserted us
when our hopes were highest; for from the day of that splendid victory we
began our retrograde movement upon Portugal. Pressed hard by overwhelming
masses of the enemy, we saw the fortresses of Ciudad Rodrigo and Almeida
fall successively into their hands. The Spaniards were defeated wherever
they ventured upon a battle; and our own troops, thinned by sickness and
desertion, presented but a shadow of that brilliant army which only a few
months previous had followed the retiring French beyond the frontiers of
Portugal.
However willing I now am--and who is not--to recognize the genius and
foresight of that great man who then held the destinies of the Peninsula
within his hands, I confess at the time I speak of I could ill comprehend
and still less feel contented with the successive retreats our forces made;
and while the words Torres Vedras brought nothing to my mind but the last
resting-place before embarkation, the sad fortunes of Corunna were now
before me, and it was with a gloomy and desponding spirit I followed the
routine of my daily duty.
During these weary months, if my life was devoid of stirring interest or
adventure, it was not profitless. Constantly employed at the outposts,
I became thoroughly inured to all the roughing of a soldier's life, and
learned in the best of schools that tacit obedience which alone can form
the subordinate or ultimately fit its possessor for command himself.
Humble and unobtrusive as such a career must ever be, it was not without
its occasional rewards. From General Crawfurd I more than once obtained
most kind mention in his despatches, and felt that I was not unknown or
unnoticed by Sir Arthur Wellesley himself. At that time these testimonies,
slight and passing as they were, contributed to the pride and glory of my
existence; and even now--shall I confess it?--when some gray hairs are
mingling with the brown, and when my old dragoon swagger is taming down
into a kind of half-pay shamble, I feel my heart warm at the recollection
of them.
Be it so; I care not who smiles at the avowal. I know of little better
worth remembering as we grow old than what pleased us while we were young.
With the memory of the kind words once spoken come back the still kinder
looks of those who spoke them, and better than all, that early feeling of
budding manhood, when there was neither fear nor distrust. Alas! these are
the things, and not weak eyes and tottering limbs, which form the burden of
old age. Oh, if we could only go on believing, go on trusting, go on hoping
to the last, who would shed tears for the bygone feats of his youthful
days, when the spirit that evoked them lived young and vivid as before?
But to my story. While Ciudad Rodrigo still held out against the besieging
French,--its battered walls and breached ramparts sadly foretelling the
fate inevitably impending,--we were ordered, together with the 16th Light
Dragoons, to proceed to Gallegos, to reinforce Crawfurd's division, then
forming a corps of observation upon Massena's movements.
The position he occupied was a most commanding one,--the crown of a long
mountain ridge, studded with pine-copse and cork-trees, presenting every
facility for light-infantry movements; and here and there gently sloping
towards the plain, offering a field for cavalry manoeuvres. Beneath, in
the vast plain, were encamped the dark legions of France, their heavy
siege-artillery planted against the doomed fortress, while clouds of their
cavalry caracoled proudly before us, as if in taunting sarcasm at our
inactivity.
Every artifice which his natural cunning could suggest, every taunt a
Frenchman's vocabulary contains, had been used by Massena to induce Sir
Arthur Wellesley to come to the assistance of the beleagured fortress:
but in vain. In vain he relaxed the energy of the siege, and affected
carelessness. In vain he asserted that the English were either afraid or
else traitors to their allies. The mind of him he thus assailed was neither
accessible to menace nor to sarcasm. Patiently abiding his time, he watched
the progress of events, and provided for that future which was to crown his
country's arms with success and himself with undying glory.
Of a far different mettle was the general formed under whose orders we were
now placed. Hot, passionate, and impetuous, relying upon bold and headlong
heroism rather than upon cool judgment and well-matured plans, Crawfurd
felt in war all the asperity and bitterness of a personal conflict. Ill
brooking the insulting tone of the wily Frenchman, he thirsted for any
occasion of a battle, and his proud spirit chafed against the colder
counsels of his superior.
On the very morning we joined, the pickets brought in the intelligence that
the French patrols were nightly in the habit of visiting the villages at
the outposts and committing every species of cruel indignity upon the
wretched inhabitants. Fired at this daring insult, our general resolved to
cut them off, and formed two ambuscades for the purpose.
Six squadrons of the 14th were despatched to Villa del Puerco, three of
the 16th to Baguetto, while some companies of the 95th, and the caadores,
supported by artillery, were ordered to hold themselves in reserve, for the
enemy were in force at no great distance from us.
The morning was just breaking as an aide-de-camp galloped up with the
intelligence that the French had been seen near the Villa del Puerco, a
body of infantry and some cavalry having crossed the plain, and disappeared
in that direction. While our colonel was forming us, with the intention of
getting between them and their main body, the tramp of horses was heard in
the wood behind, and in a few moments two officers rode up. The foremost,
who was a short, stoutly-built man of about forty, with a bronzed face and
eye of piercing black, shouted out as we wheeled into column:--
"Halt, there! Why, where the devil are you going? That's your ground!" So
saying, and pointing straight towards the village with his hand, he would
not listen to our colonel's explanation that several stone fences and
enclosures would interfere with cavalry movements, but added, "Forward, I
say! Proceed!"
Unfortunately, the nature of the ground separated our squadron, as the
colonel anticipated; and although we came on at a topping pace, the French
had time to form in square upon a hill to await us, and when we charged,
they stood firmly, and firing with a low and steady aim, several of our
troopers fell. As we wheeled round, we found ourselves exactly in front
of their cavalry coming out of Baguilles; so dashing straight at them,
we revenged ourselves for our first repulse by capturing twenty-nine
prisoners, and wounding several others.
The French infantry were, however, still unbroken; and Colonel Talbot rode
boldly up with five squadrons of the 14th; but the charge, pressed home
with all its gallantry, failed also, and the colonel fell mortally wounded,
and fourteen of his troopers around him. Twice we rode round the square,
seeking for a weak point, but in vain; the gallant Frenchman who commanded,
Captain Guache, stood fearlessly amidst his brave followers, and we could
hear him, as he called out from time to time,--
"C'est a mes enfans! Trs bien fait, mes braves!"
And at length they made good their retreat, while we returned to the camp,
leaving thirty-two troopers and our brave colonel dead upon the field in
this disastrous affair.
The repulse we had met with, so contrary to all our hopes and expectations,
made that a most gloomy day to all of us. The brave fellows we had left
behind us, the taunting cheer of the French infantry, the unbroken ranks
against which we rode time after time in vain, never left our minds; and a
sense of shame of what might be thought of us at headquarters rendered the
reflection still more painful.
Our bivouac, notwithstanding all our efforts, was a sad one, and when the
moon rose, some drops of heavy rain falling at intervals in the still,
unruffled air threatened a night of storm; gradually the sky grew darker
and darker, the clouds hung nearer to the earth, and a dense, thick mass
of dark mist shrouded every object. The heavy cannonade of the siege was
stilled; nothing betrayed that a vast army was encamped near us; their
bivouac fires were even imperceptible; and the only sound we heard was the
great bell of Ciudad Rodrigo as it struck the hour, and seemed, in the
mournful cadence of its chime, like the knell of the doomed citadel.
The patrol which I commanded had to visit on its rounds the most advanced
post of our position. This was a small farm-house, which, standing upon a
little rising ledge of ground, was separated from the French lines by a
little stream tributary to the Aguda. A party of the 14th were picketed
here, and beneath them in the valley, scarce five hundred yards distant,
was the detachment of cuirassiers which formed the French outpost. As we
neared our picket the deep voice of the sentry challenged us; and while
all else was silent as the grave, we could hear from the opposite side
the merry chorus of a French chanson  boire, with its clattering
accompaniment of glasses, as some gay companions were making merry
together.
Within the little hut which contained our fellows, the scene was a
different one. The three officers who commanded sat moodily over a wretched
fire of wet wood; a solitary candle dimly lighted the dismantled room,
where a table but ill-supplied with cheer stood unminded and uncared for.
"Well, O'Malley," cried Baker, as I came in, "what is the night about? And
what's Crawfurd for next?"
"We hear," cried another, "that he means to give battle to-morrow; but
surely Sir Arthur's orders are positive enough. Gordon himself told me
that he was forbidden to fight beyond the Coa, but to retreat at the first
advance of the enemy."
"I'm afraid," replied I, "that retreating is his last thought just now.
Ammunition has just been served out, and I know the horse artillery have
orders to be in readiness by daybreak."
"All right," said Hampden, with a half-bitter tone. "Nothing like going
through with it. If he is to be brought to court-martial for disobedience,
he'll take good care we sha'n't be there to see it."
"Why, the French are fifty thousand strong!" said Baker. "Look there, what
does that mean, now? That's a signal from the town."
As he spoke a rocket of great brilliancy shot up into the sky, and bursting
at length fell in millions of red lustrous sparks on every side, showing
forth the tall fortress, and the encamped army around it, with all the
clearness of noonday. It was a most splendid sight; and though the next
moment all was dark as before, we gazed still fixedly into the gloomy
distance, straining our eyes to observe what was hid from our view forever.
"That must be a signal," repeated Baker.
"Begad! if Crawfurd sees it he'll interpret it as a reason for fighting. I
trust he's asleep by this time," said Hampden. "By-the-bye, O'Malley, did
you see the fellows at work in the trenches? How beautifully clear it was
towards the southward!"
"Yes, I remarked that! and what surprised me was the openness of their
position in that direction. Towards the San Benito mole I could not see a
man."
"Ah, they'll not attack on that side; but if we really are--"
"Stay, Hampden!" said I, interrupting him, "a thought has just struck me.
At sunset, I saw, through my telescope, the French engineers marking with
their white tape the line of a new entrenchment in that quarter. Would it
not be a glorious thing to move the tape, and bring the fellows under the
fire of San Benito?"
"By Jove, O'Malley, that is a thought worth a troop to you!"
"Far more likely to forward his promotion in the next world than in this,"
said Baker, smiling.
"By no means," added I. "I marked the ground this evening, and have it
perfectly in my mind. If we were to follow the bend of the river, I'll be
bound to come right upon the spot; by nearing the fortress we'll escape the
sentries; and all this portion is open to us."
The project thus loosely thrown out was now discussed in all its bearings.
Whatever difficulties it presented were combated so much to our own
satisfaction, that at last its very facility damped our ardor. Meanwhile
the night wore on, and the storm of rain so long impending began to descend
in very torrents; hissing along the parched ground, it rose in a mist,
while overhead the heavy thunder rolled in long unbroken peals; the crazy
door threatened to give way at each moment, and the whole building trembled
to its foundation.
"Pass the brandy down here, Hampden, and thank your stars you're where you
are. Eh, O'Malley? You'll defer your trip to San Benito for finer weather."
"Well, to come to the point," said Hampden, "I'd rather begin my
engineering at a more favorable season; but if O'Malley's for it--"
"And O'Malley is for it," said I, suddenly.
"Then faith, I'm not the man to balk his fancy; and as Crawfurd is so bent
upon fighting to-morrow, it don't make much difference. Is it a bargain?"
"It is; here's my hand on it."
"Come, come, boys, I'll have none of this; we've been prettily cut up this
morning already. You shall not go upon this foolish excursion."
"Confound it, old fellow! it's all very well for you to talk, with the
majority before you, next step; but here we are, if peace came to-morrow,
scarcely better than we left England. No, no; if O'Malley's ready--and I
see he is so before me--What have you got there? Oh, I see; that's our tape
line; capital fun, by George! The worst of it is, they'll make us colonels
of engineers. Now then, what's your plan--on foot or mounted?"
"Mounted, and for this reason, the country is all open; if we are to have a
run for it, our thoroughbreds ought to distance them; and as we must expect
to pass some of their sentries, our only chance is on horseback."
"My mind is relieved of a great load," said Hampden; "I was trembling in my
skin lest you should make it a walking party. I'll do anything you like in
the saddle, from robbing the mail to cutting out a frigate; but I never was
much of a foot-pad."
"Well, Mike," said I, as I returned to the room with my trusty follower,
"are the cattle to be depended on?"
"If we had a snaffle in Malachi Daly's mouth [my brown horse], I'd be
afeared of nothing, sir; but if it comes to fencing, with that cruel
bit,--but sure, you've a light hand, and let him have his head, if it's
wall."
"By Jove, he thinks it a fox-chase!" said Hampden.
"Isn't it the same, sir?" said Mike, with a seriousness that made the whole
party smile.
"Well, I hope we shall not be earthed, any way," said I. "Now, the next
thing is, who has a lantern? Ah! the very thing; nothing better. Look to
your pistols, Hampden; and Mike, here's a glass of grog for you; we'll want
you. And now, one bumper for good luck. Eh, Baker, won't you pledge us?"
"And spare a little for me," said Hampden. "How it does rain! If one didn't
expect to be water-proofed before morning, one really wouldn't go out in
such weather."
While I busied myself in arranging my few preparations, Hampden proceeded
gravely to inform Mike that we were going to the assistance of the besieged
fortress, which could not possibly go on without us.
"Tare and ages!" said Mike, "that's mighty quare; and the blue rocket was a
letter of invitation, I suppose?"
"Exactly," said Hampden; "and you see there's no ceremony between us. We'll
just drop in, in the evening, in a friendly way."
"Well, then, upon my conscience, I'd wait, if I was you, till the family
wasn't in confusion. They have enough on their hands just now."
"So you'll not be persuaded?" said Baker. "Well, I frankly tell you, that
come what will of it, as your senior officer I'll report you to-morrow.
I'll not risk myself for any such hair-brained expeditions."
"A mighty pleasant look-out for me," said Mike; "if I'm not shot to-night,
I may be flogged in the morning."
This speech once more threw us into a hearty fit of laughter, amidst which
we took leave of our friends, and set forth upon our way.
CHAPTER III.
THE LINES OF CIUDAD RODRIGO.
The small, twinkling lights which shone from the ramparts of Ciudad Rodrigo
were our only guide, as we issued forth upon our perilous expedition. The
storm raged, if possible, even more violently than before, and gusts of
wind swept along the ground with the force of a hurricane; so that at
first, our horses could scarcely face the tempest. Our path lay along the
little stream for a considerable way; after which, fording the rivulet, we
entered upon the open plain, taking care to avoid the French outpost on the
extreme left, which was marked by a bivouac fire, burning under the heavy
downpour of rain, and looking larger through the dim atmosphere around it.
I rode foremost, followed closely by Hampden and Mike; not a word was
spoken after we crossed the stream. Our plan was, if challenged by a
patrol, to reply in French and press on; so small a party could never
suggest the idea of attack, and we hoped in this manner to escape.
The violence of the storm was such that many of our precautions as to
silence were quite unnecessary; and we had advanced to a considerable
extent into the plain before any appearance of the encampment struck us.
At length, on mounting a little rising ground, we perceived several fires
stretching far away to the northward; while still to our left, there blazed
one larger and brighter than the others. We now found that we had not
outflanked their position as we intended, and learning from the situation
of the fires, that we were still only at the outposts, we pressed sharply
forward, directing our course by the twin stars that shone from the
fortress.
"How heavy the ground is here!" whispered Hampden, as our horses sunk above
the fetlocks. "We had better stretch away to the right; the rise of the
hill will favor us."
"Hark!" said I; "did you not hear something? Pull up,--silence now. Yes,
there they come. It's a patrol; I hear their tramp." As I spoke, the
measured tread of infantry was heard above the storm, and soon after a
lantern was seen coming along the causeway near us. The column passed
within a few yards of where we stood. I could even recognize the black
covering of the shakos as the light fell on them. "Let us follow them,"
whispered I; and the next moment we fell in upon their track, holding our
cattle well in hand, and ready to start at a moment.
"Qui va l?" a sentry demanded.
"La deuxime division," cried a hoarse voice.
"Halte l! la consigne?"
"Wagram!" repeated the same voice as before, while his party resumed
their march; and the next moment the patrol was again upon his post, silent
and motionless as before.
"En avant, Messieurs!" said I, aloud, as soon as the infantry had
proceeded some distance,--"en avant!"
"Qui va l?" demanded the sentry, as we came along at a sharp trot.
"L'tat-major, Wagram!" responded I, pressing on without drawing rein;
and in a moment we had regained our former position behind the infantry. We
had scarcely time to congratulate ourselves upon the success of our scheme,
when a tremendous clattering noise in front, mingled with the galloping of
horses and the cracking of whips, announced the approach of the artillery
as they came along by a narrow road which bisected our path; and as they
passed between us and the column, we could hear the muttered sentences of
the drivers, cursing the unseasonable time for an attack, and swearing at
their cattle in no measured tones.
"Did you hear that?" whispered Hampden; "the battery is about to be
directed against the San Benito, which must be far away to the left.
I heard one of the troop saying that they were to open their fire at
daybreak."
"All right, now," said I; "look there!"
From the hill we now stood upon a range of lanterns was distinctly visible,
stretching away for nearly half a mile.
"There are the trenches; they must be at work, too. See how the lights are
moving from place to place! Straight now. Forward!"
So saying, I pressed my horse boldly on.
We had not proceeded many minutes when the sounds of galloping were heard
coming along behind us.
"To the right, in the hollow," cried I. "Be still."
Scarcely had we moved off when several horsemen galloped up, and drawing
their reins to breathe their horses up the hill, we could hear their voices
as they conversed together.
In the few broken words we could catch, we guessed that the attack upon San
Benito was only a feint to induce Crawfurd to hold his position, while
the French, marching upon his flank and front, were to attack him with
overwhelming masses and crush him.
"You hear what's in store for us, O'Malley?" whispered Hampden. "I think we
could not possibly do better than hasten back with the intelligence."
"We must not forget what we came for, first," said I; and the next moment
we were following the horsemen, who from their helmets seemed to be
horse-artillery officers.
The pace our guides rode at showed us that they knew their ground. We
passed several sentries, muttering something at each time, and seeming as
if only anxious to keep up with our party.
"They've halted," said I. "Now to the left there; gently here, for we must
be in the midst of their lines. Ha! I knew we were right. See there!"
Before us, now, at a few hundred yards, we could perceive a number of men
engaged upon the field. Lights were moving from place to place rapidly,
while immediately in front a strong picket of cavalry were halted.
"By Jove! there's sharp work of it to-night," whispered Hampden. "They do
intend to surprise us to-morrow."
"Gently now, to the left," said I, as cautiously skirting the little hill,
I kept my eye firmly fixed upon the watch-fire.
The storm, which for some time had abated considerably, was now nearly
quelled, and the moon again peeped forth amidst masses of black and watery
clouds.
"What good fortune for us!" thought I, at this moment, as I surveyed the
plain before me.
"I say, O'Malley, what are those fellows at yonder, where the blue light is
burning?"
"Ah! the very people we want; these are the sappers. Now for it; that's our
ground. We'll soon come upon their track now."
We pressed rapidly forward, passing an infantry party as we went. The blue
light was scarcely a hundred yards off; we could even hear the shouting of
the officers to their men in the trenches, when suddenly my horse came down
upon his head, and rolling over, crushed me to the earth.
"Not hurt, my boy," cried I, in a subdued tone, as Hampden jumped down
beside me.
It was the angle of a trench I had fallen into; and though both my horse
and myself felt stunned for the moment, we rallied the next minute.
"Here is the very spot," said I. "Now, Mike, catch the bridles and follow
us closely."
Guiding ourselves along the edge of the trench, we crept stealthily
forward; the only watch-fire near was where the engineer party was halted,
and our object was to get outside of this.
"My turn this time," said Hampden, as he tripped suddenly, and fell head
foremost upon the grass.
As I assisted him to rise, something caught my ankle, and on stooping I
found it was a cord pegged fast into the ground, and lying only a few
inches above it.
"Now, steady! See here; this is their working line. Pass your hand along it
there, and let us follow it out."
While Hampden accordingly crept along on one side, I tracked the cord upon
the other. Here I found it terminating upon a small mound, where probably
some battery was to be erected. I accordingly gathered it carefully up, and
was returning towards my friend, when what was my horror to hear Mike's
voice, conversing, as it seemed to me, with some one in French.
I stood fixed to the spot, my very heart beating almost in my mouth as I
listened.
"Qui tes-vous done, mon ami?" inquired a hoarse, deep voice, a few yards
off.
"Bon cheval, non beast, sacr nom de Dieu!" A hearty burst of laughter
prevented my hearing the conclusion of Mike's French.
I now crept forward upon my hands and knees, till I could catch the dark
outline of the horses, one hand fixed upon my pistol trigger, and my sword
drawn in the other. Meanwhile the dialogue continued.
"Vous tes d'Alsace, n'est-ce-pas?" asked the Frenchman, kindly supposing
that Mike's French savored of Strasburg.
"Oh, blessed Virgin! av I might shoot him," was the muttered reply.
Before I had time to see the effect of the last speech, I pressed forward
with a bold spring, and felled the Frenchman to the earth. My hand had
scarcely pressed upon his mouth, when Hampden was beside me. Snatching up
the pistol I let fall, he held it to the man's chest and commanded him to
be silent. To unfasten his girdle and bind the Frenchman's hands behind
him, was the work of a moment; and as the sharp click of the pistol-cock
seemed to calm his efforts to escape, we soon succeeded in fastening a
handkerchief tight across his mouth, and the next minute he was placed
behind Mike's saddle, firmly attached to this worthy individual by his
sword-belt.
"Now, a clear run home for it, and a fair start," said Hampden, as he
sprang into the saddle.
"Now, then, for it," I replied, as turning my horse's head towards our
lines, I dashed madly forward.
The moon was again obscured, but still the dark outline of the hill which
formed our encampment was discernible on the horizon. Riding side by side,
on we hurried,--now splashing through the deep wet marshes, now plunging
through small streams. Our horses were high in mettle, and we spared them
not. By taking a wide dtour we had outflanked the French pickets, and
were almost out of all risk, when suddenly on coming to the verge of rather
a steep hill, we perceived beneath us a strong cavalry picket standing
around a watch-fire; their horses were ready saddled, the men accoutred,
and quite prepared for the field. While we conversed together in whispers
as to the course to follow, our deliberations were very rapidly cut short.
The French prisoner, who hitherto had given neither trouble nor resistance,
had managed to free his mouth from the encumbrance of the handkerchief; and
as we stood quietly discussing our plans, with one tremendous effort he
endeavored to hurl himself and Mike from the saddle, shouting out as he did
so,--
"A moi camarades!  moi!"
Hampden's pistol leaped from the holster as he spoke, and levelling it with
a deadly aim, he pulled the trigger; but I threw up his arm, and the ball
passed high above his head. To have killed the Frenchman would have been to
lose my faithful follower, who struggled manfully with his adversary, and
at length by throwing himself flatly forward upon the mane of his horse,
completely disabled him. Meanwhile the picket had sprung to their saddles,
and looked wildly about on every side.
Not a moment was to be lost; so turning our horses' heads towards the
plain, away we went. One loud cheer announced to us that we had been seen,
and the next instant the clash of the pursuing cavalry was heard behind us.
It was now entirely a question of speed, and little need we have feared
had Mike's horse not been doubly weighted. However, as we still had
considerably the start, and the gray dawn of day enabled us to see the
ground, the odds were in our favor. "Never let your horse's head go," was
my often repeated direction to Mike, as he spurred with all the desperation
of madness. Already the low meadow-land was in sight which flanked the
stream we had crossed in the morning, but unfortunately the heavy rains had
swollen it now to a considerable depth, and the muddy current, choked with
branches of trees and great stones, was hurrying down like a torrent. "Take
the river! never flinch it!" was my cry to my companions, as I turned my
head and saw a French dragoon, followed by two others, gaining rapidly upon
us. As I spoke, Mike dashed in, followed by Hampden, and the same moment
the sharp ring of a carbine whizzed past me. To take off the pursuit from
the others, I now wheeled my horse suddenly round, as if I feared to take
the stream, and dashed along by the river's bank.
[Illustration: A FLYING SHOT.]
Beneath me in the foaming current the two horsemen labored,--now stemming
the rush of water, now reeling almost beneath. A sharp cry burst from Mike
as I looked, and I saw the poor fellow bend nearly to his saddle. I could
see no more, for the chase was now hot upon myself. Behind me rode a French
dragoon, his carbine pressed tightly to his side, ready to fire as he
pressed on in pursuit. I had but one chance; so drawing my pistol I wheeled
suddenly in my saddle, and fired straight at him. The Frenchman fell, while
a regular volley from his party rung around me, one ball striking my horse,
and another lodging in the pommel of my saddle. The noble animal reeled
nearly to the earth, but as if rallying for a last effort, sprang forward
with renewed energy, and plunged boldly into the river. For a moment,
so sudden was my leap, my pursuers lost sight of me; but the bank being
somewhat steep, the efforts of my horse to climb again discovered me, and
before I reached the field two pistol-balls took effect upon me,--one
slightly grazed my side, but my bridle-arm was broken by the other, and
my hand fell motionless to my side. A cheer of defiance was, however, my
reply, as I turned round in my saddle, and the next moment I was far beyond
the range of their fire.
Not a man durst follow, and the last sight I had of them was the dismounted
group who stood around their dead comrade. Before me rode Hampden and Mike,
still at top speed, and never turning their heads backwards. I hastened
after them; but my poor, wounded horse, nearly hamstrung by the shot,
became dead lame, and it was past daybreak ere I reached the first outposts
of our lines.
CHAPTER IV.
THE DOCTOR.
"And his wound? Is it a serious one?" said a round, full voice, as the
doctor left my room at the conclusion of his visit.
"No, sir; a fractured bone is the worst of it,--the bullet grazed, but did
not cut the artery, and as--"
"Well, how soon will he be about again?"
"In a few weeks, if no fever sets in."
"There's no objection to my seeing him?--a few minutes only,--I'll be
cautious." So saying, and as it seemed to me, without waiting for a reply,
the door was opened by an aide-de-camp, who, announcing General Crawfurd,
closed it again, and withdrew.
The first glance I threw upon the general enabled me to recognize the
officer who, on the previous morning, had ridden up to the picket and given
us the orders to charge. I essayed to rise a little as he came forward; but
he motioned me with his hand to lie still, while, placing a chair close
beside my bed, he sat down.
"Very sorry for your mishap, sir, but glad it is no worse. Moreton says
that nothing of consequence is injured; there, you mustn't speak except I
ask you. Hampden has told me everything necessary; at least as far as he
knew. Is it your opinion, also, that any movement is in contemplation; and
from what circumstance?"
I immediately explained, and as briefly as I was able, the reasons for
suspecting such, with which he seemed quite satisfied. I detailed the
various changes in the positions of the troops that were taking place
during the night, the march of the artillery, and the strong bodies of
cavalry that were posted in reserve along the river.
"Very well, sir; they'll not move; your prisoner, quartermaster of an
infantry battalion, says not, also. Yours was a bold stroke, but could not
possibly have been of service, and the best thing I can do for you is not
to mention it,--a court-martial's but a poor recompense for a gun-shot
wound. Meanwhile, when this blows over, I'll appoint you on my personal
staff. There, not a word, I beg; and now, good-by."
So saying, and waving me an adieu with his hand, the gallant veteran
withdrew before I could express my gratitude for his kindness.
I had little time for reflecting over my past adventure, such numbers of my
brother officers poured in upon me. All the doctor's cautions respecting
quietness and rest were disregarded, and a perfect levee sat the entire
morning in my bed-room. I was delighted to learn that Mike's wound, though
painful at the moment, was of no consequence; and indeed Hampden, who
escaped both steel and shot, was the worst off among us,--his plunge in the
river having brought on an ague he had labored under years before.
"The illustrious Maurice has been twice here this morning, but they
wouldn't admit him. Your Scotch physician is afraid of his Irish
confrre, and they had a rare set-to about Galen and Hippocrates
outside," said Baker.
"By-the-bye," said another, "did you see how Sparks looked when Quill
joined us? Egad, I never saw a fellow in such a fright; he reddened up,
then grew pale, turned his back, and slunk away at the very first moment."
"Yes, I remember it. We must find out the reason; for Maurice, depend upon
it, has been hoaxing the poor fellow."
"Well, O'Malley," growled out the senior major, "you certainly did give
Hampden a benefit. He'll not trust himself in such company again; and
begad, he says, the man is as bad as the master. That fellow of yours never
let go his prisoner till he reached the quartermaster-general, and they
were both bathed in blood by that time."
"Poor Mike! we must do something for him."
"Oh, he's as happy as a king! Maurice has been in to see him, and they've
had a long chat about Ireland, and all the national pastimes of whiskey
drinking and smashing skulls. My very temples ache at the recollection."
"Is Mister O'Mealey at home?" said a very rich Cork accent, as the
well-known and most droll features of Dr. Maurice Quill appeared at the
door.
"Come in, Maurice," said the major; "and for Heaven's sake, behave
properly. The poor fellow must not have a row about his bedside."
"A row, a row! Upon my conscience, it is little you know about a row, and
there's worse things going than a row. Which leg is it?"
"It's an arm, Doctor, I'm happy to say."
"Not your punch hand, I hope. No; all's right. A neat fellow you have for
a servant, that Mickey Free. I was asking him about a townsman of his
own--one Tim Delany,--the very cut of himself, the best servant I ever had.
I never could make out what became of him. Old Hobson of the 95th, gave
him to me, saying, 'There he is for you, Maurice, and a bigger thief and a
greater blackguard there's not in the 60th.'
"'Strong words,' said I.
"'And true' said he; 'he'd steal your molar tooth while you were laughing
at him.'
"'Let me have him, and try my hand on him, anyway. I've got no one just
now. Anything is better than nothing.'
"Well I took Tim, and sending for him to my room I locked the door, and
sitting down gravely before him explained in a few words that I was quite
aware of his little propensities.
"'Now,' said I, 'if you like to behave well, I'll think you as honest as
the chief-justice; but if I catch you stealing, if it be only the value of
a brass snuff-box, I'll have you flogged before the regiment as sure as my
name's Maurice.'
"Oh, I wish you heard the volley of protestations that fell from him fast
as hail. He was a calumniated man the world conspired to wrong him; he was
never a thief nor a rogue in his life. He had a weakness, he confessed, for
the ladies; but except that, he hoped he might die so thin that he could
shave himself with his shin-bone if he ever so much as took a pinch of salt
that wasn't his own.
"However this might be, nothing could be better than the way Tim and I got
on together. Everything was in its place, nothing missing; and in fact, for
upwards of a year, I went on wondering when he was to show out in his true
colors, for hitherto he had been a phoenix.
"At last,--we were quartered in Limerick at the time,--every morning used
to bring accounts of all manner of petty thefts in the barrack,--one fellow
had lost his belt, another his shoes, a third had three-and-sixpence in
his pocket when he went to bed and woke without a farthing, and so on.
Everybody save myself was mulet of something. At length some rumors of
Tim's former propensities got abroad; suspicion was excited; my friend
Delany was rigidly watched, and some very dubious circumstances attached to
the way he spent his evenings.
"My brother officers called upon me about the matter, and although nothing
had transpired like proof, I sent for Tim, and opened my mind on the
subject.
"You may talk of the look of conscious innocence, but I defy you to
conceive anything finer than the stare of offended honor Tim gave me as I
began.
"'They say it's me, Doctor,' said he, 'do they? And you,--you believe them.
You allow them to revile me that way? Well, well, the world is come to a
pretty pass, anyhow! Now, let me ask your honor a few questions? How many
shirts had yourself when I entered your service? Two, and one was more like
a fishing net! And how many have ye now? Eighteen; ay, eighteen bran new
cambrie ones,--devil a hole in one of them! How many pair of stockings had
you? Three and an odd one. You have two dozen this minute. How many pocket
handkerchiefs? One,--devil a more! You could only blow your nose two days
in the week, and now you may every hour of the twenty-four! And as to
the trilling articles of small value, snuff-boxes, gloves, bootjacks,
nightcaps, and--'
"'Stop, Tim, that's enough--'
"'No, sir, it is not,' said Tim, drawing himself up to his full height;
'you have wounded my feelings in a way I can't forget. It is impossible
we can have that mutual respect our position demands. Farewell, farewell,
Doctor, and forever!'
"Before I could say another word, the fellow had left the room, and closed
the door after him; and from that hour to this I never set eyes on him."
In this vein did the worthy doctor run on till some more discreet friend
suggested that however well-intentioned the visit, I did not seem to be
fully equal to it,--my flushed cheek and anxious eye betraying that the
fever of my wound had commenced. They left me, therefore, once more alone,
and to my solitary musings over the vicissitudes of my fortune.
CHAPTER V.
THE COA.
Within a week from the occurrence of the events just mentioned, Ciudad
Rodrigo surrendered, and Crawfurd assumed another position beneath the
walls of Almeida. The Spanish contingent having left us, we were reinforced
by the arrival of two battalions, renewed orders being sent not to risk a
battle, but if the French should advance, to retire beyond the Coa.
On the evening of the 21st of July a strong body of French cavalry advanced
into the plain, supported by some heavy guns; upon which Crawfurd retired
upon the Coa, intending, as we supposed, to place that river between
himself and the enemy. Three days, however, passed over without any
movement upon either side, and we still continued, with a force of scarcely
four thousand infantry and a thousand dragoons, to stand opposite to an
army of nearly fifty thousand men. Such was our position as the night of
the 24th set in. I was sitting alone in my quarters. Mike, whose wound had
been severer than at first was supposed, had been sent to Almeida, and I
was musing in solitude upon the events of the campaign, when the noise and
bustle without excited my attention,--the roll of artillery wagons, the
clash of musketry, and the distant sounds of marching, all proved that the
troops were effecting some new movement, and I burned with anxiety to
learn what it was. My brother officers, however, came not as usual to my
quarters; and although I waited with impatience while the hours rolled by,
no one appeared.
Long, low moaning gusts of wind swept along the earth, carrying the leaves
as they tore them from the trees, and mingling their sad sounds with the
noises of the retiring troops; for I could perceive that gradually the
sounds grew more and more remote, and only now and then could I trace their
position as the roll of a distant drum swelled upon the breeze, or the
more shrill cry of a pibroch broke upon my ear. A heavy downpour of rain
followed soon after, and in its unceasing plash drowned all other sounds.
As the little building shook beneath the peals of loud thunder, the
lightning flashed in broad sheets upon the rapid river, which, swollen and
foaming, dashed impetuously beside my window. By the uncertain but vivid
glare of the flashes, I endeavored to ascertain where our force was posted,
but in vain. Never did I witness such a night of storm,--the deep booming
of the thunder seeming never for a moment to cease, while the rush of the
torrent grew gradually louder, till at length it swelled into one deep and
sullen roar like that of distant artillery.
Weak and nervous as I felt from the effects of my wound, feverish and
exhausted by days of suffering and sleepless nights, I paced my little room
with tottering but impatient steps. The sense of my sad and imprisoned
state impressed me deeply; and while from time to time I replenished my
fire, and hoped to hear some friendly step upon the stair, my heart grew
gradually heavier, and every gloomy and depressing thought suggested itself
to my imagination. My most constant impression was that the troops were
retiring beyond the Coa, and that, forgotten in the haste and confusion of
a night march, I had been left behind to fall a prisoner to the enemy.
The sounds of the troops retiring gradually farther and farther favored the
idea, in which I was still more strengthened on finding that the peasants
who inhabited the little hut had departed, leaving me utterly alone. From
the moment I ascertained this fact, my impatience knew no bounds; and in
proportion as I began to feel some exertion necessary on my part, so much
more did my nervousness increase my debility, and at last I sank exhausted
upon my bed, while a cold perspiration broke out upon my temples.
I have mentioned that the Coa was immediately beneath the house; I must
also add that the little building occupied the angle of a steep but narrow
gorge which descended from the plain to the bridge across the stream. This,
as far as I knew, was the only means we possessed of passing the river; so
that, when the last retiring sounds of the troops were heard by me, I began
to suspect that Crawfurd, in compliance with his orders, was making a
backward movement, leaving the bridge open to the French, to draw them
on to his line of march, while he should cross over at some more distant
point.
As the night grew later, the storm seemed to increase; the waves of the
foaming river dashed against the frail walls of the hut, while its roof,
rent by the blast, fell in fragments upon the stream, and all threatened a
speedy and perfect ruin.
How I longed for morning! The doubt and uncertainty I suffered nearly drove
me distracted. Of all the casualties my career as a soldier opened, none
had such terrors for me as imprisonment; the very thought of the long years
of inaction and inglorious idleness was worse than any death. My wounds,
and the state of fever I was in, increased the morbid dread upon me, and
had the French captured me at the time, I know not that madness of which
I was not capable. Day broke at last, but slowly and sullenly; the gray
clouds hurried past upon the storm, pouring down the rain in torrents as
they went, and the desolation and dreariness on all sides was scarcely
preferable to the darkness and gloom of night. My eyes were turned ever
towards the plain, across which the winter wind bore the plashing rain in
vast sheets of water; the thunder crashed louder and louder; but except the
sounds of the storm none others met my ear. Not a man, not a human figure
could I see, as I strained my sight towards the distant horizon.
The morning crept over, but the storm abated not, and the same unchanged
aspect of dreary desolation prevailed without. At times I thought I could
hear, amidst the noises of the tempest, something like the roll of distant
artillery; but the thunder swelled in sullen roar above all, and left me
uncertain as before.
At last, in a momentary pause of the storm, a tremendous peal of heavy
guns caught my ear, followed by the long rattling of small-arms. My heart
bounded with ecstasy. The thoughts of the battle-field, with all its
changing fortunes, was better, a thousand times better, than the despairing
sense of desertion I labored under. I listened now with eagerness, but
the rain bore down again in torrents, and the crumbling walls and falling
timbers left no other sounds to be heard. Far as my eye could reach,
nothing could still be seen save the dreary monotony of the vast plain,
undulating slightly here and there, but unmarked by a sign of man.
Far away towards the horizon I had remarked for some time past that the
clouds resting upon the earth grew blacker and blacker, spreading out to
either side in vast masses, and not broken or wafted along like the rest.
As I watched the phenomenon with an anxious eye, I perceived the dense mass
suddenly appear, as it were, rent asunder, while a volume of liquid flame
rushed wildly out, throwing a lurid glare on every side. One terrific clap,
louder than any thunder, shook the air at this moment, while the very earth
trembled beneath the shock.
As I hesitated what it might be, the heavy din of great guns again was
heard, and from the midst of the black smoke rode forth a dark mass,
which I soon recognized as the horse-artillery at full gallop. They were
directing their course towards the bridge.
As they mounted the little rising ground, they wheeled and unlimbered with
the speed of lightning, just as a strong column of cavalry showed above the
ridge. One tremendous discharge again shook the field, and ere the smoke
cleared away they were again far in retreat.
So much was my attention occupied with this movement that I had not
perceived the long line of infantry that came from the extreme left, and
were now advancing also towards the bridge at a brisk quick-step; scattered
bodies of cavalry came up from different parts, while from the little
valley, every now and then, a rifleman would mount the rising ground,
turning to fire as he retreated. All this boded a rapid and disorderly
retreat; and although as yet I could see nothing of the pursuing enemy, I
knew too well the relative forces of each to have a doubt for the result.
At last the head of a French column appeared above the mist, and I could
plainly distinguish the gestures of the officers as they hurried their men
onwards. Meanwhile a loud hurra attracted my attention, and I turned my eye
towards the road which led to the river. Here a small body of the 95th had
hurriedly assembled, and formed again, were standing to cover the retreat
of the broken infantry as they passed on eagerly to the bridge; in a second
after the French cuirassiers appeared. Little anticipating resistance from
a flying and disordered mass, they rode headlong forward, and although the
firm attitude and steady bearing of the Highlanders might have appalled
them, they rode heedlessly down upon the square, sabring the very men in
the front rank. Till now not a trigger had been pulled, when suddenly the
word "Fire!" was given, and a withering volley of balls sent the cavalry
column in shivers. One hearty cheer broke from the infantry in the rear,
and I could hear "Gallant Ninety-fifth!" shouted on every side along the
plain.
The whole vast space before me was now one animated battle-ground. Our own
troops, retiring in haste before the overwhelming forces of the French,
occupied every little vantage ground with their guns and light infantry,
charges of cavalry coursing hither and thither; while, as the French
pressed forward, the retreating columns again formed into squares to
permit stragglers to come up. The rattle of small-arms, the heavy peal of
artillery, the earth-quake crash of cavalry, rose on every side, while the
cheers which alternately told of the vacillating fortune of the fight rose
amidst the wild pibroch of the Highlanders.
A tremendous noise now took place on the floor beneath me; and looking
down, I perceived that a sergeant and party of sappers had taken possession
of the little hut, and were busily engaged in piercing the walls for
musketry; and before many minutes had elapsed, a company of the Rifles were
thrown into the building, which, from its commanding position above the
road, enfiladed the whole line of march. The officer in command briefly
informed me that we had been attacked that morning by the French in force,
and "devilishly well thrashed;" that we were now in retreat beyond the Coa,
where we ought to have been three days previously, and desired me to cross
the bridge and get myself out of the way as soon as I possibly could.
A twenty-four pounder from the French lines struck the angle of the house
as he spoke, scattering the mortar and broken bricks about us on all sides.
This was warning sufficient for me, wounded and disabled as I was; so
taking the few things I could save in my haste, I hurried from the hut, and
descending the path, now slippery by the heavy rain, I took my way across
the bridge, and established myself on a little rising knoll of ground
beyond, from which a clear view could be obtained of the whole field.
I had not been many minutes in my present position ere the pass which led
down to the bridge became thronged with troops, wagons, ammunition carts,
and hospital stores, pressing thickly forward amidst shouting and uproar;
the hills on either side of the way were crowded with troops, who formed
as they came up, the artillery taking up their position on every rising
ground. The firing had already begun, and the heavy booming of the large
guns was heard at intervals amidst the rattling crash of musketry. Except
the narrow road before me, and the high bank of the stream, I could see
nothing; but the tumult and din, which grew momentarily louder, told that
the tide of battle raged nearer and nearer. Still the retreat continued;
and at length the heavy artillery came thundering across the narrow bridge
followed by stragglers of all arms, and wounded, hurrying to the rear. The
sharpshooters and the Highlanders held the heights above the stream, thus
covering the retiring columns; but I could plainly perceive that their fire
was gradually slackening, and that the guns which flanked their position
were withdrawn, and everything bespoke a speedy retreat. A tremendous
discharge of musketry at this moment, accompanied by a deafening cheer,
announced the advance of the French, and soon the head of the Highland
brigade was seen descending towards the bridge, followed by the Rifles and
the 95th; the cavalry, consisting of the 11th and 14th Light Dragoons, were
now formed in column of attack, and the infantry deployed into line; and in
an instant after, high above the din and crash of battle, I heard the word
"Charge!" The rising crest of the hill hid them from my sight, but my heart
bounded with ecstasy as I listened to the clanging sound of the cavalry
advance. Meanwhile the infantry pressed on, and forming upon the bank,
took up a strong position in front of the bridge; the heavy guns were
also unlimbered, riflemen scattered through the low copse-wood, and every
precaution taken to defend the pass to the last. For a moment all my
attention was riveted to the movements upon our own side of the stream,
when suddenly the cavalry bugle sounded the recall, and the same moment
the staff came galloping across the bridge. One officer I could perceive,
covered with orders and trappings, his head was bare, and his horse,
splashed with blood and foam, moved lamely and with difficulty; he turned
in the middle of the bridge, as if irresolute whether to retreat farther.
One glance at him showed me the bronzed, manly features of our leader.
Whatever his resolve, the matter was soon decided for him, for the cavalry
came galloping swiftly down the slope, and in an instant the bridge was
blocked up by the retreating forces, while the French as suddenly appearing
above the height, opened a plunging fire upon their defenceless enemies;
their cheer of triumph was answered by our fellows from the opposite bank,
and a heavy cannonade thundered along the rocky valley, sending up a
hundred echoes as it went.
The scene now became one of overwhelming interest; the French, posting
their guns upon the height, replied to our fire, while their line, breaking
into skirmishers, descended the banks to the river's edge, and poured
in one sheet of galling musketry. The road to the bridge, swept by our
artillery, presented not a single file; and although a movement among
the French announced the threat of an attack, the deadly service of the
artillery seemed to pronounce it hopeless.
A strong cavalry force stood inactively spectators of the combat, on the
French side, among whom I now remarked some bustle and preparation, and as
I looked an officer rode boldly to the river's edge, and spurring his horse
forward, plunged into the stream. The swollen and angry torrent, increased
by the late rains, boiled like barm, and foamed around him as he advanced;
when suddenly his horse appeared to have lost its footing, and the rapid
current, circling around him, bore him along with it. He labored madly, but
in vain, to retrace his steps; the rolling torrent rose above his saddle,
and all that his gallant steed could do was barely sufficient to keep
afloat; both man and horse were carried down between the contending
armies. I could see him wave his hand to his comrades, as if in adieu. One
deafening cheer of admiration rose from the French lines, and the next
moment he was seen to fall from his seat, and his body, shattered with
balls, floated mournfully upon the stream.
This little incident, to which both armies were witnesses, seemed to have
called forth all the fiercer passions of the contending forces; a loud yell
of taunting triumph rose from the Highlanders, responded to by a cry of
vengeance from the French, and the same moment the head of a column was
seen descending the narrow causeway to the bridge, while an officer with a
whole blaze of decorations and crosses sprang from his horse and took the
lead. The little drummer, a child of scarcely ten years old, tripped gayly
on, beating his little pas des charge, seeming rather like the play of
infancy than the summons to death and carnage, as the heavy guns of the
French opened a volume of fire and flame to cover the attacking column. For
a moment all was hid from our eyes; the moment after the grape-shot swept
along the narrow causeway; and the bridge, which but a second before was
crowded with the life and courage of a noble column, was now one heap of
dead and dying. The gallant fellow who led them on fell among the first
rank, and the little child, as if kneeling, was struck dead beside the
parapet; his fair hair floated across his cold features, and seemed in its
motion to lend a look of life where the heart's throb had ceased forever.
The artillery again re-opened upon us; and when the smoke had cleared away,
we discovered that the French had advanced to the middle of the bridge and
carried off the body of their general. Twice they essayed to cross, and
twice the death-dealing fire of our guns covered the narrow bridge with
slain, while by the wild pibroch of the 42d, swelling madly into notes of
exultation and triumph, the Highlanders could scarcely be prevented from
advancing hand to hand with the foe. Gradually the French slackened their
fire, their great guns were one by one withdrawn from the heights, and a
dropping, irregular musketry at intervals sustained the fight, which, ere
sunset, ceased altogether; and thus ended "The Battle of the Coa!"
CHAPTER VI.
THE NIGHT MARCH.
Scarcely had the night fallen when our retreat commenced. Tired and weary
as our brave fellows felt, but little repose was allowed them; their
bivouac fires were blazing brightly, and they had just thrown themselves
in groups around them, when the word to fall in was passed from troop to
troop, and from battalion to battalion,--no trumpet, no bugle called them
to their ranks. It was necessary that all should be done noiselessly and
speedily; while, therefore, the wounded were marched to the front, and
the heavy artillery with them, a brigade of light four pounders and two
squadrons of cavalry held the heights above the bridge, and the infantry,
forming into three columns, began their march.
My wound, forgotten in the heat and excitement of the conflict, was now
becoming excessively painful, and I gladly availed myself of a place in a
wagon, where, stretched upon some fresh straw, with no other covering save
the starry sky, I soon fell sound asleep, and neither the heavy jolting of
the rough conveyance, nor the deep and rutty road, were able to disturb my
slumbers. Still through my sleep I heard the sounds around me, the heavy
tramp of infantry, the clash of the moving squadrons, and the dull roll of
artillery; and ever and anon the half-stifled cry of pain, mingling with
the reckless carol of some drinking-song, all flitted through my dreams,
lending to my thoughts of home and friends a memory of glorious war.
All the vicissitudes of a soldier's life passed then in review before me,
elicited in some measure by the things about. The pomp and grandeur, the
misery and meanness, the triumph, the defeat, the moment of victory, and
the hour of death were there, and in that vivid dream I lived a life long.
I awoke at length, the cold and chilling air which follows midnight blew
around me, and my wounded arm felt as though it were frozen. I tried to
cover myself beneath the straw, but in vain; and as my limbs trembled and
my teeth chattered, I thought again of home, where, at that moment, the
poorest menial of my uncle's house was better lodged than I; and strange to
say, something of pride mingled with the thought, and in my lonely heart a
feeling of elation cheered me.
These reflections were interrupted by the sound of a voice near me, which I
at once knew to be O'Shaughnessy's; he was on foot, and speaking evidently
in some excitement.
"I tell you, Maurice, some confounded blunder there must be; sure, he was
left in the cottage near the bridge, and no one ever saw him after."
"The French took it from the Rifles before we crossed the river. By Jove!
I'll wager my chance of promotion against a pint of sherry, he'll turn up
somewhere in the morning; those Galway chaps have as many lives as a cat."
"See, now, Maurice, I wouldn't for a full colonelcy anything would happen
to him; I like the boy."
"So do I myself; but I tell you there's no danger of him. Did you ask
Sparks anything?"
"Ask Sparks! God help you! Sparks would go off in a fit at the sight of me.
No, no, poor creature! it's little use it would be my speaking to him."
"Why so, Doctor!" cried I, from my straw couch.
"May I never, if it's not him! Charley, my son, I'm glad you're safe.
'Faith, I thought you were on your way to Verdun by this time."
"Sure, I told you he'd find his way here--But, O'Mealey, dear, you're
mighty could,--a rigor, as old M'Lauchlan would call it."
"E'en sae, Maister Quill," said a broad Scotch accent behind him; "and I
canna see ony objection to giein' things their right names."
"The top of the morning to you," said Quill, familiarly patting him on the
back; "how goes it, old Brimstone?"
The conversation might not have taken a very amicable turn had M'Lauchlan
heard the latter part of this speech; but, as happily he was engaged
unpacking a small canteen which he had placed in the wagon, it passed
unnoticed.
"You'll nae dislike a toothfu' of something warm, Major," said he,
presenting a glass to O'Shaughnessy; "and if ye'll permit me, Mr. O'Mealey,
to help you--"
"A thousand thanks, Doctor; but I fear a broken arm--"
"There's naething in the whiskey to prevent the proper formation of
callus."
"By the rock of Cashel, it never made any one callous," said O'Shaughnessy,
mistaking the import of the phrase.
"Ye are nae drinking frae the flask?" said the doctor, turning in some
agitation towards Quill.
"Devil a bit, my darling. I've a little horn convaniency here, that holds
half-a-pint, nice measure."
I don't imagine that our worthy friend participated in Quill's admiration
of the "convaniency," for he added, in a dry tone:--
"Ye may as weel tak your liquor frae a glass, like a Christian, as stick
your nose in a coo's horn."
"By my conscience, you're no small judge of spirits, wherever you learned
it," said the major; "it's like Islay malt!"
"I was aye reckoned a gude ane," said the doctor, "and my mither's brither
Caimbogie had na his like in the north country. Ye may be heerd tell what
he aince said to the Duchess of Argyle, when she sent for him to taste her
claret."
"Never heard of it," quoth Quill; "let's have it by all means. I'd like to
hear what the duchess said to him."
"It was na what the duchess said to him, but what he said to the duchess,
ye ken. The way of it was this: My uncle Caimbogie was aye up at the
castle, for besides his knowledge of liquor, there was nae his match for
deer-stalking, or spearing a salmon, in those parts. He was a great, rough
carle, it's true; but ane ye'd rather crack wi' than fight wi'.
"Weel, ae day they had a grand dinner at the duke's, and there were plenty
o' great southern lords and braw leddies in velvets and satin; and vara
muckle surprised they were at my uncle, when he came in wi' his tartan
kilt, in full Highland dress, as the head of a clan ought to do. Caimbogie,
however, pe'd nae attention to them; but he eat his dinner, and drank his
wine, and talked away about fallow and red deer, and at last the duchess,
for she was aye fond o' him, addressed him frae the head o' the table:--
"'Cambogie,' quoth she, 'I'd like to hae your opinion about that wine. It's
some the duke has just received, and we should like to hear what you think
of it.'
"'It's nae sae bad, my leddy,' said my uncle; for ye see he was a man of
few words, and never flattered onybody.
"'Then you don't approve much of it?' said the duchess.
"'I've drank better, and I've drank waur,' quo' he.
"'I'm sorry you don't like it, Caimbogie,' said the duchess, 'for it can
never be popular now,--we have such a dependence upon your taste.'
"'I cauna say ower muckle for my taste, my leddy, but ae thing I will
say,--I've a most damnable smell!'
"I hear that never since the auld walls stood was there ever the like o'
the laughing that followed; the puir duke himsel' was carried away, and
nearly had a fit, and a' the grand lords and leddies a'most died of it. But
see here, the earle has nae left a drap o' whiskey in the flask."
"The last glass I drained to your respectable uncle's health," said Quill,
with a most professional gravity. "Now, Charlie, make a little room for me
in the straw."
The doctor soon mounted beside me, and giving me a share of his ample
cloak, considerably ameliorated my situation.
"So you knew Sparks, Doctor?" said I, with a strong curiosity to hear
something of his early acquaintance.
"That I did: I knew him when he was an ensign in the 10th Foot; and, to say
the truth, he is not much changed since that time,--the same lively look of
a sick cod-fish about his gray eyes; the same disorderly wave of his yellow
hair; the same whining voice, and that confounded apothecary's laugh."
"Come, come, Doctor, Sparks is a good fellow at heart; I won't have him
abused. I never knew he had been in the infantry; I should think it must
have been another of the same name."
"Not at all; there's only one like him in the service, and that's himself.
Confound it, man, I'd know his skin upon a bush; he was only three weeks
in the Tenth, and, indeed, your humble servant has the whole merit of his
leaving it so soon."
"Do let us hear how that happened."
"Simply thus: The jolly Tenth were some four years ago the pleasantest
corps in the army; from the lieutenant-colonel down to the last joined
sub., all were out-and-outers,--real gay fellows. The mess was, in fact,
like a pleasant club, and if you did not suit it, the best thing you could
do was to sell out or exchange into a slower regiment; and, indeed, this
very wholesome truth was not very long in reaching your ears some way or
other, and a man that could remain after being given this hint, was likely
to go afterwards without one."
Just as Dr. Quill reached this part of his story, an orderly dragoon
galloped furiously past, and the next moment an aide-de-camp rode by,
calling as he passed us,--
"Close up, there! Close up! Get forward, my lads! get forward!"
It was evident, from the stir and bustle about, that some movement was
being made; and soon after, a dropping, irregular fire from the rear showed
that our cavalry were engaged with the enemy. The affair was scarcely of
five minutes' duration, and our march resumed all its former regularity
immediately after.
I now turned to the doctor to resume his story, but he was gone; at what
moment he left I could not say, but O'Shaughnessy was also absent, nor did
I again meet with them for a considerable time after.
Towards daybreak we halted at Bonares, when, my wound demanding rest and
attention, I was billeted in the village, and consigned to all the miseries
of a sick bed.
CHAPTER VII.
THE JOURNEY.
With that disastrous day my campaigning was destined, for some time
at least, to conclude. My wound, which grew from hour to hour more
threatening, at length began to menace the loss of the arm, and by the
recommendation of the regimental surgeons, I was ordered back to Lisbon.
Mike, by this time perfectly restored, prepared everything for my
departure, and on the third day after the battle of the Coa, I began my
journey with downcast spirits and depressed heart. The poor fellow was,
however, a kind and affectionate nurse, and unlike many others, his cares
were not limited to the mere bodily wants of his patient,--he sustained,
as well as he was able, my drooping resolution, rallied my spirits, and
cheered my courage. With the very little Portuguese he possessed, he
contrived to make every imaginable species of bargain; always managed a
good billet; kept every one in good humor, and rarely left his quarters in
the morning without a most affective leave-taking, and reiterated promises
to renew his visit.
Our journeys were usually short ones, and already two days had elapsed,
when, towards nightfall, we entered the little hamlet of Jaffra. During the
entire of that day, the pain of my wounded limb had been excruciating; the
fatigue of the road and the heat had brought back violent inflammation, and
when at last the little village came in sight, my reason was fast yielding
to the torturing agonies of my wound. But the transports with which I
greeted my resting-place were soon destined to a change; for as we drew
near, not a light was to be seen, not a sound to be heard, not even a dog
barked as the heavy mule-cart rattled over the uneven road. No trace of
any living thing was there. The little hamlet lay sleeping in the pale
moonlight, its streets deserted, and its homes tenantless; our own
footsteps alone echoed along the dreary causeway. Here and there, as we
advanced farther, we found some relics of broken furniture and house-gear;
most of the doors lay open, but nothing remained within save bare walls;
the embers still smoked in many places upon the hearth, and showed us that
the flight of the inhabitants had been recent. Yet everything convinced
us that the French had not been there; there was no trace of the reckless
violence and wanton cruelty which marked their footsteps everywhere.
All proved that the desertion had been voluntary; perhaps in compliance
with an order of our commander-in-chief, who frequently desired any
intended line of march of the enemy to be left thus a desert. As we
sauntered slowly on from street to street, half hoping that some one human
being yet remained behind, and casting our eyes from side to side in search
of quarters for the night, Mike suddenly came running up, saying,--
"I have it, sir; I've found it out. There's people living down that small
street there; I saw a light this minute as I passed."
I turned immediately, and accompanied by the mule-driver, followed Mike
across a little open square into a small and narrow street, at the end
of which a light was seen faintly twinkling. We hurried on and in a few
minutes reached a high wall of solid masonry, from a niche of which we now
discovered, to our utter disappointment, the light proceeded. It was a
small lamp placed before a little waxen image of the Virgin, and was
probably the last act of piety of some poor villager ere he left his home
and hearth forever. There it burned, brightly and tranquilly, throwing its
mellow ray upon the cold, deserted stones.
Whatever impatience I might have given way to in a moment of chagrin was
soon repressed, as I saw my two followers, uncovering their heads in silent
reverence, kneel down before the little shrine. There was something at once
touching and solemn in this simultaneous feeling of homage from the hearts
of those removed in country, language, and in blood. They bent meekly down,
their heads bowed upon their bosoms, while with muttering voices each
offered up his prayer. All sense of their disappointment, all memory of
their forlorn state, seemed to have yielded to more powerful and absorbing
thoughts, as they opened their hearts in prayer.
My eyes were still fixed upon them when suddenly Mike, whose devotion
seemed of the briefest, sprang to his legs, and with a spirit of levity
but little in accordance with his late proceedings, commenced a series of
kicking, rapping, and knocking at a small oak postern sufficient to have
aroused a whole convent from their cells. "House there! Good people
within!"--bang, bang, bang; but the echoes alone responded to his call,
and the sounds died away at length in the distant streets, leaving all as
silent and dreary as before.
Our Portuguese friend, who by this time had finished his orisons, now began
a vigorous attack upon the small door, and with the assistance of Mike,
armed with a fragment of granite about the size of a man's head, at length
separated the frame from the hinges, and sent the whole mass prostrate
before us.
The moon was just rising as we entered the little park, where gravelled
walks, neatly kept and well-trimmed, bespoke recent care and attention;
following a handsome alley of lime-trees, we reached a little jet d'eau,
whose sparkling fountain shone diamond-like in the moonbeams, and escaping
from the edge of a vast shell, ran murmuring amidst mossy stones and
water-lilies that, however naturally they seemed thrown around, bespoke
also the hand of taste in their position. On turning from the spot, we came
directly in front of an old but handsome chteau, before which stretched
a terrace of considerable extent. Its balustraded parapet lined with
orange-trees, now in full blossom, scented the still air with delicious
odor; marble statues peeped here and there amidst the foliage, while a rich
acacia, loaded with flowers, covered the walls of the building, and hung in
vast masses of variegated blossom across the tall windows.
As leaning on Mike's arm I slowly ascended the steps of the terrace, I was
more than ever struck with the silence and death-like stillness around;
except the gentle plash of the fountain, all was at rest; the very plants
seemed to sleep in the yellow moonlight, and not a trace of any living
thing was there.
The massive door lay open as we entered the spacious hall flagged with
marble and surrounded with armorial bearings. We advanced farther and came
to a broad and handsome stair, which led us to a long gallery, from which
a suit of rooms opened, looking towards the front part of the building.
Wherever we went, the furniture appeared perfectly untouched; nothing was
removed; the very chairs were grouped around the windows and the tables;
books, as if suddenly dropped from their readers' hands, were scattered
upon the sofas and the ottomans; and in one small apartment, whose blue
satin walls and damask drapery bespoke a boudoir, a rich mantilla of
black velvet and a silk glove were thrown upon a chair. It was clear the
desertion had been most recent, and everything indicated that no time had
been given to the fugitives to prepare for flight. What a sad picture of
war was there! To think of those whose home was endeared to them by all
the refinements of cultivated life and all the associations of years of
happiness sent out upon the wide world wanderers and houseless, while
their hearth, sacred by every tie that binds us to our kindred, was to
be desecrated by the ruthless and savage hands of a ruffian soldiery. I
thought of them,--perhaps at that very hour their thoughts were clinging
round the old walls, remembering each well-beloved spot, while they took
their lonely path through mountain and through valley,--and felt ashamed
and abashed at my own intrusion there. While thus my revery ran on, I
had not perceived that Mike, whose views were very practical upon all
occasions, had lighted a most cheerful fire upon the hearth, and disposing
a large sofa before it, had carefully closed the curtains; and was, in
fact, making himself and his master as much at home as though he had spent
his life there.
"Isn't it a beautiful place, Misther Charles? And this little room, doesn't
it remind you of the blue bed-room in O'Malley Castle, barrin' the elegant
view out upon the Shannon, and the mountain of Scariff?"
Nothing short of Mike's patriotism could forgive such a comparison; but,
however, I did not contradict him as he ran on:--
"Faith, I knew well there was luck in store for us this evening; and ye see
the handful of prayers I threw away outside wasn't lost. Jos's making
the beasts comfortable in the stable, and I'm thinking we'll none of us
complain of our quarters. But you're not eating your supper; and the
beautiful hare-pie that I stole this morning, won't you taste it? Well, a
glass of Malaga? Not a glass of Malaga? Oh, mother of Moses! what's this
for?"
Unfortunately, the fever produced by the long and toilsome journey had
gained considerably on me, and except copious libations of cold water, I
could touch nothing; my arm, too, was much more painful than before. Mike
soon perceived that rest and quietness were most important to me at the
moment, and having with difficulty been prevailed upon to swallow a few
hurried mouthfuls, the poor fellow disposed cushions around me in every
imaginable form for comfort; and then, placing my wounded limb in its
easiest position, he extinguished the lamp, and sat silently down beside
the hearth, without speaking another word.
Fatigue and exhaustion, more powerful than pain, soon produced their
effects upon me, and I fell asleep; but it was no refreshing slumber which
visited my heavy eyelids; the slow fever of suffering had been hour by
hour increasing, and my dreams presented nothing but scenes of agony and
torture. Now I thought that, unhorsed and wounded, I was trampled beneath
the clanging hoofs of charging cavalry; now I felt the sharp steel piercing
my flesh, and heard the loud cry of a victorious enemy; then, methought, I
was stretched upon a litter, covered by gore and mangled by a grape-shot.
I thought I saw my brother officers approach and look sadly upon me, while
one, whose face I could not remember, muttered: "I should not have known
him." The dreadful hospital of Talavera, and all its scenes of agony, came
up before me, and I thought that I lay waiting my turn for amputation. This
last impression, more horrible to me than all the rest, made me spring from
my couch, and I awoke. The cold drops of perspiration stood upon my brow,
my mouth was parched and open, and my temples throbbed so that I could
count their beatings; for some seconds I could not throw off the frightful
illusion I labored under, and it was only by degrees I recovered
consciousness and remembered where I was. Before me, and on one side of the
bright wood-fire, sat Mike, who, apparently deep in thought, gazed fixedly
at the blaze. The start I gave on awaking had not attracted his attention,
and I could see, as the flickering glare fell upon his features, that he
was pale and ghastly, while his eyes were riveted upon the fire; his lips
moved rapidly, as if in prayer, and his locked hands were pressed
firmly upon his bosom; his voice, at first inaudible, I could gradually
distinguish, and at length heard the following muttered sentences:--
"Oh, mother of mercy! So far from his home and his people, and so young to
die in a strange land--There it is again." Here he appeared listening
to some sounds from without. "Oh, wirra, wirra, I know it well!--the
winding-sheet, the winding-sheet! There it is; my own eyes saw it!"
The tears coursed fast upon his pale cheeks, and his voice grew almost
inaudible, as rocking to and fro, for some time he seemed in a very stupor
of grief; when at last, in a faint, subdued tone, he broke into one of
those sad and plaintive airs of his country, which only need the moment of
depression to make them wring the very heart in agony.
His song was that to which Moore has appended the beautiful lines, "Come
rest on this bosom." The following imperfect translation may serve to
convey some impression of the words, which in Mike's version were Irish:--
"The day was declining,
The dark night drew near,
And the old lord grew sadder
And paler with fear:
'Come listen, my daughter,
Come nearer, oh, near!
Is't the wind or the water
That sighs in my ear?'
"Not the wind nor the water
Now stirred the night air,
But a warning far sadder,--.
The Banshee was there!
Now rising, now swelling,
On the night wind it bore
One cadence, still telling,
'I want thee, Rossmore!'
"And then fast came his breath,
And more fixed grew his eye;
And the shadow of death
Told his hour was nigh.
Ere the dawn of that morning
The struggle was o'er,
For when thrice came the warning
A corpse was Rossmore!"
The plaintive air to which these words were sung fell heavily upon my
heart, and it needed but the low and nervous condition I was in to make me
feel their application to myself. But so it is; the very superstition your
reason rejects and your sense spurns, has, from old association, from
habit, and from mere nationality too, a hold upon your hopes and fears that
demands more firmness and courage than a sick-bed possesses to combat with
success; and I now listened with an eager ear to mark if the Banshee
cried, rather than sought to fortify myself by any recurrence to my own
convictions. Meanwhile Mike's attitude became one of listening attention.
Not a finger moved; he scarce seemed even to breathe; the state of suspense
I suffered from was maddening; and at last, unable to bear it longer, I
was about to speak, when suddenly, from the floor beneath us, one
long-sustained note swelled upon the air and died away again, and
immediately after, to the cheerful sounds of a guitar, we heard the husky
voice of our Portuguese guide indulging himself in a love-ditty.
Ashamed of myself for my fears, I kept silent; but Mike, who felt only one
sensation,--that of unmixed satisfaction at his mistake,--rubbed his hands
pleasantly, filled up his glass, drank it, and refilled; while with an
accent of reassured courage, he briefly remarked,--
"Well, Mr. Jos, if that be singing, upon my conscience I wonder what
crying is like!"
I could not forbear a laugh at the criticism; and in a moment, the poor
fellow, who up to that moment believed me sleeping, was beside me. I saw
from his manner that he dreaded lest I had been listening to his melancholy
song, and had overheard any of his gloomy forebodings; and as he cheered
my spirits and spoke encouragingly, I could remark that he made more than
usual endeavors to appear light-hearted and at ease. Determined, however,
not to let him escape so easily, I questioned him about his belief in
ghosts and spirits, at which he endeavored, as he ever did when the subject
was an unpleasing one, to avoid the discussion; but rather perceiving that
I indulged in no irreverent disrespect of these matters, he grew gradually
more open, treating the affair with that strange mixture of credulity and
mockery which formed his estimate of most things,--now seeming to suppose
that any palpable rejection of them might entail sad consequences in
future, now half ashamed to go the whole length in his credulity.
"And so, Mike, you never saw a ghost yourself?--that you acknowledge?"
"No, sir, I never saw a real ghost; but sure there's many a thing I never
saw; but Mrs. Moore, the housekeeper, seen two. And your grandfather that's
gone--the Lord be good to him!--used to walk once a year in Lurra Abbey;
and sure you know the story about Tim Clinchy that was seen every Saturday
night coming out of the cellar with a candle and a mug of wine and a pipe
in his mouth, till Mr. Barry laid him. It cost his honor your uncle ten
pounds in Masses to make him easy; not to speak of a new lock and two bolts
on the cellar door."
"I have heard all about that; but as you never yourself saw any of these
things--"
"But sure my father did, and that's the same any day. My father seen the
greatest ghost that ever was seen in the county Cork, and spent the evening
with him, that's more."
"Spent the evening with him!--what do you mean?"
"Just that, devil a more nor less. If your honor wasn't so weak, and the
story wasn't a trying one, I'd like to tell it to you."
"Out with it by all means, Mike; I am not disposed to sleep; and now that
we are upon these matters, my curiosity is strongly excited by your worthy
father's experience."
Thus encouraged, having trimmed the fire and reseated himself beside the
blaze, Mike began; but as a ghost is no every-day personage in our history,
I must give him a chapter to himself.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE GHOST.
"Well, I believe your honor heard me tell long ago how my father left the
army, and the way that he took to another line of life that was more to his
liking. And so it was, he was happy as the day was long; he drove a hearse
for Mr. Callaghan of Cork for many years, and a pleasant place it was; for
ye see, my father was a 'cute man, and knew something of the world; and
though he was a droll devil, and could sing a funny song when he was among
the boys, no sooner had he the big black cloak on him and the weepers, and
he seated on the high box with the six long-tailed blacks before him, you'd
really think it was his own mother was inside, he looked so melancholy and
miserable. The sexton and gravedigger was nothing to my father; and he had
a look about his eye--to be sure there was a reason for it--that you'd
think he was up all night crying; though it's little indulgence he took
that way.
"Well, of all Mr. Callaghan's men, there was none so great a favorite as my
father. The neighbors were all fond of him.
"'A kind crayture, every inch of him!' the women would say. 'Did ye see his
face at Mrs. Delany's funeral?'
"'True for you,' another would remark; 'he mistook the road with grief, and
stopped at a shebeen house instead of Kilmurry church.'
"I need say no more, only one thing,--that it was principally among the
farmers and the country people my father was liked so much. The great
people and the quality--ax your pardon; but sure isn't it true, Mister
Charles?--they don't fret so much after their fathers and brothers, and
they care little who's driving them, whether it was a decent, respectable
man like my father, or a chap with a grin on him like a rat-trap. And so
it happened that my father used to travel half the county; going here and
there wherever there was trade stirring; and faix, a man didn't think
himself rightly buried if my father wasn't there; for ye see, he knew all
about it: he could tell to a quart of spirits what would be wanting for a
wake; he knew all the good criers for miles round; and I've heard it was a
beautiful sight to see him standing on a hill, arranging the procession as
they walked into the churchyard, and giving the word like a captain,--
"'Come on, the stiff; now the friends of the stiff; now the pop'lace.'
"That's what he used to say, and troth he was always repeating it, when he
was a little gone in drink,--for that's the time his spirits would rise,
and he'd think he was burying half Munster.
"And sure it was a real pleasure and a pride to be buried in them times;
for av it was only a small farmer with a potato garden, my father would
come down with the black cloak on him, and three yards of crape behind his
hat, and set all the children crying and yelling for half a mile round;
and then the way he'd walk before them with a spade on his shoulder, and
sticking it down in the ground, clap his hat on the top of it, to make it
look like a chief mourner. It was a beautiful sight!"
"But Mike, if you indulge much longer in this flattering recollection of
your father, I'm afraid we shall lose sight of the ghost entirely."
"No fear in life, your honor; I'm coming to him now. Well, it was this
way it happened: In the winter of the great frost, about forty-two or
forty-three years ago, the ould priest of Tullonghmurray took ill and died.
He was sixty years priest of the parish, and mightily beloved by all
the people, and good reason for it; a pleasanter man, and a more
social crayture never lived,--'twas himself was the life of the whole
country-side. A wedding nor a christening wasn't lucky av he wasn't there,
sitting at the top of the table, with may be his arm round the bride
herself, or the baby on his lap, a smoking jug of punch before him, and as
much kindness in his eye as would make the fortunes of twenty hypocrites if
they had it among them. And then he was so good to the poor; the Priory was
always so full of ould men and ould women sitting around the big fire in
the kitchen that the cook could hardly get near it. There they were, eating
their meals and burning their shins till they were speckled like a trout's
back, and grumbling all the time; but Father Dwyer liked them, and he would
have them.
"'Where have they to go,' he'd say, 'av it wasn't to me? Give Molly
Kinshela a lock of that bacon. Tim, it's a could morning; will ye have a
taste of the "dew?"'
"Ah, that's the way he'd spake to them; but sure goodness is no warrant
for living, any more than devilment, and so he got could in his feet at a
station, and he rode home in the heavy snow without his big coat,--for he
gave it away to a blind man on the road; in three days he was dead.
"I see you're getting impatient, so I'll not stop to say what grief was
in the parish when it was known; but troth, there never was seen the like
before,--not a crayture would lift a spade for two days, and there was more
whiskey sold in that time than at the whole spring fair. Well, on the third
day the funeral set out, and never was the equal of it in them parts:
first, there was my father,--he came special from Cork with the six horses
all in new black, and plumes like little poplar-trees,--then came Father
Dwyer, followed by the two coadjutors in beautiful surplices, walking
bare-headed, with the little boys of the Priory school, two-and-two."
"Well, Mike, I'm sure it was very fine; but for Heaven's sake, spare me all
these descriptions, and get on to the ghost!"
"'Faith, yer honor's in a great hurry for the ghost,--may be ye won't like
him when ye have him; but I'll go faster, if ye please. Well, Father Dwyer,
ye see, was born at Aghan-lish, of an ould family, and he left it in his
will that he was to be buried in the family vault; and as Aghan-lish was
eighteen miles up the mountains, it was getting late when they drew near.
By that time the great procession was all broke up and gone home. The
coadjutors stopped to dine at the 'Blue Bellows' at the cross-roads; the
little boys took to pelting snowballs; there was a fight or two on the way
besides,--and in fact, except an ould deaf fellow that my father took to
mind the horses, he was quite alone. Not that he minded that same; for when
the crowd was gone, my father began to sing a droll song, and told the deaf
chap that it was a lamentation. At last they came in sight of Aghan-lish.
It was a lonesome, melancholy-looking place with nothing near it except two
or three ould fir-trees and a small slated house with one window, where the
sexton lived, and even that was shut up and a padlock on the door. Well,
my father was not over much pleased at the look of matters; but as he was
never hard put to what to do, he managed to get the coffin into the vestry,
and then when he had unharnessed the horses, he sent the deaf fellow with
them down to the village to tell the priest that the corpse was there, and
to come up early in the morning and perform Mass. The next thing to do was
to make himself comfortable for the night; and then he made a roaring fire
on the ould hearth,--for there was plenty of bog-fir there,--closed the
windows with the black cloaks, and wrapping two round himself, he sat down
to cook a little supper he brought with him in case of need.
"Well, you may think it was melancholy enough to pass the night up there
alone with a corpse, in an ould ruined church in the middle of the
mountains, the wind howling about on every side, and the snowdrift beating
against the walls; but as the fire burned brightly, and the little plate of
rashers and eggs smoked temptingly before him, my father mixed a jug of the
strongest punch, and sat down as happy as a king. As long as he was eating
away he had no time to be thinking of anything else; but when all was done,
and he looked about him, he began to feel very low and melancholy in his
heart. There was the great black coffin on three chairs in one corner; and
then the mourning cloaks that he had stuck up against the windows moved
backward and forward like living things; and outside, the wild cry of the
plover as he flew past, and the night-owl sitting in a nook of the old
church. 'I wish it was morning, anyhow,' said my father, 'for this is a
lonesome place to be in; and faix, he'll be a cunning fellow that catches
me passing the night this way again.' Now there was one thing distressed
him most of all,--my father used always to make fun of the ghosts and
sperits the neighbors would tell of, pretending there was no such thing;
and now the thought came to him, 'May be they'll revenge themselves on me
to-night when they have me up here alone;' and with that he made another
jug stronger than the first, and tried to remember a few prayers in case of
need, but somehow his mind was not too clear, and he said afterwards he
was always mixing up ould songs and toasts with the prayers, and when he
thought he had just got hold of a beautiful psalm, it would turn out to be
'Tatter Jack Walsh' or 'Limping James' or something like that. The storm,
meanwhile, was rising every moment, and parts of the old abbey were falling
as the wind shook the ruin; and my father's spirits, notwithstanding the
punch, wore lower than ever.
"'I made it too weak,' said he, as he set to work on a new jorum; and
troth, this time that was not the fault of it, for the first sup nearly
choked him.
"'Ah,' said he, now, 'I knew what it was; this is like the thing; and Mr.
Free, you are beginning to feel easy and comfortable. Pass the jar. Your
very good health and song. I'm a little hoarse, it's true, but if the
company will excuse--'
"And then he began knocking on the table with his knuckles, as if there was
a room full of people asking him to sing. In short, my father was drunk as
a fiddler; the last brew finished him; and he began roaring away all kinds
of droll songs, and telling all manner of stories as if he was at a great
party.
"While he was capering this way about the room, he knocked down his hat,
and with it a pack of cards he put into it before leaving home, for he was
mighty fond of a game.
"'Will ye take a hand, Mr. Free?' said he, as he gathered them up and sat
down beside the fire.
"'I'm convanient,' said he, and began dealing out as if there was a partner
fornenst him.
"When my father used to get this far in the story, he became very confused.
He says that once or twice he mistook the liquor, and took a pull at the
bottle of poteen instead of the punch; and the last thing he remembers was
asking poor Father Dwyer if he would draw near to the fire, and not be
lying there near the door.
"With that he slipped down on the ground and fell fast asleep. How long he
lay that way he could never tell. When he awoke and looked up, his hair
nearly stood on an end with fright. What do you think he seen fornenst him,
sitting at the other side of the fire, but Father Dwyer himself. There he
was, divil a lie in it, wrapped up in one of the mourning cloaks, trying to
warm his hands at the fire. "'Salve hoc nomine patri!' said my father,
crossing himself, 'av it's your ghost, God presarve me!'
"'Good-evening t'ye, Mr. Free,' said the ghost; 'and av I might be bould,
what's in the jug?'--for ye see, my father had it under his arm fast, and
never let it go when he was asleep.
"'Pater noster qui es in,--poteen, sir,' said my father; for the ghost
didn't look pleased at his talking Latin.
"'Ye might have the politeness to ax if one had a mouth on him, then,' says
the ghost.
"'Sure, I didn't think the likes of you would taste sperits.'
"'Try me,' said the ghost; and with that he filled out a glass, and tossed
it off like a Christian.
"'Beamish!' says the ghost, smacking his lips.
"'The same,' says my father; 'and sure what's happened you has not spoiled
your taste.'
"'If you'd mix a little hot,' says the ghost, 'I'm thinking it would be
better,--the night is mighty sevare.'
"'Anything that your reverance pleases,' says my father, as he began to
blow up a good fire to boil the water.
"'And what news is stirring?' says the ghost.
"'Devil a word, your reverance,--your own funeral was the only thing doing
last week. Times is bad; except the measles, there's nothing in our parts.'
"'And we're quite dead hereabouts, too,' says the ghost.
"'There's some of us so, anyhow, says my father, with a sly look. 'Taste
that, your reverance.'
"'Pleasant and refreshing,' says the ghost; 'and now, Mr. Free, what do you
say to a little "spoilt five," or "beggar my neighbor"?'
"'What will we play for? 'says my father, for a thought just struck
him,--'may be it's some trick of the Devil to catch my soul.'
"'A pint of Beamish,' says the ghost.
"'Done!' says my father; 'cut for deal. The ace of clubs,--you have it.'
"Now the whole time the ghost was dealing the cards, my father never took
his eyes off of him, for he wasn't quite aisy in his mind at all; but when
he saw him turn up the trump, and take a strong drink afterwards, he got
more at ease, and began the game.
"How long they played it was never rightly known; but one thing is sure,
they drank a cruel deal of sperits. Three quart bottles my father brought
with him were all finished, and by that time his brain was so confused with
the liquor, and all he lost,--for somehow he never won a game,--that he was
getting very quarrelsome.
"'You have your own luck to it,' says he, at last.
"'True for you; and besides, we play a great deal where I come from.'
"'I've heard so,' says my father. 'I lead the knave, sir; spades! Bad cess
to it, lost again!'
"Now it was really very distressing; for by this time, though they only
began for a pint of Beamish, my father went on betting till he lost the
hearse and all the six horses, mourning cloaks, plumes, and everything.
"'Are you tired, Mr. Free? May be you'd like to stop?'
"'Stop! faith it's a nice time to stop; of course not.'
"'Well, what will ye play for now?'
"The way he said these woods brought a trembling all over my father, and
his blood curdled in his heart. 'Oh, murther!' says he to himself, 'it's my
sowl he's wanting all the time.'
"'I've mighty little left,' says my father, looking at him keenly, while he
kept shuffling the cards quick as lightning.
"'Mighty little; no matter, we'll give you plenty of time to pay,--and if
you can't do it, it shall never trouble you as long as you live.'
"'Oh, you murthering devil!' says my father, flying at him with a spade
that he had behind his chair, 'I've found you out.'
"With one blow he knocked him down, and now a terrible fight begun, for the
ghost was very strong, too; but my father's blood was up, and he'd have
faced the Devil himself then. They rolled over each other several times,
the broken bottles cutting them to pieces, and the chairs and tables
crashing under them. At last the ghost took the bottle that lay on the
hearth, and levelled my father to the ground with one blow. Down he fell,
and the bottle and the whiskey were both dashed into the fire. That was
the end of it, for the ghost disappeared that moment in a blue flame that
nearly set fire to my father as he lay on the floor.
"Och, it was a cruel sight to see him next morning, with his cheek cut open
and his hands all bloody, lying there by himself,--all the broken glass and
the cards all round him,--the coffin, too, was knocked down off the chair,
may be the ghost had trouble getting into it. However that was, the funeral
was put off for a day, for my father couldn't speak; and as for the sexton,
it was a queer thing, but when they came to call him in the morning, he had
two black eyes, and a gash over his ear, and he never knew how he got them.
It was easy enough to know the ghost did it; but my father kept the secret,
and never told it to any man, woman, or child in them parts."
CHAPTER IX.
LISBON.
I have little power to trace the events which occupied the succeeding three
weeks of my history. The lingering fever which attended my wound detained
me during that time at the chteau; and when at last I did leave for
Lisbon, the winter was already beginning, and it was upon a cold raw
evening that I once more took possession of my old quarters at the Quay de
Soderi.
My eagerness and anxiety to learn something of the campaign was ever
uppermost, and no sooner had I reached my destination than I despatched
Mike to the quartermaster's office to pick up some news, and hear which of
my friends and brother officers were then at Lisbon. I was sitting in a
state of nervous impatience watching for his return, when at length I heard
footsteps approaching my room, and the next moment Mike's voice, saying,
"The ould room, sir, where he was before." The door suddenly opened, and my
friend Power stood before me.
"Charley, my boy!"--"Fred, my fine fellow!" was all either could say for
some minutes. Upon my part, the recollection of his bold and manly bearing
in my behalf choked all utterance; while upon his, my haggard cheek and
worn look produced an effect so sudden and unexpected that he became
speechless.
In a few minutes, however, we both rallied, and opened our store of mutual
remembrances since we parted. My career I found he was perfectly acquainted
with, and his consisted of nothing but one unceasing round of gayety and
pleasure. Lisbon had been delightful during the summer,--parties to Cintra,
excursions through the surrounding country, were of daily occurrence; and
as my friend was a favorite everywhere, his life was one of continued
amusement.
"Do you know, Charley, had it been any other man than yourself, I should
not have spared him; for I have fallen head over ears in love with your
little dark-eyed Portuguese."
"Ah, Donna Inez, you mean?"
"Yes, it is she I mean, and you need not affect such an air of uncommon
nonchalance. She's the loveliest girl in Lisbon, and with fortune to pay
off all the mortgages in Connemara."
"Oh, faith! I admire her amazingly; but as I never flattered myself upon
any preference--"
"Come, come, Charley, no concealment, my old fellow; every one knows the
thing's settled. Your old friend, Sir George Dashwood, told me yesterday."
"Yesterday! Why, is he here, at Lisbon?"
"To be sure he is; didn't I tell you that before? Confound it, what a head
I have! Why, man, he's come out as deputy adjutant-general; but for him I
should not have got renewed leave."
"And Miss Dashwood, is she here?"
"Yes, she came with him. By Jove, how handsome she is,--quite a different
style of thing from our dark friend, but, to my thinking, even handsomer.
Hammersley seems of my opinion, too."
"How! Is Hammersley at Lisbon?"
"On the staff here. But, confound it, what makes you so red, you have no
ill-feeling towards him now. I know he speaks most warmly of you; no later
than last night, at Sir George's--"
What Power was about to add I know not, for I sprang from my chair with a
sudden start, and walked to the window, to conceal my agitation from him.
"And so," said I, at length regaining my composure in some measure, "Sir
George also spoke of my name in connection with the senhora?"
"To be sure he did. All Lisbon does. What can you mean? But I see, my dear
boy; you know you are not of the strongest, and we've been talking far too
long. Come now, Charley, I'll say good-night. I'll be with you at breakfast
to-morrow, and tell you all the gossip; meanwhile promise me to get quietly
to bed, and so good-night."
Such was the conflicting state of feeling I suffered from that I made no
effort to detain Power. I longed to be once more alone, to think, calmly if
I could, over the position I stood in, and to resolve upon my plans for the
future.
My love for Lucy Dashwood had been long rather a devotion than a hope. My
earliest dawn of manly ambition was associated with the first hour I met
her. She it was who first touched my boyish heart, and suggested a sense
of chivalrous ardor within me; and even though lost to me forever, I could
still regard her as the mainspring of my actions, and dwell upon my passion
as the thing that hallowed every enterprise of my life.
In a word, my love, however little it might reach her heart, was everything
to mine. It was the worship of the devotee to his protecting saint. It was
the faith that made me rise above misfortune and mishap, and led me onward;
and in this way I could have borne anything, everything, rather than the
imputation of fickleness.
Lucy might not--nay, I felt she did not--love me. It was possible that some
other was preferred before me; but to doubt my own affection, to suspect my
own truth, was to destroy all the charm of my existence, and to extinguish
within me forever the enthusiasm that made me a hero to my own heart.
It may seem but poor philosophy; but alas, how many of our happiest, how
many of our brightest thoughts here are but delusions like this! The
dayspring of youth gilds the tops of the distant mountains before us, and
many a weary day through life, when clouds and storms are thickening around
us, we live upon the mere memory of the past. Some fast-flitting prospect
of a bright future, some passing glimpse of a sunlit valley, tinges all our
after-years.
It is true that he will suffer fewer disappointments, he will incur fewer
of the mishaps of the world, who indulges in no fancies such as these; but
equally true is it that he will taste none of that exuberant happiness
which is that man's portion who weaves out a story of his life, and who, in
connecting the promise of early years with the performance of later, will
seek to fulfil a fate and destiny.
Weaving such fancies, I fell sound asleep, nor woke before the stir and
bustle of the great city aroused me. Power, I found, had been twice at my
quarters that morning, but fearing to disturb me, had merely left a few
lines to say that, as he should be engaged on service during the day,
we could not meet before the evening. There were certain preliminaries
requisite regarding my leave which demanded my appearing before a board of
medical officers, and I immediately set about dressing; resolving that, as
soon as they were completed, I should, if permitted, retire to one of the
small cottages on the opposite bank of the Tagus, there to remain until my
restored health allowed me to rejoin my regiment.
I dreaded meeting the Dashwoods. I anticipated with a heavy heart how
effectually one passing interview would destroy all my day-dreams of
happiness, and I preferred anything to the sad conviction of hopelessness
such a meeting must lead to.
While I thus balanced with myself how to proceed, a gentle step came to the
door, and as it opened slowly, a servant in a dark livery entered.
"Mr. O'Malley, sir?"
"Yes," said I, wondering to whom my arrival could be thus early known.
"Sir George Dashwood requests you will step over to him as soon as you go
out," continued the man; "he is so engaged that he cannot leave home, but
is most desirous to see you."
"It is not far from here?"
"No, sir; scarcely five minutes' walk."
"Well, then, if you will show me the way, I'll follow you."
I cast one passing glance at myself to see that all was right about my
costume, and sallied forth.
In the middle of the Black Horse Square, at the door of a large,
stone-fronted building, a group of military men were assembled, chatting
and laughing away together,--some reading the lately-arrived English
papers; others were lounging upon the stone parapet, carelessly puffing
their cigars. None of the faces were known to me; so threading my way
through the crowd, I reached the steps. Just as I did so, a half-muttered
whisper met my ear:--
"Who did you say?"
"O'Malley, the young Irishman who behaved so gallantly at the Douro."
The blood rushed hotly to my cheek, my heart bounded with exultation; my
step, infirm and tottering but a moment before, became fixed and steady,
and I felt a thrill of proud enthusiasm playing through my veins. How
little did the speaker of those few and random words know what courage he
had given to a drooping heart, what renewed energy to a breaking spirit!
The voice of praise, too, coming from those to whom we had thought
ourselves unknown, has a magic about it that must be felt to be understood.
So it happened that in a few seconds a revolution had taken place in all
my thoughts and feelings, and I, who had left my quarters dispirited and
depressed, now walked confidently and proudly forward.
"Mr. O'Malley, sir," said the servant to the officer waiting, as we entered
the antechamber.
"Ah, Mr. O'Malley," said the aide-de-damp, in his blandest accent, "I hope
you're better. Sir George is most anxious to see you; he is at present
engaged with the staff--"
A bell rang at that moment, and cut short the sentence; he flew to the door
of the inner room, and returning in an instant, said,--
"Will you follow me? This way, if you please."
The room was crowded with general officers and aides-de-camp, so that for
a second or two I could not distinguish the parties; but no sooner was my
name announced, than Sir George Dashwood, forcing his way through, rushed
forward to meet me.
"O'Malley, my brave fellow, delighted to shake your hand again! How much
grown you are,--twice the man I knew you; and the arm, too, is it getting
on well?"
Scarcely giving me a moment to reply, and still holding my hand tightly in
his grasp, he introduced me on every side.
"My young Irish friend, Sir Edward, the man of the Douro. My Lord, allow me
to present Lieutenant O'Malley, of the Fourteenth."
"A very dashing thing, that of yours, sir, at Ciudad Rodrigo."
"A very senseless one, I fear, my Lord."
"No, no, I don't agree with you at all; even when no great results follow,
the morale of an army benefits by acts of daring."
A running fire of kind and civil speeches poured in on me from all
quarters, and amidst all that crowd of bronzed and war-worn veterans, I
felt myself the lion of the moment. Crawfurd, it appeared, had spoken most
handsomely of my name, and I was thus made known to many of those whose own
reputations were then extending over Europe.
In this happy trance of excited pleasure I passed the morning. Amidst
the military chit-chat of the day around me, treated as an equal by the
greatest and the most distinguished, I heard all the confidential opinions
upon the campaign and its leaders; and in that most entrancing of
all flatteries,--the easy tone of companionship of our elders and
betters,--forgot my griefs, and half believed I was destined for great
things.
Fearing, at length, that I had prolonged my visit too far, I approached
Sir George to take my leave, when, drawing my arm within his, he retired
towards one of the windows.
"A word, O'Malley, before you go. I've arranged a little plan for you;
mind, I shall insist upon obedience. They'll make some difficulty about
your remaining here, so that I have appointed you one of our extra
aides-de-camp. That will free you from all trouble, and I shall not be very
exacting in my demands upon you. You must, however, commence your duties
to-day, and as we dine at seven precisely, I shall expect you. I am
aware of your wish to stay in Lisbon, my boy, and if all I hear be true,
congratulate you sincerely; but more of this another time, and so good-by."
So saying, he shook my hand once more, warmly; and without well feeling how
or why, I found myself in the street.
The last few words Sir George had spoken threw a gloom over all my
thoughts. I saw at once that the report Power had alluded to had gained
currency at Lisbon. Sir George believed it; doubtless, Lucy, too; and
forgetting in an instant all the emulative ardor that so lately stirred my
heart, I took my path beside the river, and sauntered slowly along, lost in
my reflections.
I had walked for above an hour before paying any attention to the path I
followed. Mechanically, as it were, retreating from the noise and tumult-of
the city, I wandered towards the country. My thoughts fixed but upon
one theme, I had neither ears nor eyes for aught around me; the great
difficulty of my present position now appearing to me in this light,--my
attachment to Lucy Dashwood, unrequited and unreturned as I felt it,
did not permit of my rebutting any report which might have reached her
concerning Donna Inez. I had no right, no claim to suppose her sufficiently
interested about me to listen to such an explanation, had I even the
opportunity to make it. One thing was thus clear to me,--all my hopes had
ended in that quarter; and as this conclusion sank into my mind, a species
of dogged resolution to brave my fortune crept upon me, which only waited
the first moment of my meeting her to overthrow and destroy forever.
Meanwhile I walked on,--now rapidly, as some momentary rush of passionate
excitement, now slowly, as some depressing and gloomy notion succeeded;
when suddenly my path was arrested by a long file of bullock cars which
blocked up the way. Some chance squabble had arisen among the drivers, and
to avoid the crowd and collision, I turned into a gateway which opened
beside me, and soon found myself in a lawn handsomely planted and adorned
with flowering shrubs and ornamental trees.
In the half-dreamy state my musings had brought me to, I struggled to
recollect why the aspect of the place did not seem altogether new. My
thoughts were, however, far away,--now blending some memory of my distant
home with scenes of battle and bloodshed, or resting upon my first
interview with her whose chance word, carelessly and lightly spoken, had
written the story of my life. From this revery I was rudely awakened by a
rustling noise in the trees behind me, and before I could turn my head, the
two fore-paws of a large stag-hound were planted upon my shoulders, while
the open mouth and panting tongue were close beside my face. My day-dream
was dispelled quick as lightning; it was Juan, himself, the favorite dog of
the senhora, who gave me this rude welcome, and who now, by a thousand wild
gestures and bounding caresses, seemed to do the honors of his house. There
was something so like home in these joyful greetings that I yielded myself
at once his prisoner, and followed, or rather was accompanied by him
towards the villa.
Of course, sooner or later, I should have called upon my kind friends; then
why not now, when chance has already brought me so near? Besides, if I
held to my resolution, which I meant to do,--of retiring to some quiet and
sequestered cottage till my health was restored,--the opportunity might not
readily present itself again. This line of argument perfectly satisfied my
reason; while a strong feeling of something like curiosity piqued me to
proceed, and before many minutes elapsed, I reached the house. The door, as
usual, lay wide open; and the ample hall, furnished like a sitting-room,
had its customary litter of books, music, and flowers scattered upon the
tables. My friend Juan, however, suffered me not to linger here, but
rushing furiously at a door before me, began a vigorous attack for
admittance.
As I knew this to be the drawing-room, I opened the door and walked in, but
no one was to be seen; a half-open book lay upon an ottoman, and a fan,
which I recognized as an old acquaintance, was beside it, but the owner was
absent.
I sat down, resolved to wait patiently for her coming, without any
announcement of my being there. I was not sorry, indeed, to have some
moments to collect my thoughts, and restore my erring faculties to
something like order.
As I looked about the room, it seemed as if I had been there but yesterday.
The folding-doors lay open to the garden, just as I had seen them last; and
save that the flowers seemed fewer, and those which remained of a darker
and more sombre tint, all seemed unchanged. There lay the guitar to whose
thrilling chords my heart had bounded; there, the drawing over which I had
bent in admiring pleasure, suggesting some tints of light or shadow, as the
fairy fingers traced them; every chair was known to me, and I greeted them
as things I cared for.
While thus I scanned each object around me, I was struck by a little china
vase which, unlike its other brethren, contained a bouquet of dead and
faded flowers; the blood rushed to my cheek; I started up; it was one I had
myself presented to her the day before we parted. It was in that same vase
I placed it; the very table, too, stood in the same position beside that
narrow window. What a rush of thoughts came pouring on me! And oh!--shall I
confess it?--how deeply did such a mute testimony of remembrance speak
to my heart, at the moment that I felt myself unloved and uncared for by
another! I walked hurriedly up and down, a maze of conflicting resolves
combating in my mind, while one thought ever recurred: "Would that I had
not come there!" and yet after all it may mean nothing; some piece of
passing coquetry which she will be the very first to laugh at. I remembered
how she spoke of poor Howard; what folly to take it otherwise! "Be it so,
then," said I, half aloud; "and now for my part of the game;" and with this
I took from my pocket the light-blue scarf she had given me the morning we
parted, and throwing it over my shoulder, prepared to perform my part in
what I had fully persuaded myself to be a comedy. The time, however, passed
on, and she came not; a thousand high-flown Portuguese phrases had time to
be conned over again and again by me, and I had abundant leisure to enact
my coming part; but still the curtain did not rise. As the day was wearing,
I resolved at last to write a few lines, expressive of my regret at not
meeting her, and promising myself an early opportunity of paying my
respects under more fortunate circumstances. I sat down accordingly, and
drawing the paper towards me, began in a mixture of French and Portuguese,
as it happened, to indite my billet.
"Senhora Inez--" no--"Ma chre Mademoiselle Inez--" confound it, that's too
intimate; well, here goes: "Monsieur O'Malley presente ses respects--" that
will never do; and then, after twenty other abortive attempts, I began
thoughtlessly sketching heads upon the paper, and scribbling with wonderful
facility in fifty different ways: "Ma charmante amie--Ma plus chre Inez,"
etc., and in this most useful and profitable occupation did I pass another
half-hour.
How long I should have persisted in such an employment it is difficult to
say, had not an incident intervened which suddenly but most effectually put
an end to it. As the circumstance is one which, however little striking in
itself, had the greatest and most lasting influence upon my future career,
I shall, perhaps, be excused in devoting another chapter to its recital.
CHAPTER X.
A PLEASANT PREDICAMENT.
As I sat vainly endeavoring to fix upon some suitable and appropriate
epithet by which to commence my note, my back was turned towards the door
of the garden; and so occupied was I in my meditations, that even had any
one entered at the time, in all probability I should not have perceived it.
At length, however, I was aroused from my study by a burst of laughter,
whose girlish joyousness was not quite new to me. I knew it well; it was
the senhora herself; and the next moment I heard her voice.
"I tell you, I'm quite certain I saw his face in the mirror as I passed.
Oh, how delightful! and you'll be charmed with him; so, mind, you must not
steal him from me; I shall never forgive you if you do; and look, only
look! he has got the blue scarf I gave him when he marched to the Douro."
While I perceived that I was myself seen, I could see nothing of the
speaker, and wishing to hear something further, appeared more than ever
occupied in the writing before me.
What her companion replied I could not, however, catch, but only guess at
its import by the senhora's answer. "Fi done!--I really am very fond of
him; but, never fear, I shall be as stately as a queen. You shall see how
meekly he will kiss my hand, and with what unbending reserve I'll receive
him."
"Indeed!" thought I; "mayhap, I'll mar your plot a little; but let us
listen."
Again her friend spoke, but too low to be heard.
"It is so provoking," continued Inez; "I never can remember names, and his
was something too absurd; but never mind, I shall make him a grandee of
Portugal. Well, but come along, I long to present him to you."
Here a gentle struggle seemed to ensue; for I heard the senhora coaxingly
entreat her, while her companion steadily resisted.
"I know very well you think I shall be so silly, and perhaps wrong; eh, is
it not so? but you are quite mistaken. You'll be surprised at my cold and
dignified manner. I shall draw myself proudly up, thus, and curtsying
deeply, say, 'Monsieur, j'ai l'honneur de vous saluer.'"
A laugh twice as mirthful as before interrupted her account of herself,
while I could hear the tones of her friend evidently in expostulation.
[Illustration: O'MALLEY FOLLOWING THE CUSTOM OF HIS COUNTRY.]
"Well, then, to be sure, you are provoking, but you really promise to
follow me. Be it so; then give me that moss-rose. How you have fluttered
me; now for it!"
So saying, I heard her foot upon the gravel, and the next instant upon the
marble step of the door. There is something in expectation that sets the
heart beating, and mine throbbed against my side. I waited, however, till
she entered, before lifting my head, and then springing suddenly up, with
one bound clasped her in my arms, and pressing my lips upon her roseate
cheek, said,--
"Mar charmante amie!" To disengage herself from me, and to spring
suddenly back was her first effort; to burst into an immoderate fit of
laughing, her second; her cheek was, however, covered with a deep blush,
and I already repented that my malice had gone so far.
"Pardon, Mademoiselle," said I, in affected innocence, "if I have so far
forgotten myself as to assume a habit of my own country to a stranger."
A half-angry toss of the head was her only reply, and turning towards the
garden, she called to her friend:--
"Come here, dearest, and instruct my ignorance upon your national customs;
but first let me present to you,--never know his name,--the Chevalier de
----What is it?"
The glass door opened as she spoke; a tall and graceful figure entered, and
turning suddenly round, showed me the features of Lucy Dashwood. We both
stood opposite each other, each mute with amazement. My feelings let me
not attempt to convey; shame, for the first moment stronger than aught
else, sent the blood rushing to my face and temples, and the next I was
cold and pale as death. As for her, I cannot guess at what passed in
her mind. She curtsied deeply to me, and with a half-smile of scarce
recognition passed by me, and walked towards a window.
"Comme vous tes amiable!" said the lively Portuguese, who comprehended
little of this dumb show; "here have I been flattering myself what friends
you'd be the very moment you meet, and now you'll not even look at each
other."
What was to be done? The situation was every instant growing more and more
embarrassing; nothing but downright effrontery could get through with
it now; and never did a man's heart more fail him than did mine at this
conjuncture. I made the' effort, however, and stammered out certain
unmeaning commonplaces. Inez replied, and I felt myself conversing with the
headlong recklessness of one marching to a scaffold, a coward's fear at his
heart, while he essayed to seem careless and indifferent.
Anxious to reach what I esteemed safe ground, I gladly adverted to the
campaign; and at last, hurried on by the impulse to cover my embarrassment,
was describing some skirmish with a French outpost. Without intending, I
had succeeded in exciting the senhora's interest, and she listened with
sparkling eye and parted lips to the description of a sweeping charge in
which a square was broken, and several prisoners carried off. Warming with
the eager avidity of her attention, I grew myself more excited, when just
as my narrative reached its climax, Miss Dashwood walked gently towards the
bell, rang it, and ordered her carriage. The tone of perfect nonchalance
of the whole proceeding struck me dumb; I faltered, stammered, hesitated,
and was silent. Donna Inez turned from one to the other of us with a look
of unfeigned astonishment and I heard her mutter to herself something
like a reflection upon "national eccentricities." Happily, however,
her attention was now exclusively turned towards her friend, and while
assisting her to shawl, and extorting innumerable promises of an early
visit, I got a momentary reprieve; the carriage drew up also, and as the
gravel flew right and left beneath the horses' feet, the very noise and
bustle relieved me. "Adios," then said Inez, as she kissed her for the
last time, while she motioned to me to escort her to her carriage. I
advanced, stopped, made another step forward, and again grew irresolute;
but Miss Dashwood speedily terminated the difficulty; for making me a
formal curtsey, she declined my scarce-proffered attention, and left the
room.
As she did so, I perceived that on passing the table, her eyes fell upon
the paper I had been scribbling over so long, and I thought that for
an instant an expression of ineffable scorn seemed to pass across her
features, save which--and perhaps even in this I was mistaken--her manner
was perfectly calm, easy, and indifferent.
Scarce had the carriage rolled from the door, when the senhora, throwing
herself upon her chair, clapped her hands in childish ecstasy, while she
fell into a fit of laughing that I thought would never have an end. "Such
a scene!" cried she; "I would not have lost it for the world; what
cordiality! what empressement to form acquaintance! I shall never forget
it, Monsieur le Chevalier; your national customs seem to run sadly in
extremes. One would have thought you deadly enemies; and poor me, after a
thousand delightful plans about you both!"
As she ran on thus, scarce able to control her mirth at each sentence, I
walked the room with impatient strides, now, resolving to hasten after the
carriage, stop it, explain in a few words how all had happened, and then
fly from her forever; then the remembrance of her cold, impassive look
crossed me, and I thought that one bold leap into the Tagus might be the
shortest and easiest solution to all my miseries. Perfect abasement,
thorough self-contempt had broken all my courage, and I could have cried
like a child. What I said, or how I comforted myself after, I know not; but
my first consciousness came to me as I felt myself running at the top of my
speed far upon the road towards Lisbon.
CHAPTER XI.
THE DINNER.
It may easily be imagined that I had little inclination to keep my promise
of dining that day with Sir George Dashwood. However, there was nothing
else for it; the die was cast,--my prospects as regarded Lucy were ruined
forever. We were not, we never could be anything to each other; and as for
me, the sooner I braved my altered fortunes the better; and after all, why
should I call them altered. She evidently never had cared for me; and even
supposing that my fervent declaration of attachment had interested her, the
apparent duplicity and falseness of my late conduct could only fall the
more heavily upon me.
I endeavored to philosophize myself into calmness and indifference. One by
one I exhausted every argument for my defence, which, however ingeniously
put forward, brought no comfort to my own conscience. I pleaded the
unerring devotion of my heart, the uprightness of my motives, and when
called on for the proofs,--alas! except the blue scarf I wore in memory of
another, and my absurd conduct at the villa, I had none. From the current
gossip of Lisbon, down to my own disgraceful folly, all, all was against
me.
Honesty of intention, rectitude of purpose, may be, doubtless they are,
admirable supports to a rightly constituted mind; but even then they must
come supported by such claims to probability as make the injured man feel
he has not lost the sympathy of all his fellows. Now, I had none of these,
had even my temperament, broken by sickness and harassed by unlucky
conjectures, permitted my appreciating them.
I endeavored to call my wounded pride to my aid, and thought over the
glance of haughty disdain she gave me as she passed on to her carriage; but
even this turned against me, and a humiliating sense of my own degraded
position sank deeply into my heart. "This impression at least," thought I,
"must be effaced. I cannot permit her to believe--"
"His Excellency is waiting dinner, sir," said a lackey, introducing a
finely powdered head gently within the door. I looked at my watch, it was
eight o'clock; so snatching my sabre, and shocked at my delay, I
hastily followed the servant down-stairs, and thus at once cut short my
deliberations.
The man must be but little observant or deeply sunk in his own reveries,
who, arriving half-an-hour too late for dinner, fails to detect in the
faces of the assembled and expectant guests a very palpable expression of
discontent and displeasure. It is truly a moment of awkwardness, and one
in which few are found to manage with success; the blushing, hesitating,
blundering apology of the absent man, is scarcely better than the
ill-affected surprise of the more practised offender. The bashfulness of
the one is as distasteful as the cool impertinence of the other; both are
so thoroughly out of place, for we are thinking of neither; our thoughts
are wandering to cold soups and rechauffd pts, and we neither care for
nor estimate the cause, but satisfy our spleen by cursing the offender.
Happily for me I was clad in a triple insensibility to such feelings,
and with an air of most perfect unconstraint and composure walked into
a drawing-room where about twenty persons were busily discussing what
peculiar amiability in my character could compensate for my present
conduct.
"At last, O'Malley, at last!" said Sir George. "Why, my dear boy, how very
late you are!"
I muttered something about a long walk,--distance from Lisbon, etc.
"Ah! that was it. I was right, you see!" said an old lady in a spangled
turban, as she whispered something to her friend beside her, who appeared
excessively shocked at the information conveyed; while a fat, round-faced
little general, after eying me steadily through his glass, expressed a
sotto voce wish that I was upon his staff. I felt my cheek reddening
at the moment, and stared around me like one whose trials were becoming
downright insufferable, when happily dinner was announced, and terminated
my embarrassment.
As the party filed past, I perceived that Miss Dashwood was not among them;
and with a heart relieved for the moment by the circumstance, and inventing
a hundred conjectures to account for it, I followed with the aides-de-camp
and the staff to the dinner-room.
The temperament is very Irish, I believe, which renders a man so elastic
that from the extreme of depression to the very climax of high spirits,
there is but one spring. To this I myself plead guilty, and thus, scarcely
was I freed from the embarrassment which a meeting with Lucy Dashwood must
have caused, when my heart bounded with lightness.
When the ladies withdrew, the events of the campaign became the subject of
conversation, and upon these, very much to my astonishment, I found myself
consulted as an authority. The Douro, from some fortunate circumstance, had
given me a reputation I never dreamed of, and I heard my opinions quoted
upon topics of which my standing as an officer, and my rank in the service,
could not imply a very extended observation. Power was absent on duty; and
happily for my supremacy, the company consisted entirely of generals in the
commissariat or new arrivals from England, all of whom knew still less than
myself.
What will not iced champagne and flattery do? Singly, they are strong
impulses; combined, their power is irresistible. I now heard for the first
time that our great leader had been elevated to the peerage by the title of
Lord Wellington, and I sincerely believe--however now I may smile at the
confession--that, at the moment, I felt more elation at the circumstance
than he did. The glorious sensation of being in any way, no matter how
remotely, linked with the career of those whose path is a high one, and
whose destinies are cast for great events, thrilled through me; and in
all the warmth of my admiration and pride for our great captain, a secret
pleasure stirred within me as I whispered to myself, "And I, too, am a
soldier!"
I fear me that very little flattery is sufficient to turn the head of a
young man of eighteen; and if I yielded to the "pleasant incense," let my
apology be that I was not used to it; and lastly, let me avow, if I did get
tipsy, I liked the liquor. And why not? It is the only tipple I know of
that leaves no headache the next morning to punish you for the glories of
the past night. It may, like all other strong potations, it is true, induce
you to make a fool of yourself when under its influence; but like the
nitrous-oxide gas, its effects are passing, and as the pleasure is an
ecstasy for the time, and your constitution none the worse when it is over,
I really see no harm in it.
Then the benefits are manifest; for while he who gives becomes never the
poorer for his benevolence, the receiver is made rich indeed. It matters
little that some dear, kind friend is ready with his bitter draught to
remedy what he is pleased to call its unwholesome sweetness; you betake
yourself with only the more pleasure to the "blessed elixir," whose
fascinations neither the poverty of your pocket, nor the penury of your
brain, can withstand, and by the magic of whose spell you are great and
gifted. "Vive la bagatelle!" saith the Frenchman. "Long live flattery!"
say I, come from what quarter it will,--the only wealth of the poor man,
the only reward of the unknown one; the arm that supports us in failure;
the hand that crowns us in success; the comforter in our affliction; the
gay companion in our hours of pleasure; the lullaby of the infant; the
staff of old age; the secret treasure we lock up in our own hearts, and
which ever grows greater as we count it over. Let me not be told that the
coin is fictitious, and the gold not genuine; its clink is as musical to
the ear as though it bore the last impression of the mint, and I'm not the
man to cast an aspersion upon its value.
This little digression, however seemingly out of place, may serve to
illustrate what it might be difficult to convey in other words,--namely,
that if Charles O'Malley became, in his own estimation, a very considerable
personage that day at dinner, the fault lay not entirely with himself, but
with his friends, who told him he was such. In fact, my good reader, I was
the lion of the party, the man who saved Laborde, who charged through a
brigade of guns, who performed feats which newspapers quoted, though he
never heard of them himself. At no time is a man so successful in society
as when his reputation heralds him; and it needs but little conversational
eloquence to talk well, if you have but a willing and ready auditory. Of
mine, I could certainly not complain; and as, drinking deeply, I poured
forth a whole tide of campaigning recital, I saw the old colonels of
recruiting districts exchanging looks of wonder and admiration with
officers of the ordnance; while Sir George himself, evidently pleased at my
dbut, went back to an early period of our acquaintance, and related the
rescue of his daughter in Galway.
In an instant the whole current of my thoughts was changed. My first
meeting with Lucy, my boyhood's dream of ambition, my plighted faith,
my thought of our last parting in Dublin, when, in a moment of excited
madness, I told my tale of love. I remembered her downcast look, as her
cheek now flushing, now growing pale, she trembled while I spoke. I thought
of her, as in the crash of battle her image flashed across my brain, and
made me feel a rush of chivalrous enthusiasm to win her heart by "doughty
deeds."
I forgot all around and about me. My head reeled, the wine, the excitement,
my long previous illness, all pressed upon me; and as my temples throbbed
loudly and painfully, a chaotic rush of discordant, ill-connected ideas
flitted across my mind. There seemed some stir and confusion in the room,
but why or wherefore I could not think, nor could I recall my scattered
senses, till Sir George Dashwood's voice roused me once again to
consciousness.
"We are going to have some coffee, O'Malley. Miss Dashwood expects us in
the drawing-room. You have not seen her yet?"
I know not my reply; but he continued:--
"She has some letters for you, I think."
I muttered something, and suffered him to pass on; no sooner had he done
so, however, than I turned towards the door, and rushed into the street.
The cold night air suddenly recalled me to myself, and I stood for a moment
endeavoring to collect myself; as I did so, a servant stopped, and saluting
me, presented me with a letter. For a second, a cold chill came over me; I
knew not what fear beset me. The letter, I at last remembered, must be that
one alluded to by Sir George, so I took it in silence, and walked on.
CHAPTER XII.
THE LETTER.
As I hurried to my quarters, I made a hundred guesses from whom the letter
could have come; a kind of presentiment told me that it bore, in some
measure, upon the present crisis of my life, and I burned with anxiety to
read it.
No sooner had I reached the light, than all my hopes on this head vanished;
the envelope bore the well-known name of my old college chum, Frank Webber,
and none could, at the moment, have more completely dispelled all chance
of interesting me. I threw it from me with disappointment, and sat moodily
down to brood over my fate.
At length, however, and almost without knowing it, I drew the lamp towards
me, and broke the seal. The reader being already acquainted with my amiable
friend, there is the less indiscretion in communicating the contents, which
ran thus:--
TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN, No. 2,
October 5, 1810.
My Dear O'Malley,--Nothing short of your death and burial,
with or without military honors, can possibly excuse your very
disgraceful neglect of your old friends here. Nesbitt has never
heard of you, neither has Smith. Ottley swears never to have seen
your handwriting, save on the back of a protested bill. You have
totally forgotten me, and the dean informs me that you have never
condescended a single line to him; which latter inquiry on my part
nearly cost me a rustication.
A hundred conjectures to account for your silence--a new feature
in you since you were here--are afloat. Some assert that your
soldiering has turned your head, and that you are above corresponding
with civilians. Your friends, however, who know you better and
value your worth, think otherwise; and having seen a paragraph
about a certain O'Malley being tried by court-martial for stealing a
goose, and maltreating the woman that owned it, ascribe your not
writing to other motives. Do, in any case, relieve our minds; say,
is it yourself, or only a relative that's mentioned?
Herbert came over from London with a long story about your
doing wonderful things,--capturing cannon and general officers by
scores,--but devil a word of it is extant; and if you have really
committed these acts, they have "misused the king's press damnably,"
for neither in the "Times" nor the "Post" are you heard of.
Answer this point, and say also if you have got promotion; for what
precise sign you are algebraically expressed by at this writing, may
serve Fitzgerald for a fellowship question. As for us, we are jogging
along, semper eadem,--that is, worse and worse. Dear Cecil
Cavendish, our gifted friend, slight of limb and soft of voice, has
been rusticated for immersing four bricklayers in that green
receptacle of stagnant water and duckweed, yeleped the "Haha."
Roper, equally unlucky, has taken to reading for honors, and obtained
a medal, I fancy,--at least his friends shy him, and it must be
something of that kind. Belson--poor Belson (fortunately for him he
was born in the nineteenth, not the sixteenth century, or he'd be most
likely ornamenting a pile of fagots) ventured upon some stray
excursions into the Hebrew verbs,--the professor himself never having
transgressed beyond the declensions, and the consequence is, he is
in disgrace among the seniors. And as for me, a heavy charge hangs
over my devoted head even while I write. The senior lecturer, it
appears, has been for some time instituting some very singular
researches into the original state of our goodly college at its
founding. Plans and specifications showing its extent and magnificence
have been continually before the board for the last month; and in such
repute have been a smashed door-sill or an old arch, that freshmen
have now abandoned conic sections for crowbars, and instead of the
"Principia" have taken up the pickaxe. You know, my dear fellow,
with what enthusiasm I enter into any scheme for the aggrandizement
of our Alma Mater, so I need not tell you how ardently I
adventured into the career now opened to me. My time was completely
devoted to the matter; neither means nor health did I spare,
and in my search for antiquarian lore, I have actually undermined
the old wall of the fellows' garden, and am each morning in expectation
of hearing that the big bell near the commons-hall has descended
from its lofty and most noisy eminence, and is snugly reposing in
the mud. Meanwhile accident put me in possession of a most
singular and remarkable discovery. Our chambers--I call them
ours for old association sake--are, you may remember, in the Old
Square. Well, I have been fortunate enough, within the very precincts
of my own dwelling, to contribute a very wonderful fact to the
history of the University; alone, unassisted, unaided, I labored
at my discovery. Few can estimate the pleasure I felt, the fame
and reputation I anticipated. I drew up a little memoir for the
board, most respectfully and civilly worded, having for title the
following:--
ACCOUNT
Of a remarkable Subterranean Passage lately discovered in the
Old Building of Trinity College, Dublin;
With Observations upon its Extent, Antiquity, and Probable Use.
By F. WEBBER, Senior Freshman.
My dear O'Malley, I'll not dwell upon the pride I felt in my new
character of antiquarian; it is enough to state, that my very
remarkable tract was well considered and received, and a commission
appointed to investigate the discovery, consisting of the
vice-provost, the senior lecturer, old Woodhouse, the sub-dean, and
a few more.
On Tuesday last they came accordingly in full academic costume.
I, being habited most accurately in the like manner, conducted
them with all form into my bed-room, where a large screen concealed
from view the entrance to the tunnel alluded to. Assuming a very
John Kembleish attitude, I struck this down with one hand, pointing
with the other to the wall, as I exclaimed, "There! look
there!"
I need only quote Barret's exclamation to enlighten you upon my
discovery as, drawing in his breath with a strong effort, he burst
out:--
"May the Devil admire me, but it's a rat-hole!"
I fear, Charley, he's right, and what's more, that the board will
think so, for this moment a very warm discussion is going on among
that amiable and learned body whether I shall any longer remain an
ornament to the University. In fact, the terror with which they
fled from my chambers, overturning each other in the passage,
seemed to imply that they thought me mad, and I do believe my
voice, look, and attitude would not have disgraced a blue cotton
dressing-gown and a cell in "Swift's." Be this as it may, few men
have done more for college than I have. The sun never stood still
for Joshua with more resolution than I have rested in my career of
freshman; and if I have contributed little to the fame, I have done
much for the funds of the University; and when they come to compute
the various sums I have paid in, for fines, penalties, and what
they call properly "impositions," if they don't place a portrait of me
in the examination hall, between Archbishop Ussher and Flood, then
do I say there is no gratitude in mankind; not to mention the impulse
I have given to the various artisans whose business it is to
repair lamps, windows, chimneys, iron railings, and watchmen, all
of which I have devoted myself to with an enthusiasm for political
economy well known, and registered in the College Street police-office.
After all, Charley, I miss you greatly. Your second in a ballad is
not to be replaced; besides, Carlisle Bridge has got low; medical
students and young attorneys affect minstrelsy, and actually frequent
the haunts sacred to our muse.
Dublin is, upon the whole, I think, worse; though one scarcely
ever gets tired laughing at the small celebrities--
Master Frank gets here indiscreet, so I shall skip.
And so the Dashwoods are going too; this will make mine a
pitiable condition, for I really did begin to feel tender in that
quarter. You may have heard that she refused me; this, however, is not
correct, though I have little doubt it might have been,--had I
asked her.
Hammersley has, you know, got his dismissal. I wonder how the
poor fellow took it when Power gave him back his letters and his
picture. How you are to be treated remains to be seen; in any
case, you certainly stand first favorite.
I laid down the letter at this passage, unable to read farther. Here, then,
was the solution of the whole chaos of mystery; here the full explanation
of what had puzzled my aching brain for many a night long. These were the
very letters I had myself delivered into Hammersley's hands; this the
picture he had trodden to dust beneath his heel the morning of our meeting.
I now felt the reason of his taunting allusion to my "success," his cutting
sarcasm, his intemperate passion. A flood of light poured at once across
all the dark passages of my history; and Lucy, too,--dare I think of her! A
rapid thought shot through my brain. What if she had really cared for me!
What if for me she had rejected another's love! What if, trusting to my
faith, my pledged and sworn faith, she had given me her heart! Oh, the
bitter agony of that thought! To think that all my hopes were shipwrecked
with the very land in sight.
I sprang to my feet with some sudden impulse, but as I did so the blood
rushed madly to my face and temples, which beat violently; a parched and
swollen feeling came about my throat; I endeavored to open my collar
and undo my stock, but my disabled arm prevented me. I tried to call
my servant, but my utterance was thick and my words would not come; a
frightful suspicion crossed me that my reason was tottering. I made towards
the door; but as I did so, the objects around me became confused and
mingled, my limbs trembled, and I fell heavily upon the floor. A pang of
dreadful pain shot through me as I fell; my arm was rebroken. After this I
knew no more; all the accumulated excitement of the evening bore down with
one fell swoop upon my brain. Ere day broke, I was delirious.
I have a vague and indistinct remembrance of hurried and anxious faces
around my bed, of whispered words and sorrowful looks; but my own thoughts
careered over the bold hills of the far west as I trod them in my
boyhood, free and high of heart, or recurred to the din and crash of the
battle-field, with the mad bounding of the war-horse, and the loud clang of
the trumpet. Perhaps the acute pain of my swollen and suffering arm gave
the character to my mental aberration; for I have more than once observed
among the wounded in battle, that even when torn and mangled by grape
from a howitzer, their ravings have partaken of a high feature of
enthusiasm,--shouts of triumph and exclamations of pleasure, even
songs have I heard, but never once the low muttering of despair or the
half-stifled cry of sorrow and affliction.
Such were the few gleams of consciousness which visited me; and even to
such as these I soon became insensible.
Few like to chronicle, fewer still to read, the sad history of a sick-bed.
Of mine, I know but little. The throbbing pulses of the erring brain, the
wild fancies of lunacy, take no note of time. There is no past nor future;
a dreadful present, full of its hurried and confused impressions, is all
that the mind beholds; and even when some gleams of returning reason flash
upon the mad confusion of the brain, they come like sunbeams through a
cloud, dimmed, darkened, and perverted.
It is the restless activity of the mind in fever that constitutes its
most painful anguish; the fast-flitting thoughts that rush ever onwards,
crowding sensation on sensation, an endless train of exciting images
without purpose or repose; or even worse, the straining effort to pursue
some vague and shadowy conception which evades us ever as we follow, but
which mingles with all around and about us, haunting us at midnight as in
the noontime. Of this nature was a vision which came constantly before
me, till at length, by its very recurrence, it assumed a kind of real and
palpable existence; and as I watched it, my heart thrilled with the high
ardor of enthusiasm and delight, or sunk into the dark abyss of sorrow and
despair. "The dawning of morning, the daylight sinking," brought no other
image to my aching sight; and of this alone, of all the impressions of the
period, has my mind retained any consciousness.
Methought I stood within an old and venerable cathedral, where the dim
yellow light fell with a rich but solemn glow upon the fretted capitals,
or the grotesque tracings of the oaken carvings, lighting up the fading
gildings of the stately monuments, and tinting the varied hues of time-worn
banners. The mellow notes of a deep organ filled the air, and seemed to
attune the sense to all the awe and reverence of the place, where the very
footfall, magnified by its many echoes, seemed half a profanation. I stood
before an altar, beside me a young and lovely girl, whose bright brown
tresses waved in loose masses upon a neck of snowy whiteness; her hand,
cold and pale, rested within my own; we knelt together, not in prayer, but
a feeling of deep reverence stole over my heart, as she repeated some few
half-uttered words after me; I knew that she was mine. Oh, the ecstasy of
that moment, as, springing to my feet, I darted forward to press her to my
heart! When, suddenly, an arm was interposed between us, while a low but
solemn voice rang in my ears, "Stir not; for thou art false and traitorous,
thy vow a perjury, and thy heart a lie!" Slowly and silently the fair form
of my loved Lucy--for it was her--receded from my sight. One look, one last
look of sorrow--it was scarce reproach--fell upon me, and I sank back upon
the cold pavement, broken-hearted and forsaken.
This dream came with daybreak, and with the calm repose of evening; the
still hours of the waking night brought no other image to my eyes, and when
its sad influence had spread a gloom and desolation over my wounded heart,
a secret hope crept over me, that again the bright moment of happiness
would return, and once more beside that ancient altar I'd kneel beside my
bride, and call her mine.
For the rest, my memory retains but little; the kind looks which came
around my bedside brought but a brief pleasure, for in their affectionate
beaming I could read the gloomy prestige of my fate. The hurried but
cautious step, the whispered sentences, the averted gaze of those who
sorrowed for me, sunk far deeper into my heart than my friends then thought
of. Little do they think, who minister to the sick or dying, how each
passing word, each flitting glance is noted, and how the pale and stilly
figure which lies all but lifeless before them counts over the hours he has
to live by the smiles or tears around him!
Hours, days, weeks rolled over, and still my fate hung in the balance; and
while in the wild enthusiasm of my erring faculties, I wandered far in
spirit from my bed of suffering and pain, some well-remembered voice beside
me would strike upon my ear, bringing me back, as if by magic, to all the
realities of life, and investing my almost unconscious state with all the
hopes and fears about me.
One by one, at length, these fancies fled from me, and to the delirium of
fever succeeded the sad and helpless consciousness of illness, far, far
more depressing; for as the conviction of sense came back, the sorrowful
aspect of a dreary future came with it.
CHAPTER XIII.
THE VILLA.
The gentle twilight of an autumnal evening, calm, serene, and mellow, was
falling as I opened my eyes to consciousness of life and being, and looked
around me. I lay in a large and handsomely-furnished apartment, in which
the hand of taste was as evident in all the decorations as the unsparing
employment of wealth; the silk draperies of my bed, the inlaid tables, the
ormolu ornaments which glittered upon the chimney, were one by one so many
puzzles to my erring senses, and I opened and shut my eyes again and again,
and essayed by every means in my power to ascertain if they were not the
visionary creations of a fevered mind. I stretched out my hands to feel the
objects; and even while holding the freshly-plucked flowers in my grasp I
could scarce persuade myself that they were real. A thrill of pain at this
instant recalled me to other thoughts, and I turned my eyes upon my wounded
arm, which, swollen and stiffened, lay motionless beside me. Gradually, my
memory came back, and to my weak faculties some passages of my former
life were presented, not collectedly it is true, nor in any order, but
scattered, isolated scenes. While such thoughts flew past, my ever-rising
question to myself was, "Where am I now?" The vague feeling which illness
leaves upon the mind, whispered to me of kind looks and soft voices; and
I had a dreamy consciousness about me of being watched and cared for, but
wherefore, or by whom, I knew not.
From a partly open door which led into a garden, a mild and balmy air
fanned my temples and soothed my heated brow; and as the light curtain
waved to and fro with the breeze, the odor of the rose and the orange-tree
filled the apartment.
There is something in the feeling of weakness which succeeds to long
illness of the most delicious and refined enjoyment. The spirit emerging as
it were from the thraldom of its grosser prison, rises high and triumphant
above the meaner thoughts and more petty ambitions of daily life. Purer
feelings, more ennobling hopes succeed; and dreams of our childhood,
mingling with our promises for the future, make up an ideal existence
in which the low passions and cares of ordinary life enter not or are
forgotten. 'Tis then we learn to hold converse with ourselves; 'tis then we
ask how has our manhood performed the promises of its youth, or have our
ripened prospects borne out the pledges of our boyhood? 'Tis then, in
the calm justice of our lonely hearts, we learn how our failures are but
another name for our faults, and that what we looked on as the vicissitudes
of fortune are but the fruits of our own vices. Alas, how short-lived are
such intervals! Like the fitful sunshine in the wintry sky, they throw one
bright and joyous tint over the dark landscape: for a moment the valley and
the mountain-top are bathed in a ruddy glow; the leafless tree and the dark
moss seem to feel a touch of spring; but the next instant it is past; the
lowering clouds and dark shadows intervene, and the cold blast, the moaning
wind, and the dreary waste are once more before us.
I endeavored to recall the latest events of my career, but in vain; the
real and the visionary were inextricably mingled, and the scenes of my
campaigns were blended with hopes and fears and doubts which had no
existence save in my dreams. My curiosity to know where I was grew now my
strongest feeling, and I raised myself with one arm to look around me. In
the room all was still and silent, but nothing seemed to intimate what I
sought for. As I looked, however, the wind blew back the curtain which
half-concealed the sash-door, and disclosed to me the figure of a man
seated at a table; his back was towards me, but his broad sombrero hat
and brown mantle bespoke his nation; the light blue curl of smoke
which wreathed gently upwards, and the ample display of long-necked,
straw-wrapped flasks, also attested that he was enjoying himself with true
Peninsular gusto, having probably partaken of a long siesta.
It was a perfect picture in its way of the indolent luxury of the
South,--the rich and perfumed flowers, half-closing to the night air, but
sighing forth a perfumed buonas noches as they betook themselves to rest;
the slender shadows of the tall shrubs, stretching motionless across the
walks; the very attitude of the figure himself was in keeping as supported
by easy chairs he lounged at full length, raising his head ever and anon as
if to watch the wreath of eddying smoke as it rose upwards from his cigar
and melted away in the distance.
[Illustration: MR. FREE TURNED SPANIARD.]
"Yes", thought I, as I looked for some time, "such is the very type of his
nation. Surrounded by every luxury of climate, blessed with all that earth
can offer of its best and fairest, and yet only using such gifts as mere
sensual gratifications." Starting with this theme, I wove a whole story for
the unknown personage whom, in my wandering fancy, I began by creating
a grandee of Portugal, invested with rank honors, and riches; but who,
effeminated by the habits and usages of his country, had become the mere
idle voluptuary, living a life of easy and inglorious indolence. My further
musings were interrupted at this moment for the individual to whom I
had been so complimentary in my revery, slowly arose from his recumbent
position, flung his loose mantle carelessly across his left shoulder, and
pushing open the sash-door, entered my chamber. Directing his steps to a
large mirror, he stood for some minutes contemplating himself with what,
from his attitude, I judged to be no small satisfaction. Though his back
was still towards me, and the dim twilight of the room too uncertain to see
much, yet I could perceive that he was evidently admiring himself in the
glass. Of this fact I had soon the most complete proof; for as I looked,
he slowly raised his broad-leafed Spanish hat with an air of most imposing
pretension, and bowed reverently to himself.
"Come sta vostra senoria?" said he.
The whole gesture and style of this proceeding struck me as so ridiculous,
that in spite of all my efforts I could scarcely repress a laugh. He turned
quickly round and approached the bed. The deep shadow of the sombrero
darkened the upper part of his features, but I could distinguish a pair of
fierce-looking mustaches beneath, which curled upwards towards his eyes,
while a stiff point beard stuck straight from his chin. Fearing lest my
rude interruption had been overheard, I was framing some polite speech in
Portuguese, when he opened the dialogue by asking in that language how I
did.
I replied, and was about to ask some questions relative to where, and
under whose protection I then was, when my grave-looking friend, giving a
pirouette upon one leg, sent his hat flying into the air, and cried out in
a voice that not even my memory could fail to recognize,--
"By the rock of Cashel he's cured!--he's cured!--the fever's over! Oh,
Master Charles, dear! oh, Master, darling, and you ain't mad, after all?"
"Mad! no, faith! but I shrewdly suspect you must be."
"Oh, devil a taste! But spake to me, honey; spake to me, acushla!"
"Where am I? Whose house is this? What do you mean by that disguise, that
beard--"
"Whisht, I'll tell you all, av you have patience? But are you cured? Tell
me that first. Sure they was going to cut the arm off you, till you got out
of bed, and with your pistols, sent them flying, one out of the window and
the other down-stairs; and I bate the little chap with the saw myself till
he couldn't know himself in the glass."
While Mike ran on at this rate, I never took my eyes from him, and it was
all my poor faculties were equal to, to convince myself that the whole
scene was not some vision of a wandering intellect. Gradually, however, the
well-known features recalled me to myself, and as my doubts gave way at
length, I laughed long and heartily at the masquerade absurdity of his
appearance.
Mike, meanwhile, whose face expressed no small mistrust at the sincerity of
my mirth, having uncloaked himself, proceeded to lay aside his beard and
mustaches, saying, as he did so,--
"There now, darling; there now, Master, dear,--don't be grinning that
way,--I'll not be a Portigee any more, av you'll be quiet and listen to
reason."
"But, Mike, where am I? Answer me that one question."
"You're at home, dear; where else would you be?"
"At home?" said I, with a start, as my eye ranged over the various articles
of luxury and elegance around, so unlike the more simple and unpretending
features of my uncle's house,--"at home?"
"Ay, just so; sure, isn't it the same thing. It's ould Don Emanuel that
owns it; and won't it be your own when you're married to that lovely
crayture herself?"
I started up, and placing my hand upon my throbbing temples, asked myself
if I were really awake, or if some flight of fancy had not carried me away
beyond the bounds of reason and sense. "Go on, go on!" said I, at length,
in a hollow voice, anxious to gather from his words something like a clew
to this mystery. "How did this happen?"
"Av ye mean how you came here, faith, it was just this way. After you got
the fever, and beat the doctors, devil a one would go near you but myself
and the major."
"The major,--Major Monsoon?"
"No, Major Power himself. Well, he told your friends up here how it was
going very hard with you, and that you were like to die; and the same
evening they sent down a beautiful litter, as like a hearse as two peas,
for you, and brought you up here in state,--devil a thing was wanting but
a few people to raise the cry to make it as fine a funeral as ever I seen.
And sure, I set up a whillilew myself in the Black Horse Square, and the
devils only laughed at me.
"Well, you see they put you into a beautiful, elegant bed, and the young
lady herself sat down beside you, betune times fanning you with a big
fan, and then drying her eyes, for she was weeping like a waterfall. 'Don
Miguel,' says she to me,--for ye see, I put your cloak on by mistake when I
was leaving the quarters,--'Don Miguel, questa hidalgo  vostro amigo?'
"'My most particular friend,' says I; 'God spare him many years to be so.'
"'Then take up your quarters here,' says she, 'and don't leave him; we'll
do everything in our power to make you comfortable.'
"'I'm not particular,' says I; 'the run of the house--'
"Then this is the Villa Nuova?" said I, with a faint sigh.
"The same," replied Mike; "and a sweet place it is for eating and
drinking,--for wine in buckets full, av ye axed for it, for dancing and
singing every evening, with as pretty craytures as ever I set eyes upon.
Upon my conscience, it's as good as Galway; and good manners it is they
have. What's more, none of your liberties or familiarities with strangers;
but it's Don Miguel, devil a less. 'Don Miguel, av it's plazing to you to
take a drop of Xeres before your meat?' or, 'Would you have a shaugh of a
pipe or cigar when you're done?' That's the way of it."
"And Sir George Dashwood," said I, "has he been here? Has he inquired for
me?"
"Every day either himself or one of the staff comes galloping up at
luncheon time to ask after you; and then they have a bit of tender
discourse with the senhora herself. Oh, devil a bit need ye fear them,
she's true blue; and it isn't the major's fault,--upon my conscience it
isn't,--for he does be coming the blarney over her in beautiful style."
"Does Miss Dashwood ever visit here?" said I, with a voice faltering and
uncertain enough to have awakened suspicion in a more practised observer.
"Never once; and that's what I call unnatural behavior, after you saving
her life; and if she wasn't--"
"Be silent, I say."
"Well, well, there, I won't say any more; and sure it's time for me to be
putting on my beard again. I'm going to the Casino with Catrina, and sure
it's with real ladies I might be going av it wasn't for Major Power, that
told them I wasn't a officer; but it's all right again. I gave them a great
history of the Frees from the time of Cuilla na Toole, that was one of the
family and a cousin of Moses, I believe; and they behave well to one that
comes from an ould stock."
"Don Miguel! Don Miguel!" said a voice from the garden.
"I'm coming, my angel! I'm coming, my turtle-dove!" said Mike, arranging
his mustaches and beard with amazing dexterity. "Ah, but it would do your
heart good av you could take a peep at us about twelve o'clock, dancing
'Dirty James' for a bolero, and just see Miss Catrina, the lady's maid,
doing 'cover the buckle' as neat as Nature. There now, there's the lemonade
near your hand, and I'll leave you the lamp, and you may go asleep as soon
as you please, for Miss Inez won't come in to-night to play the guitar, for
the doctor said it might do you harm now."
So saying, and before I could summon presence of mind to ask another
question, Don Miguel wrapped himself in the broad folds of his Spanish
cloak, and strode from the room with the air of an hidalgo.
I slept but little that night; the full tide of memory, rushing in upon me,
brought back the hour of my return to Lisbon and the wreck of all my hopes,
which from the narrative of my servant I now perceived to be complete. I
dare not venture upon recording how many plans suggested themselves to my
troubled spirit, and were in turn rejected. To meet Lucy Dashwood; to make
a full and candid declaration; to acknowledge that flirtation alone with
Donna Inez (a mere passing, boyish flirtation) had given the coloring to
my innocent passion, and that in heart and soul I was hers, and hers
only,--this was my first resolve; but alas! if I had not courage to sustain
a common interview, to meet her in the careless crowd of a drawing-room,
what could I do under circumstances like these? Besides, the matter would
be cut very short by her coolly declaring that she had neither right nor
inclination to listen to such a declaration. The recollection of her look
as she passed me to her carriage came flashing across my brain and decided
this point. No, no! I'll not encounter that; however appearances for the
moment had been against me, she should not have treated me thus coldly and
disdainfully. It was quite clear she had never cared for me,--wounded pride
had been her only feeling; and so as I reasoned I ended by satisfying
myself that in that quarter all was at end forever.
Now then for dilemma number two, I thought. The senhora, my first impulse
was one of anything but gratitude to her by whose kind, tender care my
hours of pain and suffering had been soothed and alleviated. But for her,
I should have been spared all my present embarrassment, all my shipwrecked
fortunes; but for her I should now be the aide-de-camp residing in Sir
George Dashwood's own house, meeting with Lucy every hour of the day,
dining beside her, riding out with her, pressing my suit by every means and
with every advantage of my position; but for her and her dark eyes--and,
by-the-bye, what eyes they are! how full of brilliancy, yet how teeming
with an expression of soft and melting sweetness; and her mouth, too,
how perfectly chiselled those full lips,--how different from the cold,
unbending firmness of Miss Dashwood's! Not but I have seen Lucy smile too,
and what a sweet smile! How it lighted up her fair cheek, and made her blue
eyes darken and deepen till they looked like heaven's own vault. Yes, there
is more poetry in a blue eye. But still Inez is a very lovely girl, and
her foot never was surpassed. She is a coquette, too, about that foot and
ankle,--I rather like a woman to be so. What a sensation she would make in
England; how she would be the rage! And then I thought of home and Galway,
and the astonishment of some, the admiration of others, as I presented her
as my wife,--the congratulations of my friends, the wonder of the men, the
tempered envy of the women. Methought I saw my uncle, as he pressed her in
his arms, say, "Yes, Charley, this is a prize worth campaigning for."
The stray sounds of a guitar which came from the garden broke in upon my
musings at this moment. It seemed as if a finger was straying heedlessly
across the strings. I started up, and to my surprise perceived it was Inez.
Before I had time to collect myself, a gentle tap at the window aroused me;
it opened softly, while from an unseen hand a bouquet of fresh flowers was
thrown upon my bed. Before I could collect myself to speak, the sash closed
again and I was alone.
CHAPTER XIV.
THE VISIT.
Mike's performances at the masquerade had doubtless been of the most
distinguished character, and demanded a compensating period of repose, for
he did not make his appearance the entire morning. Towards noon, however,
the door from the garden gently opened, and I heard a step upon the stone
terrace, and something which sounded to my ears like the clank of a sabre.
I lifted my head, and saw Fred Power beside me.
I shall spare my readers the recital of my friend, which, however, more
full and explanatory of past events, contained in reality little more than
Mickey Free had already told me. In fine, he informed me that our army, by
a succession of retreating movements, had deserted the northern provinces,
and now occupied the intrenched lines of Torres Vedras. That Massena, with
a powerful force, was still in march, reinforcements daily pouring in
upon him, and every expectation pointing to the probability that he would
attempt to storm our position.
"The wise-heads," remarked Power, "talk of our speedy embarkation, the
sanguine and the hot-brained rave of a great victory and the retreat of
Massena; but I was up at headquarters last week with despatches, and saw
Lord Wellington myself."
"Well, what did you make out? Did he drop any hint of his own views?"
"Faith, I can't say he did. He asked me some questions about the troops
just landed; he spoke a little of the commissary department, damned the
blankets, said that green forage was bad food for the artillery horses,
sent me an English paper to read about the O. P. riots, and said the
harriers would throw off about six o'clock, and that he hoped to see me at
dinner."
I could not restrain a laugh at Power's catalogue of his lordship's topics.
"So," said I, "he at least does not take any gloomy views of our present
situation."
"Who can tell what he thinks? He's ready to fight if fighting will do
anything, and to retreat, if that be better. But that he'll sleep an hour
less, or drink a glass of claret more--come what will of it--I'll believe
from no man living.
"We've lost one gallant thing in any case, Charley," resumed Power. "Busaco
was, I'm told, a glorious day, and our people were in the heat of it. So
that, if we do leave the Peninsula now, that will be a confounded chagrin.
Not for you, my poor fellow, for you could not stir; but I was so cursed
foolish to take the staff appointment,--thus one folly ever entails
another."
There was a tone of bitterness in which these words were uttered that left
no doubt upon my mind some arrire pense remained lurking behind them.
My eyes met his; he bit his lip, and coloring deeply, rose from the chair,
and walked towards the window.
The chance allusion of my man Mike flashed upon me at the moment, and I
dared not trust myself to break silence. I now thought I could trace in my
friend's manner less of that gay and careless buoyancy which ever marked
him. There was a tone, it seemed, of more grave and sombre character, and
even when he jested, the smile his features bore was not his usual frank
and happy one, and speedily gave way to an expression I had never before
remarked. Our silence which had now lasted for some minutes was becoming
embarrassing; that strange consciousness that, to a certain extent, we were
reading each other's thoughts, made us both cautious of breaking it; and
when at length, turning abruptly round, he asked, "When I hoped to be up
and about again?" I felt my heart relieved from I knew not well what load
of doubt and difficulty that oppressed it. We chatted on for some little
time longer, the news of Lisbon, and the daily gossip finishing our topics.
"Plenty of gayety, Charley, dinners and balls to no end! so get well, my
boy, and make the most of it."
"Yes," I replied, "I'll do my best; but be assured the first use I'll make
of health will be to join the regiment. I am heartily ashamed of myself for
all I have lost already,--though not altogether my fault."
"And will you really join at once?" said Power, with a look of eager
anxiety I could not possibly account for.
"Of course I will; what have I, what can I have to detain me here?"
What reply he was about to make at this moment I know not, but the door
opened, and Mike announced Sir George Dashwood.
"Gently, my worthy man, not so loud, if you please?" said the mild voice of
the general, as he stepped noiselessly across the room, evidently shocked
at the indiscreet tone of my follower. "Ah, Power, you here! and our poor
friend, how is he?"
"Able to answer for himself at last, Sir George," said I, grasping his
proffered hand.
"My poor lad! you've had a long bout of it; but you've saved your arm, and
that's well worth the lost time. Well, I've come to bring you good news;
there's been a very sharp cavalry affair, and our fellows have been the
conquerors."
"There again, Power,--listen to that! We are losing everything!"
"Not so, not so, my boy," said Sir George, smiling blandly, but archly.
"There are conquests to be won here, as well as there; and in your present
state, I rather think you better fitted for such as these."
Power's brow grew clouded; he essayed a smile, but it failed, and he rose
and hurried towards the window.
As for me, my confusion must have led to a very erroneous impression of my
real feelings, and I perceived Sir George anxious to turn the channel of
the conversation.
"You see but little of your host, O'Malley," he resumed; "he is ever from
home; but I believe nothing could be kinder than his arrangements for you.
You are aware that he kidnapped you from us? I had sent Forbes over to
bring you to us; your room was prepared, everything in readiness, when he
met your man Mike, setting forth upon a mule, who told him you had just
taken your departure for the villa. We both had our claim upon you and, I
believe, pretty much on the same score. By-the-bye, you have not seen Lucy
since your arrival. I never knew it till yesterday, when I asked if she did
not find you altered."
I blundered out some absurd reply, blushed, corrected myself, and got
confused. Sir George attributing this, doubtless, to my weak state, rose
soon after, and taking Power along with him, remarked as he left the
room,--
"We are too much for him yet, I see that; so we'll leave him quiet some
time longer."
Thanking him in my heart for his true appreciation of my state, I sank back
upon my pillow to think over all I had heard and seen.
"Well, Mister Charles," said Mike as he came forward with a smile, "I
suppose you heard the news? The Fourteenth bate the French down at Merca
there, and took seventy prisoners; but sure it's little good it'll do,
after all."
"And why not, Mike?"
"Musha! isn't Boney coming himself? He's bringing all the Roossians down
with him, and going to destroy us entirely."
"Not at all, man; you mistake. He's nothing to do with Russia, and has
quite enough on his hands at this moment."
"God grant it was truth you were talking! But, you see, I read it myself in
the papers (or Sergeant Haggarty did, which is the same thing) that he's
coming with the Cusacks."
"With who?--with what?"
"With the Cusacks."
"What the devil do you mean? Who are they?"
"Oh, Tower of Ivory! did you never hear of the Cusacks, with the red beards
and the red breeches and long poles with pike-heads on them, that does all
the devilment on horseback,--spiking and spitting the people like larks?"
"The Cossacks, is it, you mean? The Cossacks?"
"Ay, just so, the Cusacks. They're from Clare Island, and thereabouts; and
there's more of them in Meath. They're my mother's people, and was always
real devils for fighting."
I burst out into an immoderate fit of laughing at Mike's etymology, which
thus converted Hetman Platoff into a Galway man.
"Oh, murder! isn't it cruel to hear you laugh that way! There now, alanna!
be asy, and I'll tell you more news. We've the house to ourselves to-day.
The ould gentleman's down at Behlem, and the daughter's in Lisbon, making
great preparations for a grand ball they're to give when you are quite
well."
"I hope I shall be with the army in a few days, Mike; and certainly, if I'm
able to move about, I'll not remain longer in Lisbon."
"Arrah, don't say so, now! When was you ever so comfortable? Upon my
conscience, it's more like Paradise than anything else. If ye see the
dinner we sit down to every day; and as for drink,--if it wasn't that I
sleep on a ground-floor, I'd seldom see a blanket!"
"Well, certainly, Mike, I agree with you, these are hard things to tear
ourselves away from."
"Aren't they now, sir? And then Miss Catherine, I'm taching her Irish!"
"Teaching her Irish! for Heaven's sake, what use can she make of Irish?"
"Ah, the crayture, she doesn't know better; and as she was always bothering
me to learn her English, I promised one day to do it; but ye see, somehow,
I never was very proficient in strange tongues; so I thought to myself
Irish will do as well. So, you perceive, we're taking a course of Irish
literature, as Mr. Lynch says in Athlone; and, upon my conscience, she's an
apt scholar."
"'Good-morning to you, Katey,' says Mr. Power to her the other day, as he
passed through the hall. 'Good-morning, my dear; I hear you speak English
perfectly now?'
"'Honia mon diaoul,' says she, making a curtsey.
"Be the powers, I thought he'd die with the laughing.
"'Well, my dear, I hope you don't mean it,--do you know what you're
saying?'
"'Honor bright, Major!' says I,--'honor bright!' and I gave him a wink at
the same time.
"'Oh, that's it!' said he, 'is it!' and so he went off holding his hands to
his sides with the bare laughing; and your honor knows it wasn't a blessing
she wished him, for all that."
CHAPTER XV.
THE CONFESSION.
"What a strange position this of mine!" thought I, a few mornings after
the events detailed in the last chapter. "How very fascinating in some
respects, how full of all the charm of romance, and how confoundly
difficult to see one's way through!"
To understand my cogitation right, figurez-vous, my dear reader, a large
and splendidly furnished drawing-room, from one end of which an orangery
in full blossom opens; from the other is seen a delicious little boudoir,
where books, bronzes, pictures and statues, in all the artistique disorder
of a lady's sanctum, are bathed in a deep purple light from a stained glass
window of the seventeenth century.
On a small table beside the wood fire, whose mellow light is flirting with
the sunbeams upon the carpet, stands an antique silver breakfast-service,
which none but the hand of Benvenuto could have chiselled; beside it sits
a girl, young and beautiful; her dark eyes, beaming beneath their long
lashes, are fixed with an expression of watchful interest upon a pale and
sickly youth, who, lounging upon a sofa opposite, is carelessly turning
over the leaves of a new journal, or gazing steadfastly on the fretted
gothic of the ceiling, while his thoughts are travelling many a mile away.
The lady being the Senhora Inez; the nonchalant invalid, your unworthy
acquaintance, Charles O'Malley.
What a very strange position to be sure.
"Then you are not equal to this ball to-night?" said she, after a pause of
some minutes.
I turned as she spoke; her words had struck audibly upon my ear, but, lost
in my revery, I could but repeat my own fixed thought,--how strange to be
so situated!
"You are really very tiresome, Signor; I assure you, you are. I have
been giving you a most elegant description of the Casino fte, and the
beautiful costume of our Lisbon belles, but I can get nothing from you but
this muttered something, which may be very shocking for aught I know. I'm
sure your friend, Major Power, would be much more attentive to me; that
is," added she, archly, "if Miss Dashwood were not present."
"What! why! You don't mean that there is anything there--that Tower is
paying attention to--"
"Madre divina, how that seems to interest you, and how red you are! If it
were not that you never met her before, and that your acquaintance did not
seem to make rapid progress, then I should say you are in love with her
yourself."
I had to laugh at this, but felt my face flushing more. "And so," said I,
affecting a careless and indifferent tone, "the gay Fred Power is smitten
at last!"
"Was it so very difficult a thing to accomplish?" said she, slyly.
"He seems to say so, at least. And the lady, how does she appear to receive
his attentions?"
"Oh, I should say with evident pleasure and satisfaction, as all girls do
the advances of men they don't care for, nor intend to care for."
"Indeed," said I, slowly, "indeed, Senhora?" looking into her eyes as I
spoke, as if to read if the lesson were destined for my benefit.
"There, don't stare so!--every one knows that."
"So you don't think, then, that Lucy,--I mean Miss Dashwood--Why are you
laughing so?"
"How can I help it; your calling her Lucy is so good, I wish she heard it;
she's the very proudest girl I ever knew."
"But to come back; you really think she does not care for him?"
"Not more than for you; and I may be pardoned for the simile, having seen
your meeting. But let me give you the news of our own fte. Saturday is
the day fixed; and you must be quite well,--I insist upon it. Miss Dashwood
has promised to come,--no small concession; for after all she has never
once been here since the day you frightened her. I can't help laughing at
my blunder,--the two people I had promised myself should fall desperately
in love with each other, and who will scarcely meet."
"But I trusted," said I, pettishly, "that you were not disposed to resign
your own interest in me?"
"Neither was I," said she, with an easy smile, "except that I have so many
admirers. I might even spare to my friends; though after all I should be
sorry to lose you, I like you."
"Yes," said I half bitterly, "as girls do those they never intend to care
for; is it not so?"
"Perhaps, yes, and perhaps--But is it going to rain? How provoking! and I
have ordered my horse. Well, Signor Carlos, I leave you to your delightful
newspaper, and all the magnificent descriptions of battles and sieges and
skirmishes of which you seem doomed to pine without ceasing. There, don't
kiss my hand twice; that's not right."
"Well, let me begin again--"
"I shall not breakfast with you any more. But tell me, am I to order a
costume for you in Lisbon; or will you arrange all that yourself? You must
come to the fte, you know."
"If you would be so very kind."
"I will, then, be so very kind; and once more, adios." So saying, and
with a slight motion of her hand, she smiled a good-by, and left me.
"What a lovely girl!" thought I, as I rose and walked to the window,
muttering to myself Othello's line, and--
"When I love thee not, chaos is come again."
In fact, it was the perfect expression of my feeling; the only solution
to all the difficulties surrounding me, being to fall desperately,
irretrievably in love with the fair senhora, which, all things considered,
was not a very desperate resource for a gentleman in trouble. As I thought
over the hopelessness of one attachment, I turned calmly to consider all
the favorable points of the other. She was truly beautiful, attractive in
every sense; her manner most fascinating, and her disposition, so far as
I could pronounce, perfectly amiable. I felt already something more than
interest about her; how very easy would be the transition to a stronger
feeling! There was an clat, too, about being her accepted lover that had
its charm. She was the belle par excellence of Lisbon; and then a sense
of pique crossed my mind as I reflected what would Lucy say of him whom
she had slighted and insulted, when he became the husband of the beautiful
millionnaire Senhora Inez?
As my meditations had reached thus far, the door opened stealthily, and
Catherine appeared, her finger upon her lips, and her gesture indicating
caution. She carried on her arm a mass of drapery covered by a large
mantle, which throwing off as she entered, she displayed before me a rich
blue domino with silver embroidery. It was large and loose in its folds, so
as thoroughly to conceal the figure of any wearer. This she held up before
me for an instant without speaking; when at length, seeing my curiosity
fully excited, she said,--
"This is the senhora's domino. I should be ruined if she knew I showed it;
but I promised--that is, I told--"
"Yes, yes, I understand," relieving her embarrassment about the source of
her civilities; "go on."
"Well, there are several others like it, but with this small difference,
instead of a carnation, which all the others have embroidered upon the
cuff, I have made it a rose,--you perceive? La Senhora knows nothing of
this,--none save yourself knows it. I'm sure I may trust you with the
secret."
"Fear not in the least, Catherine; you have rendered me a great service.
Let me look at it once more; ah, there's no difficulty in detecting it. And
you are certain she is unaware of it?"
"Perfectly so; she has several other costumes, but in this one I know she
intends some surprise, so be upon your guard."
With these words, carefully once more concealing the rich dress beneath the
mantle, she withdrew; while I strolled forth to wonder what mystery might
lie beneath this scheme, and speculate how far I myself was included in the
plot she spoke of.
For the few days which succeeded, I passed my time much alone. The senhora
was but seldom at home; and I remarked that Power rarely came to see me. A
strange feeling of half-coolness had latterly grown between us, and instead
of the open confidence we formerly indulged in when together, we appeared
now rather to chat over things of mere every-day interest than of our own
immediate plans and prospects. There was a kind of pre-occupation, too, in
his manner that struck me; his mind seemed ever straying from the topics he
talked of to something remote, and altogether, he was no longer the frank
and reckless dragoon I had ever known him. What could be the meaning of
this change? Had he found out by any accident that I was to blame in my
conduct towards Lucy; had any erroneous impression of my interview with her
reached his ears? This was most improbable; besides, there was nothing in
that to draw down his censure or condemnation, however represented; and was
it that he was himself in love with her, that, devoted heart and soul to
Lucy, he regarded me as a successful rival, preferred before him! Oh, how
could I have so long blinded myself to the fact! This was the true solution
of the whole difficulty. I had more than once suspected this to be so; now
all the circumstances of proof poured in upon me. I called to mind his
agitated manner the night of my arrival in Lisbon, his thousand questions
concerning the reasons of my furlough; and then, lately, the look of
unfeigned pleasure with which he heard me resolve to join my regiment the
moment I was sufficiently recovered. I remembered also how assiduously he
pressed his intimacy with the senhora, Lucy's dearest friend here; his
continual visits at the villa; those long walks in the garden, where his
very look betokened some confidential mission of the heart. Yes, there was
no doubt of it, he loved Lucy Dashwood! Alas, there seemed to be no end to
the complication of my misfortunes; one by one I appeared fated to lose
whatever had a hold upon my affections, and to stand alone, unloved and
uncared for in the world. My thoughts turned towards the senhora, but
I could not deceive myself into any hope there. My own feelings were
untouched, and hers I felt to be equally so. Young as I was, there was no
mistaking the easy smile of coquetry, the merry laugh of flattered vanity,
for a deeper and holier feeling. And then I did not wish it otherwise. One
only had taught me to feel how ennobling, how elevating in all its impulses
can be a deep-rooted passion for a young and beautiful girl! From her
eyes alone had I caught the inspiration that made me pant for glory and
distinction. I could not transfer the allegiance of my heart, since it had
taught that very heart to beat high and proudly. Lucy, lost to me forever
as she must be, was still more than any other woman ever could be; all the
past clung to her memory, all the prestige of the future must point to it
also.
And Power, why had he not trusted, why had he not confided in me? Was this
like my old and tried friend? Alas! I was forgetting that in his eye I was
the favored rival, and not the despised, rejected suitor.
"It is past now," thought I, as I rose and walked into the garden; "the
dream that made life a fairy tale is dispelled; the cold reality of the
world is before me, and my path lies a lonely and solitary one." My first
resolution was to see Power, and relieve his mind of any uneasiness as
regarded my pretentions; they existed no longer. As for me, I was no
obstacle to his happiness; it was, then, but fair and honorable that I
should tell him so; this done, I should leave Lisbon at once. The cavalry
had for the most part been ordered to the rear; still there was always
something going forward at the outposts.
The idea of active service, the excitement of a campaigning life, cheered
me, and I advanced along the dark alley of the garden with a lighter and a
freer heart. My resolves were not destined to meet delay; as I turned the
angle of a walk, Power was before me. He was leaning against a tree, his
hands crossed upon his bosom, his head bowed forward, and his whole air and
attitude betokening deep reflection.
He started as I came up, and seemed almost to change color.
"Well, Charley," said he, after a moment's pause, "you look better this
morning. How goes the arm?"
"The arm is ready for service again, and its owner most anxious for it. Do
you know, Fred, I'm thoroughly weary of this life."
"They're little better, however, at the lines. The French are in position,
but never adventure a movement; and except some few affairs at the pickets,
there is really nothing to do."
"No matter, remaining here can never serve one's interests, and besides, I
have accomplished what I came for--"
I was about to add, "the restoration of my health," when he suddenly
interrupted me, eying me fixedly as he spoke.
"Indeed! indeed! Is that so?"
"Yes," said I, half puzzled at the tone and manner of the speech; "I can
join now when I please; meanwhile, Fred, I have been thinking of you. Yes,
don't be surprised, at the very moment we met you were in my thoughts."
I took his arm as I said this, and led him down the alley.
"We are too old and, I trust, too true friends, Fred, to have secrets from
each other, and yet we have been playing this silly game for some weeks
past. Now, my dear fellow, I have yours, and it is only fair justice you
should have mine, and, faith, I feel you'd have discovered it long since,
had your thoughts been as free as I have known them to be. Fred, you are in
love; there, don't wince, man, I know it; but hear me out. You believe me
to be so also; nay, more, you think that my chances of success are better,
stronger than your own; learn, then, that I have none,--absolutely none.
Don't interrupt me now, for this avowal cuts me deeply; my own heart alone
knows what I suffer as I record my wrecked fortunes; but I repeat it, my
hopes are at end forever; but, Fred, my boy, I cannot lose my friend too.
If I have been the obstacle to your path, I am so no more. Ask me not why;
it is enough that I speak in all truth and sincerity. Ere three days I
shall leave this, and with it all the hopes that once beamed upon my
fortunes, and all the happiness,--nay, not all, my boy, for I feel some
thrill at my heart yet, as I think that I have been true to you."
I know not what more I spoke nor how he replied to me. I felt the warm
grasp of his hand, I saw his delighted smile; the words of grateful
acknowledgment his lips uttered conveyed but an imperfect meaning to my
ear, and I remembered no more.
The courage which sustained me for the moment sank gradually as I meditated
over my avowal, and I could scarce help accusing Power of a breach of
friendship for exacting a confession which, in reality, I had volunteered
to give him. How Lucy herself would think of my conduct was ever occurring
to my thoughts, and I felt, as I ruminated upon the conjectures it might
give rise to, how much more likely a favorable opinion might now be formed
of me, than when such an estimation could have crowned me with delight.
"Yes," thought I, "she will at last learn to know him who loved her with
truth and with devoted affection; and when the blight of all his hopes is
accomplished, the fair fame of his fidelity will be proved. The march,
the bivouac, the battle-field, are now all to me; and the campaign alone
presents a prospect which may fill up the aching void that disappointed and
ruined hopes have left behind them."
How I longed for the loud call of the trumpet, the clash of the steel, the
tramp of the war-horse; though the proud distinction of a soldier's life
were less to me in the distance than the mad and whirlwind passion of a
charge, and the loud din of the rolling artillery.
It was only some hours after, as I sat alone in my chamber, that all the
circumstances of our meeting came back clearly to my memory, and I could
not help muttering to myself,--
"It is indeed a hard lot, that to cheer the heart of my friend, I must bear
witness to the despair that shed darkness on my own."
CHAPTER XVI.
MY CHARGER.
Although I felt my heart relieved of a heavy load by the confession I had
made to Power, yet still I shrank from meeting him for some days after;
a kind of fear lest he should in any way recur to our conversation
continually beset me, and I felt that the courage which bore me up for my
first effort would desert me on the next occasion.
My determination to join my regiment was now made up, and I sent forward a
resignation of my appointment to Sir George Dashwood's staff, which I
had never been in health to fulfil, and commenced with energy all my
preparations for a speedy departure.
The reply to my rather formal letter was a most kind note written by
himself. He regretted the unhappy cause which had so long separated us, and
though wishing, as he expressed it, to have me near him, perfectly approved
of my resolution.
"Active service alone, my dear boy, can ever place you in the
position you ought to occupy; and I rejoice the more at your decision
in this matter, as I feared the truth of certain reports here,
which attributed to you other plans than those which a campaign
suggests. My mind is now easy on this score, and I pray you forgive
me if my congratulations are mal  propos."
After some hints for my future management, and a promise of some letters to
his friends at headquarters, he concluded:--
"As this climate does not seem to suit my daughter, I have
applied for a change, and am in daily hope of obtaining it. Before
going, however, I must beg your acceptance of the charger which my
groom will deliver to your servant with this. I was so struck with
his figure and action that I purchased him before leaving England
without well knowing why or wherefore. Pray let him see some
service under your auspices, which he is most unlikely to do under
mine. He has plenty of bone to be a weight carrier, and they tell
me also that he has speed enough for anything."
Mike's voice in the lawn beneath interrupted my reading farther, and on
looking out, I perceived him and Sir George Dashwood's servant standing
beside a large and striking-looking horse, which they were both examining
with all the critical accuracy of adepts.
"Arrah, isn't he a darling, a real beauty, every inch of him?"
"That 'ere splint don't signify nothing; he aren't the worse of it," said
the English groom.
"Of coorse it doesn't," replied Mike. "What a fore-hand, and the legs,
clean as a whip!"
"There's the best of him, though," interrupted the other, patting the
strong hind-quarters with his hand. "There's the stuff to push him along
through heavy ground and carry him over timber."
"Or a stone wall," said Mike, thinking of Galway.
My own impatience to survey my present had now brought me into the
conclave, and before many minutes were over I had him saddled, and was
cantering around the lawn with a spirit and energy I had not felt for
months long. Some small fences lay before me, and over these he carried me
with all the ease and freedom of a trained hunter. My courage mounted with
the excitement, and I looked eagerly around for some more bold and dashing
leap.
"You may take him over the avenue gate," said the English groom, divining
with a jockey's readiness what I looked for; "he'll do it, never fear him."
Strange as my equipment was, with an undress jacket flying loosely open,
and a bare head, away I went. The gate which the groom spoke of was a
strongly-barred one of oak timber, nearly five feet high,--its difficulty
as a leap only consisted in the winding approach, and the fact that it
opened upon a hard road beyond it.
In a second or two a kind of half fear came across me. My long illness had
unnerved me, and my limbs felt weak and yielding; but as I pressed into the
canter, that secret sympathy between the horse and his rider shot suddenly
through me, I pressed my spurs to his flanks, and dashed him at it.
Unaccustomed to such treatment, the noble animal bounded madly forward.
With two tremendous plunges he sprang wildly in the air, and shaking his
long mane with passion, stretched out at the gallop.
[Illustration: CHARLEY TRYING A CHARGER.]
My own blood boiled now as tempestuously as his; and with a shout of
reckless triumph, I rose him at the gate. Just at the instant two figures
appeared before it,--the copse had concealed their approach hitherto,--but
they stood now as if transfixed. The wild attitude of the horse, the not
less wild cry of his rider, had deprived them for a time of all energy; and
overcome by the sudden danger, they seemed rooted to the ground. What I
said, spoke, begged, or imprecated, Heaven knows--not I. But they stirred
not! One moment more and they must lie trampled beneath my horse's
hoofs,--he was already on his haunches for the bound,--when, wheeling half
aside, I faced him at the wall. It was at least a foot higher and of solid
stone masonry, and as I did so I felt that I was perilling my life to save
theirs. One vigorous dash of the spur I gave him, as I lifted him to the
leap. He bounded beneath it quick as lightning; still, with a spring like
a rocket, he rose into the air, cleared the wall, and stood trembling and
frightened on the road outside.
"Safe, by Jupiter! and splendidly done, too," cried a voice near me, that I
immediately recognized as Sir George Dashwood's.
"Lucy, my love, look up,--Lucy, my dear, there's no danger now. She has
fainted! O'Malley, fetch some water,--fast. Poor fellow, your own nerves
seem shaken. Why, you've let your horse go! Come here, for Heaven's sake!
Support her for an instant. I'll fetch some water."
It appeared to me like a dream; I leaned against the pillar of the gate;
the cold and death-like features of Lucy Dashwood lay motionless upon my
arm; her hand, falling heavily upon my shoulder, touched my cheek. The
tramp of my horse, as he galloped onward, was the only sound that broke the
silence, as I stood there, gazing steadfastly upon the pale brow and paler
cheek, down which a solitary tear was slowly stealing. I knew not how the
minutes passed; my memory took no note of time, but at length a gentle
tremor thrilled her frame, a slight, scarce-perceptible blush colored her
fair face, her lips slightly parted, and heaving a deep sigh, she looked
around her. Gradually her eyes turned and met mine. Oh, the bliss
unutterable of that moment! It was no longer the look of cold scorn she had
given me last; the expression was one of soft and speaking gratitude. She
seemed to read my very heart, and know its truth; there was a tone of deep
and compassionate interest in the glance; and forgetting all,--everything
that had passed,--all save my unaltered, unalterable love, I kneeled beside
her, and in words burning as my own heart burned, poured out my tale
of mingled sorrow and affection with all the eloquence of passion. I
vindicated my unshaken faith,--reconciling the conflicting evidences with
the proofs I proffered of my attachment. If my moments were measured, I
spent them not idly. I called to witness how every action of my soldier's
life emanated from her; how her few and chance words had decided the
character of my fate; if aught of fame or honor were my portion, to her I
owed it. As, hurried onwards by my ardent hopes, I forgot Power and all
about him, a step up the gravel walk came rapidly nearer, and I had but
time to assume my former attitude beside Lucy as her father came up.
"Well, Charley, is she better? Oh, I see she is. Here, we have the whole
household at our heels." So saying, he pointed to a string of servants
pressing eagerly forward with every species of restorative that Portuguese
ingenuity has invented.
The next moment we were joined by the senhora, who, pale with fear, seemed
scarcely less in need of assistance than her friend.
Amidst questions innumerable; explanations sought for on all sides;
mistakes and misconceptions as to the whole occurrence,--we took our way
towards the villa, Lucy walking between Sir George and Donna Inez, while I
followed, leaning upon Power's arm.
"They've caught him again, O'Malley," said the general, turning half round
to me; "he, too, seemed as much frightened as any of us."
"It is time, Sir George, I should think of thanking you. I never was so
mounted in my life--"
"A splendid charger, by Jove!" said Power; "but, Charley, my lad, no more
feats of this nature, if you love me. No girl's heart will stand such
continual assaults as your winning horsemanship submits it to."
I was about making some half-angry reply, when he continued: "There, don't
look sulky; I have news for you. Quill has just arrived. I met him at
Lisbon; he has got leave of absence for a few days, and is coming to our
masquerade here this evening."
"This evening!" said I, in amazement; "why, is it so soon?"
"Of course it is. Have you not got all your trappings ready? The Dashwoods
came out here on purpose to spend the day; but come, I'll drive you into
town. My tilbury is ready, and we'll both look out for our costumes." So
saying, he led me along towards the house, when, after a rapid change of my
toilet, we set out for Lisbon.
CHAPTER XVII.
MAURICE.
It seemed a conceded matter between Power and myself that we should never
recur to the conversation we held in the garden; and so, although we dined
tte--tte that day, neither of us ventured, by any allusion the most
distant, to advert to what it was equally evident was uppermost in the
minds of both.
All our endeavors, therefore, to seem easy and unconcerned were in vain;
a restless anxiety to seem interested about things and persons we were
totally indifferent to, pervaded all our essays at conversation. By
degrees, we grew weary of the parts we were acting, and each relapsed
into a moody silence, thinking over his plans and projects, and totally
forgetting the existence of the other.
The decanter was passed across the table without speaking, a half nod
intimated the bottle was standing; and except an occasional malediction
upon an intractable cigar, nothing was heard.
Such was the agreeable occupation we were engaged in, when, towards nine
o'clock, the door opened, and the great Maurice himself stood before us.
"Pleasant fellows, upon my conscience, and jovial over their liquor!
Confound your smoking! That may do very well in a bivouac. Let us have
something warm!"
Quill's interruption was a most welcome one to both parties, and we
rejoiced with a sincere pleasure at his coming.
"What shall it be, Maurice? Port or sherry mulled, and an anchovy?"
"Or what say you to a bowl of bishop?" said I.
"Hurrah for the Church, Charley! Let us have the bishop; and not to
disparage Fred's taste, we'll be eating the anchovy while the liquor's
concocting."
"Well, Maurice, and now for the news. How are matters at Torres Vedras?
Anything like movement in that quarter?"
"Nothing very remarkable. Massena made a reconnoissance some days since,
and one of our batteries threw a shower of grape among the staff, which
spoiled the procession, and sent them back in very disorderly time. Then
we've had a few skirmishes to the front with no great results,--a few
courts-martial, bad grub, and plenty of grumbling."
"Why, what would they have? It's a great thing to hold the French army in
check within a few marches of Lisbon."
"Charley, my man, who cares twopence for the French army or Lisbon or the
Portuguese or the Junta or anything about it?--every man is pondering over
his own affairs. One fellow wants to get home again, and be sent upon some
recruiting station. Another wishes to get a step or two in promotion, to
come to Torres Vedras, where even the grande arme can't. Then some of us
are in love, and some of us are in debt. Their is neither glory nor profit
to be had. But here's the bishop, smoking and steaming with an odor of
nectar!"
"And our fellows, have you seen them lately?"
"I dined with yours on Tuesday. Was it Tuesday? Yes. I dined with them.
By-the-bye, Sparks was taken prisoner that morning."
"Sparks taken prisoner! Poor fellow. I am sincerely sorry. How did it
happen, Maurice?"
"Very simply. Sparks had a forage patrol towards Vieda, and set out early
in the morning with his party. It seemed that they succeeded perfectly, and
were returning to the lines, when poor Sparks, always susceptible where the
sex are concerned, saw, or thought he saw, a lattice gently open as he rode
from the village, and a very taper finger make a signal to him. Dropping a
little behind the rest, he waited till his men had debouched upon the road,
when riding quietly up, he coughed a couple of times to attract the fair
unknown; a handkerchief waved from the lattice in reply, which was speedily
closed, and our valiant cornet accordingly dismounted and entered the
house.
"The remainder of the adventure is soon told; for in a few seconds after,
two men mounted on one horse were seen galloping at top speed towards the
French lines,--the foremost being a French officer of the 4th Cuirassiers,
the gentleman with his face to the tail, our friend Sparks; the lovely
unknown being a vieille moustache of Loison's corps, who had been
wounded in a skirmish some days before, and lay waiting an opportunity of
rejoining his party. One of our prisoners knew this fellow well; he had
been promoted from the ranks, and was a Hercules for feats of strength; so
that, after all, Sparks could not help himself."
"Well, I'm really sorry; but as you say, Sparks's tender nature is always
the ruin of him."
"Of him! ay, and of you; and of Power; and of myself; of all of us. Isn't
it the sweet creatures that make fools of us from Father Adam down to
Maurice Quill, neither sparing age nor rank in the service, half-pay nor
the veteran battalion--it's all one? Pass the jug, there. O'Shaughnessy--"
"Ah, by-the-bye, how's the major?"
"Charmingly; only a little bit in a scrape just now. Sir Arthur--Lord
Wellington, I mean--had him up for his fellows being caught pillaging, and
gave him a devil of a rowing a few days ago.
"'Very disorderly corps yours, Major O'Shaughnessy,' said the general;
'more men up for punishment than any regiment in the service.'
"Shaugh muttered something; but his voice was lost in a loud
cock-a-doo-do-doo, that some bold chanticleer set up at the moment.
"'If the officers do their duty, Major O'Shaughnessy, these acts of
insubordination do not occur.'
"'Cock-a-doo-do-doo,' was the reply. Some of the staff found it hard not to
laugh; but the general went on,--
"'If, therefore, the practice does not cease, I'll draft the men into West
India regiments.'
"'Cock-a-doo-do-doo.'
"'And if any articles pillaged from the inhabitants are detected in the
quarters, or about the person of the troops--'
"'Cock-a-doo-do-doo,' screamed louder here than ever.
"'Damn that cock! Where is it?'
"There was a general look around on all sides, which seemed in vain; when
a tremendous repetition of the cry resounded from O'Shaughnessy's coat
pocket,--thus detecting the valiant major himself in the very practice of
his corps. There was no standing this: every one burst out into a peal of
laughing; and Lord Wellington himself could not resist, but turned away,
muttering to himself as he went, 'Damned robbers--every man of them!' while
a final war-note from the major's pocket closed the interview."
"Confound you, Maurice, you've always some villanous narrative or other.
You never crossed a street for shelter without making something out of it."
"True this time, as sure as my name's Maurice; but the bowl is empty."
"Never mind, here comes its successor. How long can you stay among us?"
"A few days at most. Just took a run off to see the sights. I was all over
Lisbon this morning; saw the Inquisition and the cells and the place where
they tried the fellows,--the kind of grand jury room with the great picture
of Adam and Eve at the end of it. What a beautiful creature she is; hair
down to her waist, and such eyes! 'Ah, ye darling!' said I to myself,
'small blame to him for what he did. Wouldn't I ate every crab in the
garden, if ye asked me!'"
"I must certainly go to see her, Maurice. Is she very Portuguese in her
style?"
"Devil a bit of it! She might be a Limerick-woman with elegant brown hair
and blue eyes and a skin like snow."
"Come, come, they've pretty girls in Lisbon too, Doctor."
"Yes, faith," said Power, "that they have."
"Nothing like Ireland, boys; not a bit of it; they're the girls for my
money; and where's the man can resist them? From Saint Patrick, that had to
go and live in the Wicklow mountains--"
"Saint Kevin, you mean, Doctor."
"Sure it's all the same, they were twins. I made a little song about them
one evening last week,--the women I mean."
"Let us have it, Maurice; let us have it, old fellow. What's the measure?"
"Short measure; four little verses, devil a more!"
"But the time, I mean?"
"Whenever you like to sing it; here it is,"--
THE GIRLS OF THE WEST.
Air,--"Teddy, ye Gander."
(With feeling: but not too slow.)
You may talk, if you please,
Of the brown Portuguese,
But wherever you roam, wherever you roam,
You nothing will meet,
Half so lovely or sweet,
As the girls at home, the girls at home.
Their eyes are not sloes,
Nor so long is their nose,
But between me and you, between me and you,
They are just as alarming,
And ten times more charming,
With hazel and blue, with hazel and blue.
They don't ogle a man,
O'er the top of their fan
Till his heart's in a flame, till his heart's in a flame
But though bashful and shy,
They've a look in their eye
That just comes to the same, just comes to the same.
No mantillas they sport,
But a petticoat short
Shows an ankle the best, an ankle the best,
And a leg--but, O murther!
I dare not go further;
So here's to the west, so here's to the west.
"Now that really is a sweet little thing. Moore's isn't it?"
"Not a bit of it; my own muse, every word of it."
"And the music?" said I.
"My own, too. Too much spice in that bowl; that's an invariable error in
your devisers of drink, to suppose that the tipple you start with can
please your palate to the last; they forget that as we advance, either in
years or lush, our tastes simplify."
"Nous revenons  nos premires amours. Isn't that it?"
"No, not exactly, for we go even further; for if you mark the progression
of a sensible man's fluids, you'll find what an emblem of life it presents
to you. What is his initiatory glass of 'Chablis' that he throws down with
his oysters but the budding expectancy of boyhood,--the appetizing sense of
pleasure to come; then follows the sherry with his soup, that warming glow
which strength and vigor in all their consciousness impart, as a glimpse of
life is opening before him. Then youth succeeds--buoyant, wild, tempestuous
youth--foaming and sparkling like the bright champagne whose stormy surface
subsides into a myriad of bright stars."
"Oeil de perdrix."
"Not a bit of it; woman's own eye, brilliant, sparkling, life-giving--"
"Devil take the fellow, he's getting poetical!"
"Ah, Fred! if that could only last; but one must come to the burgundies
with his maturer years. Your first glass of hermitage is the algebraic sign
for five-and-thirty,--the glorious burst is over; the pace is still good,
to be sure, but the great enthusiasm is past. You can afford to look
forward, but confound it, you've along way to look back also."
"I say, Charley, our friend has contrived to finish the bishop during his
disquisition; the bowl's quite empty."
"You don't say so, Fred. To be sure, how a man does forget himself in
abstract speculations; but let us have a little more, I've not concluded my
homily."
"Not a glass, Maurice; it's already past nine. We are all pledged to
the masquerade, and before we've dressed and got there, 't will be late
enough."
"But I'm not disguised yet, my boy, nor half."
"Well, they must take you au naturel, as our countrymen do their
potatoes."
"Yes, Doctor, Fred's right; we had better start."
"Well, I can't help it; I've recorded my opposition to the motion, but I
must submit; and now that I'm on my legs, explain to me what's that very
dull-looking old lamp up there?"
"That's the moon, man; the full moon."
"Well, I've no objection; I'm full too: so come along, lads."
CHAPTER XVIII.
THE MASQUERADE.
To form one's impression of a masked ball from the attempts at this mode
of entertainment in our country, is but to conceive a most imperfect and
erroneous notion. With us, the first coup d'oeil is everything; the
nuns, the shepherdesses, the Turks, sailors, eastern princes, watchmen,
moonshees, milestones, devils, and Quakers are all very well in their way
as they pass in the review before us, but when we come to mix in the
crowd, we discover that, except the turban and the cowl, the crook and
the broad-brim, no further disguise is attempted or thought of. The nun,
forgetting her vow and her vestments, is flirting with the devil; the
watchman, a very fastidious elegant, is ogling the fishwomen through his
glass; while the Quaker is performing a pas seul Alberti might be proud
of, in a quadrille of riotous Turks and half-tipsy Hindoos; in fact, the
whole wit of the scene consists in absurd associations. Apart from this,
the actors have rarely any claims upon your attention; for even supposing
a person clever enough to sustain his character, whatever it be, you must
also supply the other personages of the drama, or, in stage phrase, he'll
have nothing to "play up to." What would be Bardolph without Pistol; what
Sir Lucius O'Triuger without Acres? It is the relief which throws out the
disparities and contradictions of life that afford us most amusement; hence
it is that one swallow can no more make a summer, than one well-sustained
character can give life to a masquerade. Without such sympathies, such
points of contact, all the leading features of the individual, making him
act and be acted upon, are lost; the characters being mere parallel lines,
which, however near they approach, never bisect or cross each other.
This is not the case abroad: the domino, which serves for mere concealment,
is almost the only dress assumed, and the real disguise is therefore thrown
from necessity upon the talents, whatever they be, of the wearer. It is
no longer a question of a beard or a spangled mantle, a Polish dress or
a pasteboard nose; the mutation of voice, the assumption of a different
manner, walk, gesture, and mode of expression, are all necessary, and no
small tact is required to effect this successfully.
I may be pardoned this little digression, as it serves to explain in some
measure how I felt on entering the splendidly lit up salons of the
villa, crowded with hundreds of figures in all the varied costumes of a
carnival,--the sounds of laughter mingled with the crash of the music;
the hurrying hither and thither of servants with refreshments; the crowds
gathered around fortune-tellers, whose predictions threw the parties
at each moment into shouts of merriment; the eager following of some
disappointed domino, interrogating every one to find out a lost mask.
For some time I stood an astonished spectator at the kind of secret
intelligence which seemed to pervade the whole assemblage, when suddenly a
mask, who for some time had been standing beside me, whispered in French,--
"If you pass your time in this manner, you must not feel surprised if your
place be occupied."
I turned hastily round, but she was gone. She, I say, for the voice was
clearly a woman's; her pink domino could be no guide, for hundreds of the
same color passed me every instant. The meaning of the allusion I had
little doubt of. I turned to speak to Power, but he was gone; and for the
first moment of my life, the bitterness of rivalry crossed my mind. It was
true I had resigned all pretensions in his favor. My last meeting with Lucy
had been merely to justify my own character against an impression that
weighed heavily on me; still, I thought he might have waited,--another day
and I should be far away, neither to witness nor grieve over his successes.
"You still hesitate," whispered some one near me.
I wheeled round suddenly, but could not detect the speaker, and was again
relapsing into my own musings, when the same voice repeated,--
"The white domino with the blue cape. Adieu."
Without waiting to reflect upon the singularity of the occurrence, I now
hurried along through the dense crowd, searching on every side for the
domino.
"Isn't that O'Malley?" said an Englishman to his friend.
"Yes," replied the other; "the very man we want. O'Malley, find a partner;
we have been searching a vis--vis this ten minutes."
The speaker was an officer I had met at Sir George Dashwood's. "How did you
discover me?" said I, suddenly.
"Not a very difficult thing if you carry your mask in your hand that way,"
was the answer.
And I now perceived that in the distraction of my thoughts I had been
carrying my mask in this manner since my coming into the room.
"There now, what say you to the blue domino? I saw her foot, and a girl
with such an instep must be a waltzer."
I looked round, a confused effort at memory passing across my mind; my eyes
fell at the instant upon the embroidered sleeve of the domino, where a
rosebud worked in silver at once reminded me of Catrina's secret. "Ah,"
thought I, "La Senhora herself!" She was leaning upon the arm of a tall and
portly figure in black; who this was I knew not, nor sought to discover,
but at once advancing towards Donna Inez asked her to waltz.
Without replying to me she turned towards her companion, who seemed as it
were to press her acceptance of my offer; she hesitated, however, for an
instant, and curtsying deeply, declined it. "Well," thought I, "she at
least has not recognized me."
"And yet, Senhora," said I, half jestingly, "I have seen you join a
bolero before now."
"You evidently mistake me," was the reply, but in a voice so well feigned
as almost to convince me she was right.
"Nay, more," said I, "under your own fair auspices did I myself first
adventure one."
"Still in error, believe me; I am not known to you."
"And yet I have a talisman to refresh your memory, should you dare me
further."
At this instant my hand was grasped warmly by a passing mask. I turned
round rapidly, and Power whispered in my ear,--
"Yours forever, Charley; you've made my fortune."
As he hurried on I could perceive that he supported a lady on his arm, and
that she wore a loose white domino with a deep blue cape. In a second all
thought of Inez was forgotten, and anxious only to conceal my emotion, I
turned away and mingled in the crowd. Lost to all around me, I wandered
carelessly, heedlessly on, neither noticing the glittering throng around,
nor feeling a thought in common with the gay and joyous spirits that
flitted by. The night wore on, my melancholy and depression growing ever
deeper, yet so spell-bound was I that I could not leave the place. A
secret sense that it was the last time we were to meet had gained entire
possession of me, and I longed to speak a few words ere we parted forever.
I was leaning on a window which looked out upon the courtyard, when
suddenly the tramp of horses attracted my attention, and I saw by the
clear moonlight a group of mounted men, whose long cloaks and tall helmets
announced dragoons, standing around the porch. At the same moment the
door of the salon opened, and an officer in undress, splashed and
travel-stained, entered. Making his way rapidly through the crowd, he
followed the servant, who introduced him towards the supper-room. Thither
the dense mass now pressed to learn the meaning of the singular apparition;
while my own curiosity, not less excited, led me towards the door. As
I crossed the hall, however, my progress was interrupted by a group of
persons, among whom I saw an aide-de-camp of Lord Wellington's staff,
narrating, as it were, some piece of newly-arrived intelligence. I had
no time for further inquiry, when a door opened near me, and Sir George
Dashwood, accompanied by several general officers, came forth, the officer
I had first seen enter the ball-room along with them. Every one was by this
unmasked, and eagerly looking to hear what had occurred.
"Then, Dashwood, you'll send off an orderly at once?" said an old general
officer beside me.
"This instant, my Lord. I'll despatch an aide-de-camp. The troops shall be
in marching order before noon. Oh, here's the man I want! O'Malley, come
here. Mount your horse and dash into town. Send for Brotherton and M'Gregor
to quarters, and announce the news as quickly as possible."
"But what am I to announce, Sir George?"
"That the French are in retreat,--Massena in retreat, my lad."
A tremendous cheer at this instant burst from the hundreds in the
salon, who now heard the glorious tidings. Another cheer and another
followed,--ten thousand vivas rose amidst the crash of the band, as it
broke into a patriotic war chant. Such a scene of enthusiasm and excitement
I never witnessed. Some wept with joy. Others threw themselves into their
friends' arms.
"They're all mad, every mother's son of them!" said Maurice Quill, as he
elbowed his way through the mass; "and here's an old vestal won't leave my
arm. She has already embraced me three times, and we've finished a flask of
Malaga between us."
"Come, O'Malley, are you ready for the road?"
My horse was by this time standing saddled at the front. I sprang at once
to the saddle, and without waiting for a second order, set out for Lisbon.
Ten minutes had scarce elapsed,--the very shouts of joy of the delighted
city were still ringing in my ears,--when I was once again back at the
villa. As I mounted the steps into the hall, a carriage drew up,--it was
Sir George Dashwood's. He came forward, his daughter leaning upon his arm.
"Why, O'Malley, I thought you had gone."
"I have returned, Sir George. Colonel Brotherton is in waiting, and the
staff also. I have received orders to set out for Benejos, where the 14th
are stationed, and have merely delayed to say adieu."
"Adieu, my dear boy, and God bless you!" said the warm-hearted old man, as
he pressed my hand between both his. "Lucy, here's your old friend about to
leave; come and say good-by."
Miss Dashwood had stopped behind to adjust her shawl. I flew to her
assistance. "Adieu, Miss Dashwood, and forever!" said I, in a broken voice,
as I took her hand in mine. "This is not your domino," said I, eagerly, as
a blue silk one peeped from beneath her mantle; "and the sleeve, too,--did
you wear this?" She blushed slightly, and assented.
"I changed with the senhora, who wore mine all the evening."
"And Power, then, was not your partner?"
"I should think not,--for I never danced."
"Lucy, my love, are you ready? Come, be quick."
"Good-by, Mr. O'Malley, and au revoir, n'est-ce pas?"
I drew her glove from her hand as she spoke, and pressing my lips upon her
fingers, placed her within the carriage. "Adieu, and au revoir!" said I.
The carriage turned away, and a white glove was all that remained to me of
Lucy Dashwood!
The carriage had turned the angle of the road, and its retiring sounds were
growing gradually fainter, ere I recovered myself sufficiently to know
where I stood. One absorbing thought alone possessed me. Lucy was not lost
to me forever; Power was not my rival in that quarter,--that was enough for
me. I needed no more to nerve my arm and steel my heart. As I reflected
thus, the long loud blast of a trumpet broke upon the silence of the
night, and admonished me to depart. I hurried to my room to make my few
preparations for the road; but Mike had already anticipated everything
here, and all was in readiness.
But one thing now remained,--to make my adieu to the senhora. With this
intent, I descended a narrow winding stair which led from my dressing-room,
and opened by a little terrace upon the flower-garden beside her
apartments.
As I crossed the gravelled alley, I could not but think of the last time I
had been there. It was on the eve of departure for the Douro. I recalled
the few and fleeting moments of our leave-taking, and a thought flashed
upon me,--what if she cared for me! What if, half in coquetry, half in
reality, her heart was mixed up in those passages which daily association
gives rise to?
I could not altogether acquit myself of all desire to make her believe me
her admirer; nay, more, with the indolent abandon of my country, I had
fallen into a thousand little schemes to cheat the long hours away, which,
having no other object than the happiness of the moment, might yet color
all her after-life with sorrow.
Let no one rashly pronounce me a coxcomb, vain and pretentious, for all
this. In my inmost heart I had no feeling of selfishness mingled with the
consideration. It was from no sense of my own merits, no calculation of my
own chances of success, that I thought thus. Fortunately, at eighteen one's
heart is uncontaminated with such an alloy of vanity. The first emotions of
youth are pure and holy things, tempering our fiercer passions, and calming
the rude effervescence of our boyish spirit; and when we strive to please,
and hope to win affection, we insensibly fashion ourselves to nobler and
higher thoughts, catching from the source of our devotion a portion of that
charm that idealizes daily life, and makes our path in it a glorious and a
bright one.
Who would not exchange all the triumph of his later days, the proudest
moments of successful ambition, the richest trophies of hard-won
daring,--for the short and vivid flash that first shot through his heart
and told him he was loved. It is the opening consciousness of life, the
first sense of power that makes of the mere boy a man,--a man in all his
daring and his pride; and hence it is that in early life we feel ever prone
to indulge those fancied attachments which elevate and raise us in our own
esteem. Such was the frame of my mind when I entered the little boudoir
where once before I had ventured on a similar errand.
As I closed the sash-door behind me, the gray dawn of breaking day scarcely
permitted my seeing anything around me, and I felt my way towards the door
of an adjoining room, where I supposed it was likely I should find the
senhora. As I proceeded thus, with cautious step and beating heart, I
thought I heard a sound near me. I stopped and listened, and was about
again to move on, when a half-stifled sob fell upon my ear. Slowly and
silently guiding my steps towards the sounds, I reached a sofa, when, my
eyes growing by degrees more accustomed to the faint light, I could detect
a figure which, at a glance, I recognized as Donna Inez. A cashmere shawl
was loosely thrown around her, and her face was buried in her hands. As she
lay, to all seeming, still and insensible before me, her beautiful hair
fell heavily upon her back and across her arm, and her whole attitude
denoted the very abandonment of grief. A short convulsive shudder which
slightly shook her frame alone gave evidence of life, except when a sob,
barely audible in the death-like silence, escaped her.
I knelt silently down beside her, and gently withdrawing her hand, placed
it within mine. A dreadful feeling of self-condemnation shot through me as
I felt the gentle pressure of her taper fingers, which rested without a
struggle in my grasp. My tears fell hot and fast upon that pale hand, as
I bent in sadness over it, unable to utter a word. A rush of conflicting
thoughts passed through my brain, and I knew not what to do. I now had no
doubt upon my mind that she loved me, and that her present affliction was
caused by my approaching departure.
"Dearest Inez!" I stammered out at length, as I pressed her hands to my
lips,--"dearest Inez!"--a faint sob, and a slight pressure of her hand, was
the only reply. "I have come to say good-by," continued I, gaining a little
courage as I spoke; "a long good-by, too, in all likelihood. You have heard
that we are ordered away,--there, don't sob, dearest, and, believe me, I
had wished ere we parted to have spoken to you calmly and openly; but,
alas, I cannot,--I scarcely know what I say."
"You will not forget me?" said she, in a low voice, that sank into my very
heart. "You will not forget me?" As she spoke, her hand dropped heavily
upon my shoulder, and her rich luxuriant hair fell upon my cheek. What a
devil of a thing is proximity to a downy cheek and a black eyelash, more
especially when they belong to one whom you are disposed to believe not
indifferent to you! What I did at this precise moment there is no necessity
for recording, even had not an adage interdicted such confessions, nor can
I now remember what I said; but I can well recollect how, gradually warming
with my subject, I entered into a kind of half-declaration of attachment,
intended most honestly to be a mere expos of my own unworthiness to win
her favor, and my resolution to leave Lisbon and its neighborhood forever.
Let not any one blame me rashly if he has not experienced the difficulty of
my position. The impetus of love-making is like the ardor of a fox-hunt.
You care little that the six-bar gate before you is the boundary of another
gentleman's preserves or the fence of his pleasure-ground. You go slap
along at a smashing-pace, with your head up, and your hand low, clearing
all before you, the opposing difficulties to your progress giving half
the zest, because all the danger to your career. So it is with love; the
gambling spirit urges one ever onward, and the chance of failure is a
reason for pursuit, where no other argument exists.
"And you do love me?" said the senhora, with a soft, low whisper that most
unaccountably suggested anything but comfort to me.
"Love you, Inez? By this kiss--I'm in an infernal scrape!" said I,
muttering this last half of my sentence to myself.
"And you'll never be jealous again?"
"Never, by all that's lovely!--your own sweet lips. That's the very last
thing to reproach me with."
"And you promise me not to mind that foolish boy? For, after all, you know,
it was mere flirtation,--if even that."
"I'll never think of him again," said I, while my brain was burning to make
out her meaning. "But, dearest, there goes the trumpet-call--"
"And, as for Pedro Mascarenhas, I never liked him."
"Are you quite sure, Inez?"
"I swear it!--so no more of him. Gonzales Cordenza--I've broke with him
long since. So that you see, dearest Frederic--"
"Frederic!" said I, starting almost to my feet with, amazement, while she
continued:--
"I'm your own,--all your own!"
"Oh, the coquette, the heartless jilt!" groaned I, half-aloud.
"And O'Malley, Inez, poor Charley!--what of him?"
"Poor thing! I can't help him. But he's such a puppy, the lesson may do him
good."
"But perhaps he loved you, Inez?"
"To be sure he did; I wished him to do so,--I can't bear not to be loved.
But, Frederic, tell me, may I trust you,--will you keep faithful to me?"
"Sweetest Inez! by this last kiss I swear that such as I kneel before you
now, you'll ever find me."
A foot upon the gravel-walk without now called me to my feet; I sprang
towards the door, and before Inez had lifted her head from the sofa, I had
reached the garden. A figure muffled in a cavalry cloak passed near me, but
without noticing me, and the next moment I had cleared the paling, and was
hurrying towards the stable, where I had ordered Mike to be in waiting.
The faint streak of dull pink which announces the coming day stretched
beneath the dark clouds of the night, and the chill air of the morning was
already stirring in the leaves.
As I passed along by a low beech hedge which skirted the avenue, I was
struck by the sound of voices near me. I stopped to listen, and soon
detected in one of the speakers my friend Mickey Free; of the other I was
not long in ignorance.
"Love you, is it, bathershin? It's worship you, adore you, my
darling,--that's the word! There, acushla, don't cry; dry your eyes--Oh,
murther, it's a cruel thing to tear one's self away from the best of
living, with the run of the house in drink and kissing! Bad luck to it for
campaigning, any way, I never liked it!"
Catrina's reply,--for it was she,--I could not gather; but Mike resumed:--
"Ay, just so, sore bones and wet grass, accadent, and half-rations. Oh,
that I ever saw the day when I took to it! Listen to me now, honey; here it
is, on my knees I am before you, and throth it's not more nor three, may be
four, young women I'd say the like to; bad scran to me if I wouldn't marry
you out of a face this blessed morning just as soon as I'd look at ye.
Arrah, there now, don't be screeching and bawling; what'll the neighbors
think of us, and my own heart's destroyed with grief entirely."
Poor Catrina's voice returned an inaudible answer, and not wishing any
longer to play the eavesdropper, I continued my path towards the stable.
The distant noises from the city announced a state of movement and
preparation, and more than one orderly passed the road near me at a gallop.
As I turned into the wide courtyard, Mike, breathless and flurried with
running, overtook me.
"Are the horses ready, Mike?" said I; "we must start this instant?"
"They've just finished a peck of oats apiece, and faix, that same may be a
stranger to them this day six months."
"And the baggage, too?"
"On the cars, with the staff and the light brigade. It was down there I was
now, to see all was right."
"Oh, I'm quite aware; and now bring out the cattle. I hope Catrina received
your little consolations well. That seems a very sad affair."
"Murder, real murder, devil a less! It's no matter where you go, from
Clonmel to Chayney, it's all one; they've a way of getting round you. Upon
my soul, it's like the pigs they are."
"Like pigs, Mike? That appears a strange compliment you've selected to pay
them."
"Ay, just like the pigs, no less. May be you've heard what happened to
myself up at Moronha?"
"Look to that girth there. Well, go on."
"I was coming along one morning, just as day was beginning to break, when I
sees a slip of a pig trotting before me, with nobody near him; but as the
road was lonely, and myself rather down in heart, I thought, Musha! but yer
fine company, anyhow, av a body could only keep you with him. But, ye see,
a pig--saving your presence--is a baste not easily flattered, so I didn't
waste time and blarney upon him, but I took off my belt, and put it round
its neck as neat as need be; but, as the devil's luck would have it, I
didn't go half an hour when a horse came galloping up behind me. I turned
round, and, by the blessed light, it was Sir Dinny himself was on it!"
"Sir Dennis Pack?"
"Yes, bad luck to his hook nose. 'What are you doing there, my fine
fellow?' says he. 'What's that you have dragging there behind you?'
"'A boneen, sir,' says I. 'Isn't he a fine crayture?--av he wasn't so
troublesome.'
"'Troublesome, troublesome--what do you mean?'
"'Just so,' says I. 'Isn't he parsecutiug the life out of me the whole
morning, following me about everywhere I go? Contrary bastes they always
was.'
"'I advise you to try and part company, my friend, notwithstanding,' says
he; 'or may be it's the same end you'll be coming to, and not long either.'
And faix, I took his advice; and ye see, Mister Charles, it's just as I was
saying, they're like the women, the least thing in life is enough to bring
them after us, av ye only put the 'comether' upon them."
"And now adieu to the Villa Nuova," said I, as I rode slowly down the
avenue, turning ever and anon in my saddle to look back on each well-known
spot.
A heavy sigh from Mike responded to my words.
"A long, a last farewell!" said I, waving my hand towards the trellised
walls, now half-hidden by the trees; and, as I spoke, that heaviness of the
heart came over me that seems inseparable from leave-taking. The hour of
parting seems like a warning to us that all our enjoyments and pleasures
here are destined to a short and merely fleeting existence; and as each
scene of life passes away never to return, we are made to feel that youth
and hope are passing with them; and that, although the fair world be as
bright, and its pleasures as rich in abundance, our capacity of enjoyment
is daily, hourly diminishing; and while all around us smiles in beauty and
happiness, that we, alas! are not what we were.
Such was the tenor of my thoughts as I reached the road, when they were
suddenly interrupted by my man Mike, whose meditations were following
a somewhat similar channel, though at last inclining to different
conclusions. He coughed a couple of times as if to attract my attention,
and then, as it were half thinking aloud, he muttered,--
"I wonder if we treated the young ladies well, anyhow, Mister Charles, for,
faix, I've my doubts on it."
CHAPTER XIX.
THE LINES.
When we reached Lescas, we found that an officer of Lord Wellington's staff
had just arrived from the lines, and was occupied in making known the
general order from headquarters; which set forth, with customary brevity,
that the French armies, under the command of Massena, had retired from
their position, and were in full retreat,--the second and third corps,
which had been stationed at Villa Franca, having marched, during the
night of the 15th, in the direction of Manal. The officers in command of
divisions were ordered to repair instantly to Pero Negro, to consult upon a
forward movement, Admiral Berkeley being written to to provide launches to
pass over General Hill's, or any other corps which might be selected, to
the left bank of the Tagus. All now was excitement, heightened by the
unexpected nature of an occurrence which not even speculation had
calculated upon. It was but a few days before, and the news had reached
Torres Vedras that a powerful reinforcement was in march to join Massena's
army, and their advanced guard had actually reached Santarem. The confident
expectation was, therefore, that an attack upon the lines was meditated.
Now, however, this prospect existed no longer; for scarcely had the heavy
mists of the lowering day disappeared, when the vast plain, so lately
peopled by the thickened ranks and dark masses of a great army, was seen in
its whole extent deserted and untenanted.
The smouldering fires of the pickets alone marked where the troops had been
posted, but not a man of that immense force was to be seen. General Fane,
who had been despatched with a brigade of Portuguese cavalry and some
artillery, hung upon the rear of the retiring army, and from him we learned
that the enemy were continuing their retreat northward, having occupied
Santarem with a strong force to cover the movement. Crawfurd was ordered
to the front with the light division, the whole army following in the same
direction, except Hill's corps, which, crossing the river at Velada, was
intended to harass the enemy's flank, and assist our future operations.
Such, in brief, was the state of affairs when I reached Villa Franca
towards noon, and received orders to join my regiment, then forming part of
Sir Stapleton Cotton's brigade.
It must be felt to be thoroughly appreciated, the enthusiastic pleasure
with which one greets his old corps after some months of separation: the
bounding ecstasy with which the weary eye rests on the old familiar faces,
dear by every association of affection and brotherhood; the anxious look
for this one and for that; the thrill of delight sent through the heart as
the well-remembered march swells upon the ear; the very notes of that rough
voice which we have heard amidst the crash of battle and the rolling of
artillery, speak softly to our senses like a father's welcome; from the
well-tattered flag that waves above us to the proud steed of the war-worn
trumpeter, each has a niche in our affection.
If ever there was a corps calculated to increase and foster these
sentiments, the 14th Light Dragoons was such. The warm affection, the truly
heart-felt regard, which existed among my brother officers, made of our
mess a happy home. Our veteran colonel, grown gray in campaigning, was like
a father to us; while the senior officers, tempering the warm blood of
impetuous youth with their hard-won experience, threw a charm of peace and
tranquillity over all our intercourse that made us happy when together, and
taught us to feel that, whether seated around the watch-fire or charging
amidst the squadrons of the enemy, we were surrounded by those devoted
heart and soul to aid us.
Gallant Fourteenth!--ever first in every gay scheme of youthful jollity, as
foremost in the van to meet the foe--how happy am I to recall the memory
of your bright looks and bold hearts; of your manly daring and your bold
frankness; of your merry voices, as I have heard them in the battle or in
the bivouac! Alas and alas, that I should indulge such recollections alone!
How few--how very few--are left of those with whom I trod the early steps
of life, whose bold cheer I have heard above the clashing sabres of the
enemy, whose broken voice I have listened to above the grave of a comrade!
The dark pines of the Pyrenees wave above some, the burning sands of India
cover others, and the wide plains of Salamanca are the abiding-place of
still more.
"Here comes O'Malley!" shouted a well-known voice, as I rode down the
little slope at the foot of which a group of officers were standing beside
their horses.
"Welcome, thou man of Galway!" cried Hampden; "delighted to have you once
more among us. How confoundedly well the fellow is looking!"
"Lisbon beef seems better prog than commissariat biscuit!" said another.
"A'weel, Charley?" said my friend the Scotch doctor; "how's a' wi' ye man?
Ye seem to thrive on your mishaps! How cam' ye by that braw beastie ye're
mounted on?"
"A present, Doctor; the gift of a very warm friend."
"I hope you invited him to the mess, O'Malley! For, by Jove, our stables
stand in need of his kind offices! There he goes! Look at him! What a
slashing pace for a heavy fellow!" This observation was made with
reference to a well-known officer on the commander-in-chief's staff, whose
weight--some two and twenty stone--never was any impediment to his bold
riding.
"Egad, O'Malley, you'll soon be as pretty a light-weight as our friend
yonder. Ah, there's a storm going on there! Here comes the colonel!"
"Well, O'Malley, are you come back to us? Happy to see you, boy! Hope
we shall not lose you again in a hurry! We can't spare the scapegraces!
There's plenty of skirmishing going on! Crawfurd always asks for the
scapegraces for the pickets!"
I shook my gallant colonel's hand, while I acknowledged, as best I might,
his ambiguous compliment.
"I say, lads," resumed the colonel, "squad your men and form on the road!
Lord Wellington's coming down this way to have a look at you! O'Malley, I
have General Crawfurd's orders to offer you your old appointment on his
staff; without you prefer to remaining with the regiment!"
"I can never be sufficiently grateful, sir, to the general: but, in fact--I
think--that is, I believe--"
"You'd rather be among your own fellows. Out with it boy! I like you all
the better! But come, we mustn't let the general know that; so that I shall
forget to tell you all about it. Eh, isn't that best? But join your troop
now; I hear the staff coming this way."
As he spoke, a crowd of horseman were seen advancing towards us at a sharp
trot, their waving plumes and gorgeous aiguillettes denoting their rank
as generals of division. In the midst, as they came nearer, I could
distinguish one whom once seen there was no forgetting; his plain blue
frock and gray trousers, unstrapped beneath his boots, not a little unlike
the trim accuracy of costume around him. As he rode to the head of the
leading squadron, the staff fell back and he stood alone before us; for a
second there was a dead silence, but the next instant--by what impulse tell
who can--one tremendous cheer burst from the entire regiment. It was like
the act of one man; so sudden, so spontaneous. While every cheek glowed,
and every eye sparkled with enthusiasm, he alone seemed cool and unexcited,
as, gently raising his hand, he motioned them to silence.
"Fourteenth, you are to be where you always desire to be,--in the advanced
guard of the army. I have nothing to say on the subject of your conduct
in the field. I know you; but if in pursuit of the enemy, I hear of any
misconduct towards the people of the country, or any transgression of the
general orders regarding pillage, by G----, I'll punish you as severely as
the worst corps in the service, and you know me!"
"Oh, tear an ages, listen to that; and there's to be no plunder after all!"
said Mickey Free; and for an instant the most I could do was not to burst
into a fit of laughter. The word, "Forward!" was given at the moment, and
we moved past in close column, while that penetrating eye, which seemed to
read our very thoughts, scanned us from one end of the line to the other.
"I say, Charley," said the captain of my troop, in a whisper,--"I say, that
confounded cheer we gave got us that lesson; he can't stand that kind of
thing."
"By Jove! I never felt more disposed than to repeat it," said I.
"No, no, my boy, we'll give him the honors, nine times nine; but wait till
evening. Look at old Merivale there. I'll swear he's saying something
devilish civil to him. Do you see the old fellow's happy look?"
And so it was; the bronzed, hard-cast features of the veteran soldier
were softened into an expression of almost boyish delight, as he sat,
bare-headed, bowing to his very saddle, while Lord Wellington was speaking.
As I looked, my heart throbbed painfully against my side, my breath came
quick, and I muttered to myself, "What would I not give to be in his place
now!"
CHAPTER XX.
THE RETREAT OF THE FRENCH.
It is not my intention, were I even adequate to the task, to trace with
anything like accuracy the events of the war at this period. In fact, to
those who, like myself, were performing a mere subaltern character, the
daily movements of our own troops, not to speak of the continual changes
of the enemy, were perfectly unknown, and an English newspaper was more
ardently longed for in the Peninsula than by the most eager crowd of a
London coffee-room; nay, the results of the very engagements we were
ourselves concerned in, more than once, first reached us through the press
of our own country. It is easy enough to understand this. The officer in
command of the regiment, and how much more, the captain of a troop, or the
subaltern under him, knows nothing beyond the sphere of his own immediate
duty; by the success or failure of his own party his knowledge is bounded,
but how far he or his may influence the fortune, of the day, or of what is
taking place elsewhere, he is totally ignorant; and an old Fourteenth man
did not badly explain, his ideas on the matter, who described Busaco as "a
great noise and a great smoke, booming artillery and rattling small-arms,
infernal confusion, and to all seeming, incessant blundering, orders
and counter-orders, ending with a crushing charge; when, not being hurt
himself, nor having hurt anybody, he felt much pleased to learn that they
had gained a victory." It is then sufficient for all the purposes of my
narrative, when I mention that Massena continued his retreat by Santarem
and Thomar, followed by the allied army, who, however desirous of pressing
upon the rear of their enemy, were still obliged to maintain their
communication with the lines, and also to watch the movement of the large
armies which, under Ney and Soult, threatened at any unguarded moment to
attack them in flank.
The position which Massena occupied at Santarem, naturally one of great
strength, and further improved by intrenchments, defied any attack on
the part of Lord Wellington, until the arrival of the long-expected
reinforcements from England. These had sailed in the early part of January,
but delayed by adverse winds, only reached Lisbon on the 2d of March; and
so correctly was the French marshal apprised of the circumstance, and so
accurately did he anticipate the probable result, that on the fourth he
broke up his encampment, and recommenced his retrograde movement, with an
army now reduced to forty thousand fighting men, and with two thousand
sick, destroying all his baggage and guns that could not be horsed. By a
demonstration of advancing upon the Zezere, by which he held the allies
in check, he succeeded in passing his wounded to the rear, while Ney,
appearing with a large force suddenly at Leiria, seemed bent upon attacking
the lines. By these stratagems two days' march were gained, and the French
retreated upon Torres Novas and Thomar, destroying the bridges behind them
as they passed.
The day was breaking on the 12th of March, when the British first came in
sight of the retiring enemy. We were then ordered to the front, and broken
up into small parties, threw out our skirmishers. The French chasseurs,
usually not indisposed to accept this species of encounter, showed now less
of inclination than usual, and either retreated before us, or hovered in
masses to check our advance; in this way the morning was passed, when
towards noon we perceived that the enemy was drawn up in battle array,
occupying the height above the village of Redinha. This little straggling
village is situated in a hollow traversed by a narrow causeway which opens
by a long and dangerous defile upon a bridge, on either side of which a
dense wood afforded a shelter for light troops, while upon the commanding
eminence above a battery of heavy guns was seen in position.
In front of the village a brigade of artillery and a division of infantry
were drawn up so skilfully as to give the appearance of a considerable
force, so that when Lord Wellington came up he spent some time in examining
the enemy's position. Erskine's brigade was immediately ordered up, and the
Fifty-second and Ninety-fourth, and a company of the Forty-third were led
against the wooded slopes upon the French right. Picton simultaneously
attacked the left, and in less than an hour, both were successful, and
Ney's position was laid bare; his skirmishers, however, continued to hold
their ground in front, and La Ferrire, a colonel of hussars, dashing
boldly forward at this very moment, carried off fourteen prisoners from
the very front of our line. Deceived by the confidence of the enemy, Lord
Wellington now prepared for an attack in force. The infantry were therefore
formed into line, and, at the signal of three shots fired from the centre,
began their foremost movement.
Bending up a gentle curve, the whole plain glistened with the glancing
bayonets, and the troops marched majestically onward; while the light
artillery and the cavalry, bounding forward from the left and centre,
rushed eagerly towards the foe. One deafening discharge from the French
guns opened at the moment, with a general volley of small-arms. The smoke
for an instant obscured everything, and when that cleared away, no enemy
was to be seen.
The British pressed madly on, like heated blood-hounds; but when they
descended the slope, the village of Redinha was in flames, and the French
in full retreat beyond it. A single howitzer seemed our only trophy, and
even this we were not destined to boast of, for from the midst of the
crashing flame and dense smoke of the burning village, a troop of dragoons
rushed forward, and charging our infantry, carried it off. The struggle,
though but for a moment, cost them dear: twenty of their comrades lay dead
upon the spot; but they were resolute and determined, and the officer who
led them on, fighting hand to hand with a soldier of the Forty-second,
cheered them as they retired. His gallant bearing, and his coat covered
with decorations, bespoke him one of note, and well it might; he who
thus perilled his life to maintain the courage of his soldiers at the
commencement of a retreat, was none other than Ney himself, le plus brave
des braves. The British pressed hotly on, and the light troops crossed the
river almost at the same time with the French. Ney, however, fell back upon
Condeixa, where his main body was posted, and all farther pursuit was for
the present abandoned.
At Casa Noval and at Foz d'Aronce, the allies were successful; but the
French still continued to retire, burning the towns and villages in their
rear, and devastating the country along the whole line of march by every
expedient of cruelty the heart of man has ever conceived. In the words of
one whose descriptions, however fraught with the most wonderful power of
painting, are equally marked by truth, "Every horror that could make war
hideous attended this dreadful march. Distress, conflagration, death in
all modes,--from wounds, from fatigue, from water, from the flames, from
starvation,--vengeance, unlimited vengeance, was on every side." The
country was a desert!
Such was the exhaustion of the allies, who suffered even greater privations
than the enemy, that they halted upon the 16th, unable to proceed farther;
and the river Ceira, swollen and unfordable, flowed between the rival
armies.
The repose of even one day was a most grateful interruption to the
harassing career we had pursued for some time past; and it seemed that my
comrades felt, like myself, that such an opportunity was by no means to
be neglected; but while I am devoting so much space and trespassing on my
reader's patience thus far with narrative of flood and field, let me steal
a chapter for what will sometimes seem a scarcely less congenial topic, and
bring back the recollection of a glorious night in the Peninsula.
CHAPTER XXI.
PATRICK'S DAY IN THE PENINSULA.
The rveil had not yet sounded, when I felt my shoulder shaken gently as
I lay wrapped up in my cloak beneath a prickly pear-tree.
"Lieutenant O'Malley, sir; a letter, sir; a bit of a note, your honor,"
said a voice that bespoke the bearer and myself were countrymen. I opened
it, and with difficulty, by the uncertain light, read as follows:--
Dear Charley,--As Lord Wellington, like a good Irishman as
he is, wouldn't spoil Patrick's Day by marching, we've got a little
dinner at our quarters to celebrate the holy times, as my uncle would
call it. Maurice, Phil Grady, and some regular trumps will all come,
so don't disappoint us. I've been making punch all night, and
Casey, who has a knack at pastry, has made a goose-pie as big as a
portmanteau. Sharp seven, after parade. The second battalion of
the Fusiliers are quartered at Melant, and we are next them. Bring
any of yours worth their liquor. Power is, I know, absent with the
staff; perhaps the Scotch doctor would come; try him. Carry over
a little mustard with you, if there be such in your parts.
Yours,
D. O'SHAUGHNESSY.
Patrick's day, and raining like blazes.
Seeing that the bearer expected an answer, I scrawled the words, "I'm
there," with my pencil on the back of the note, and again turned myself
round to sleep. My slumbers were, however, soon interrupted once more; for
the bugles of the light infantry and the hoarse trumpet of the cavalry
sounded the call, and I found to my surprise that, though halted, we were
by no means destined to a day of idleness. Dragoons were already mounted,
carrying orders hither and thither, and staff-officers were galloping right
and left. A general order commanded an inspection of the troops, and within
less than an hour from daybreak the whole army was drawn up under arms. A
thin, drizzling rain continued to fall during the early part of the day,
but the sun gradually dispelled the heavy vapor; and as the bright verdure
glittered in its beams, sending up all the perfumes of a southern clime, I
thought I had never seen a more lovely morning. The staff were stationed
upon a little knoll beside the river, round the base of which the troops
defiled, at first in orderly, then in quick time, the bands playing and the
colors flying. In the same brigade with us the Eighty-eighth came, and as
they neared the commander-in-chief, their quick-step was suddenly stopped,
and after a pause of a few seconds, the band struck up "St. Patrick's Day;"
the notes were caught up by the other Irish regiments, and amidst one
prolonged cheer from the whole line, the gallant fellows moved past.
The grenadier company were drawn up beside the road, and I was not long in
detecting my friend O'Shaughnessy, who wore a tremendous shamrock in his
shako.
"Left face, wheel! Quick march! Don't forget the mustard!" said the bold
major; and a loud roar of laughing from my brother officers followed him
off the ground. I soon explained the injunction, and having invited some
three or four to accompany me to the dinner, waited with all patience for
the conclusion of the parade.
The sun was setting as I mounted, and joined by Hampden, Baker, the doctor,
and another, set out for O'Shaughnessy's quarters. As we rode along, we
were continually falling in with others bent upon the same errand as
ourselves, and ere we arrived at Melant our party was some thirty strong;
and truly a most extraordinary procession did we form. Few of the
invited came without some contribution to the general stock; and while a
staff-officer flourished a ham, a smart hussar might be seen with a plucked
turkey, trussed for roasting; most carried bottles, as the consumption of
fluid was likely to be considerable; and one fat old major jogged along on
a broken-winded pony, with a basket of potatoes on his arm. Good fellowship
was the order of the day, and certainly a more jovial squadron seldom was
met together than ours. As we turned the angle of a rising ground, a hearty
cheer greeted us, and we beheld in front of an old ordnance marquee a party
of some fifty fellows engaged in all the pleasing duties of the cuisine.
Maurice, conspicuous above all, with a white apron and a ladle in his hand,
was running hither and thither, advising, admonishing, instructing, and
occasionally imprecating. Ceasing for a second his functions, he gave us a
cheer and a yell like that of an Indian savage, and then resumed his duties
beside a huge boiler, which, from the frequency of his explorations into
its contents, we judged to be punch.
"Charley, my son, I've a place for you; don't forget. Where's my learned
brother?--haven't you brought him with you? Ah, Doctor, how goes it?"
[Illustration: GOING OUT TO DINNER.]
"Nae that bad, Master Quell: a' things considered, we've had an awfu' time
of it lately."
"You know my friend Hampden, Maurice. Let me introduce Mr. Baker, Mr.
Maurice Quill. Where's the major?"
"Here I am, my darling, and delighted to see you. Some of yours, O'Malley,
ain't they? Proud to have you, gentlemen. Charley, we are obliged to have
several tables; but you are to be beside Maurice, so take your friends with
you. There goes the 'Roast Beef;' my heart warms to that old tune."
Amidst a hurried recognition, and shaking of hands on every side, I elbowed
my way into the tent, and soon reached a corner, where, at a table for
eight, I found Maurice seated at one end; a huge, purple-faced old major,
whom he presented to us as Bob Mahon, occupied the other. O'Shaughnessy
presided at the table next to us, but near enough to join in all the
conviviality of ours.
One must have lived for some months upon hard biscuit and harder beef
to relish as we did the fare before us, and to form an estimate of our
satisfaction. If the reader cannot fancy Van Amburgh's lions in red coats
and epaulettes, he must be content to lose the effect of the picture. A
turkey rarely fed more than two people, and few were abstemious enough to
be satisfied with one chicken. The order of the viands, too, observed no
common routine, each party being happy to get what he could, and satisfied
to follow up his pudding with fish, or his tart with a sausage. Sherry,
champagne, London porter, Malaga, and even, I believe, Harvey's sauce were
hobnobbed in; while hot punch, in teacups or tin vessels, was unsparingly
distributed on all sides. Achilles himself, they say, got tired of eating,
and though he consumed something like a prize ox to his own cheek, he at
length had to call for cheese, so that we at last gave in, and having
cleared away the broken tumbrels and baggage-carts of our army, cleared for
a general action.
"Now, lads!" cried the major, "I'm not going to lose your time and mine by
speaking; but there are a couple of toasts I must insist upon your drinking
with all the honors; and as I like despatch, we'll couple them. It so
happens that our old island boasts of two of the finest fellows that
ever wore Russia ducks. None of your nonsensical geniuses, like poets or
painters or anything like that; but downright, straightforward, no-humbug
sort of devil-may-care and bad-luck-to-you kind of chaps,--real Irishmen!
Now, it's a strange thing that they both had such an antipathy to vermin,
they spent their life in hunting them down and destroying them; and whether
they met toads at home or Johnny Crapaud abroad, it was all one. [Cheers.]
Just so, boys; they made them leave that; but I see you are impatient, so
I'll not delay you, but fill to the brim, and with the best cheer in your
body, drink with me the two greatest Irishmen that ever lived, 'Saint
Patrick and Lord Wellington.'"
The Englishmen laughed long and loud, while we cheered with an energy that
satisfied even the major.
"Who is to give us the chant? Who is to sing Saint Patrick?" cried Maurice.
"Come, Bob, out with it."
"I'm four tumblers too low for that yet," growled out the major.
"Well, then, Charley, be you the man; or why not Dennis himself? Come,
Dennis, we cannot better begin our evening than with a song; let us have
our old friend 'Larry M'Hale.'"
"Larry M'Hale!" resounded from all parts of the room, while O'Shaughnessy
rose once more to his legs.
"Faith, boys, I'm always ready to follow your lead; but what analogy can
exist between 'Larry M'Hale' and the toast we have just drank I can't see
for the life of me; not but Larry would have made a strapping light company
man had he joined the army."
"The song, the song!" cried several voices.
"Well, if you will have it, here goes:"--
LARRY M'HALE.
AIR,--"It's a bit of a thing," etc.
Oh, Larry M'Hale he had little to fear,
And never could want when the crops didn't fail;
He'd a house and demesne and eight hundred a year,
And the heart for to spend it, had Larry M'Hale!
The soul of a party, the life of a feast,
And an illigant song he could sing, I'll be bail;
He would ride with the rector, and drink with the priest,
Oh, the broth of a boy was old Larry M'Hale!
It's little he cared for the judge or recorder,
His house was as big and as strong as a jail;
With a cruel four-pounder, he kept in great order,
He'd murder the country, would Larry M'Hale.
He'd a blunderbuss too, of horse-pistols a pair;
But his favorite weapon was always a flail.
I wish you could see how he'd empty a fair,
For he handled it neatly, did Larry M'Hale.
His ancestors were kings before Moses was born,
His mother descended from great Grana Uaile;
He laughed all the Blakes and the Frenches to scorn;
They were mushrooms compared to old Larry M'Hale.
He sat down every day to a beautiful dinner,
With cousins and uncles enough for a tail;
And, though loaded with debt, oh, the devil a thinner,
Could law or the sheriff make Larry M'Hale!
With a larder supplied and a cellar well stored,
None lived half so well, from Fair-Head to Kinsale,
As he piously said, "I've a plentiful board,
And the Lord he is good to old Larry M'Hale."
So fill up your glass, and a high bumper give him,
It's little we'd care for the tithes or repale;
For ould Erin would be a fine country to live in,
If we only had plenty like LARRY M'HALE.
"Very singular style of person your friend Mr. M'Hale," lisped a
spooney-looking cornet at the end of the table.
"Not in the country he belongs to, I assure you," said Maurice; "but I
presume you were never in Ireland."
"You are mistaken there," resumed the other; "I was in Ireland, though I
confess not for a long time."
"If I might be so bold," cried Maurice, "how long?"
"Half an hour, by a stop-watch," said the other, pulling up his stock; "and
I had quite enough of it in that time."
"Pray give us your experiences," cried out Bob Mahon; "they should be
interesting, considering your opportunities."
"You are right," said the cornet; "they were so; and as they illustrate a
feature in your amiable country, you shall have them."
A general knocking upon the table announced the impatience of the company,
and when silence was restored the cornet began:--
When the 'Bermuda' transport sailed from Portsmouth for Lisbon, I happened
to make one of some four hundred interesting individuals who, before they
became food for powder, were destined to try their constitutions on pickled
pork. The second day after our sailing, the winds became adverse; it blew
a hurricane from every corner of the compass but the one it ought, and the
good ship, that should have been standing straight for the Bay of Biscay,
was scudding away under a double-reefed topsail towards the coast of
Labrador. For six days we experienced every sea-manoeuvre that usually
preludes a shipwreck, and at length, when, what from sea-sickness and fear,
we had become utterly indifferent to the result, the storm abated, the sea
went down, and we found ourselves lying comfortably in the harbor of Cork,
with a strange suspicion on our minds that the frightful scenes of the past
week had been nothing but a dream.
"'Come, Mr. Medlicot,' said the skipper to me, 'we shall be here for a
couple of days to refit; had you not better go ashore and see the country?'
"I sprang to my legs with delight; visions of cowslips, larks, daisies, and
mutton-chops floated before my excited imagination, and in ten minutes I
found myself standing at that pleasant little inn at Cove which, opposite
Spike Island, rejoices in the name of the 'Goat and Garters.'
"'Breakfast, waiter,' said I; 'a beefsteak,--fresh beef, mark ye,--fresh
eggs, bread, milk, and butter, all fresh. No more hard tack,' thought I;
'no salt butter, but a genuine land breakfast.'
"Up-stairs, No. 4, sir,' said the waiter, as he flourished a dirty napkin,
indicating the way.
"Up-stairs I went, and in due time the appetizing little meal made its
appearance. Never did a minor's eye revel over his broad acres with more
complacent enjoyment than did mine skim over the mutton and the muffin,
the tea-pot, the trout, and the devilled kidney, so invitingly spread out
before me. 'Yes,' thought I, as I smacked my lips, 'this is the reward of
virtue; pickled pork is a probationary state that admirably fits us for
future enjoyments.' I arranged my napkin upon my knee, seized my knife
and fork, and proceeded with most critical acumen to bisect a beefsteak.
Scarcely, however, had I touched it, when, with a loud crash, the plate
smashed beneath it, and the gravy ran piteously across the cloth. Before I
had time to account for the phenomenon, the door opened hastily, and the
waiter rushed into the room, his face beaming with smiles, while he rubbed
his hands in an ecstasy of delight.
"'It's all over, sir,' said he; 'glory be to God! it's all done.'
"'What's over? What's done?' inquired I, with impatience.
"'Mr. M'Mahon is satisfied,' replied he, 'and so is the other gentleman.'
"'Who and what the devil do you mean?'
[Illustration: DISADVANTAGE OF BREAKFASTING OVER A DUELLING-PARTY.]
"'It's over, sir, I say,' replied the waiter again; 'he fired in the air.'
"'Fired in the air! Was there a duel in the room below stairs?'
"'Yes, sir,' said the waiter, with a benign smile.
"'That will do,' said I, as seizing my hat, I rushed out of the house, and
hurrying to the beach, took a boat for the ship. Exactly half an hour had
elapsed since my landing, but even those short thirty minutes had fully as
many reasons that although there may be few more amusing, there are some
safer places to live in than the Green Isle."
A general burst of laughter followed the cornet's story, which was
heightened in its effect by the gravity with which he told it.
"And after all," said Maurice Quill, "now that people have given up making
fortunes for the insurance companies by living to the age of Methuselah,
there's nothing like being an Irishman. In what other part of the habitable
globe can you cram so much adventure into one year? Where can you be so
often in love, in liquor, or in debt; and where can you get so merrily out
of the three? Where are promises to marry and promises to pay treated with
the same gentleman-like forbearance; and where, when you have lost your
heart and your fortune, are people found so ready to comfort you in your
reverses? Yes," said Maurice, as he filled his glass up to the brim, and
eyed it lusciously for a moment,--"yes, darling, here's your health; the
only girl I ever loved--in that part of the country, I mean. Give her a
bumper, lads, and I'll give you a chant."
"Name! name! name!" shouted several voices from different parts of the
table.
"Mary Draper!" said Maurice, filling his glass once more, while the name
was re-echoed by every lip at table.
"The song! the song!"
"Faith, I hope I haven't forgotten it," quoth Maurice. "No; here it is."
So saying, after a couple of efforts to assure the pitch of his voice, the
worthy doctor began the following words to that very popular melody, "Nancy
Dawson:"--
MARY DRAPER.
AIR,--Nancy Dawson.
Don't talk to me of London dames,
Nor rave about your foreign flames,
That never lived, except in drames,
Nor shone, except on paper;
I'll sing you 'bout a girl I knew,
Who lived in Ballywhacmacrew,
And let me tell you, mighty few
Could equal Mary Draper.
Her cheeks were red, her eyes were blue,
Her hair was brown of deepest hue,
Her foot was small, and neat to view,
Her waist was slight and taper;
Her voice was music to your ear,
A lovely brogue, so rich and clear,
Oh, the like I ne'er again shall hear,
As from sweet Mary Draper.
She'd ride a wall, she'd drive a team,
Or with a fly she'd whip a stream,
Or may be sing you "Rousseau's Dream,"
For nothing could escape her;
I've seen her, too,--upon my word,--
At sixty yards bring down her bird,
Oh, she charmed all the Forty-third,
Did lovely Mary Draper.
And at the spring assizes' ball,
The junior bar would one and all
For all her fav'rite dances call,
And Harry Dean would caper;
Lord Clare would then forget his lore;
King's Counsel, voting law a bore,
Were proud to figure on the floor,
For love of Mary Draper.
The parson, priest, sub-sheriff too,
Were all her slaves, and so would you,
If you had only but one view,
Of such a face and shape, or
Her pretty ankles--But, ohone,
It's only west of old Athlone
Such girls were found--and now they're gone--
So here's to Mary Draper!
"So here's to Mary Draper!" sang out every voice, in such efforts to catch
the tune as pleased the taste of the motley assembly.
"For Mary Draper and Co., I thank you," said Maurice. "Quill drinks to
Dennis," added he, in a grave tone, as he nodded to O'Shaughnessy. "Yes,
Shaugh, few men better than ourselves know these matters; and few have had
more experience of the three perils of Irishmen,--love, liquor, and the law
of arrest."
"It's little the latter has ever troubled my father's son," replied
O'Shaughnessy. "Our family have been writ proof for centuries, and he'd
have been a bold man who would have ventured with an original or a true
copy within the precincts of Killinahoula."
"Your father had a touch of Larry M'Hale in him," said I, "apparently."
"Exactly so," replied Dennis; "not but they caught him at last, and a
scurvy trick it was and well worthy of him who did it! Yes," said he, with
a sigh, "it is only another among the many instances where the better
features of our nationality have been used by our enemies as instruments
for our destruction; and should we seek for the causes of unhappiness in
our wretched country, we should find them rather in our virtues than in
our vices, and in the bright rather than in the darker phases of our
character."
"Metaphysics, by Jove!" cried Quill; "but all true at the same time. There
was a mess-mate of mine in the 'Roscommon' who never paid car-hire in his
life. 'Head or harp, Paddy!' he would cry. 'Two tenpennies or nothing.'
'Harp, for the honor of ould Ireland!' was the invariable response, and my
friend was equally sure to make head come uppermost; and, upon my soul,
they seem to know the trick at the Home Office."
"That must have been the same fellow that took my father," cried
O'Shaughnessy, with energy.
"Let us hear the story, Dennis," said I.
"Yes," said Maurice, "for the benefit of self and fellows, let us hear the
stratagem!"
"The way of it was this," resumed O'Shaughnessy. "My father, who for
reasons registered in the King's Bench spent a great many years of his life
in that part of Ireland geographically known as lying west of the law,
was obliged, for certain reasons of family, to come up to Dublin. This he
proceeded to do with due caution. Two trusty servants formed an advance
guard, and patrolled the country for at least five miles in advance; after
them came a skirmishing body of a few tenants, who, for the consideration
of never paying rent, would have charged the whole Court of Chancery, if
needful. My father himself, in an old chaise victualled like a fortress,
brought up the rear; and as I said before, he were a bold man who would
have attempted to have laid siege to him. As the column advanced into the
enemy's country, they assumed a closer order, the patrol and the picket
falling back upon the main body; and in this way they reached that most
interesting city called Kilbeggan. What a fortunate thing it is for us in
Ireland that we can see so much of the world without foreign travel, and
that any gentleman for six-and-eightpence can leave Dublin in the morning,
and visit Timbuctoo against dinner-time. Don't stare! it's truth I'm
telling; for dirt, misery, smoke, unaffected behavior, and black faces,
I'll back Kilbeggan against all Africa. Free-and-easy, pleasant people ye
are, with a skin, as begrimed and as rugged as your own potatoes! But, to
resume. The sun was just rising in a delicious morning of June, when my
father,--whose loyal antipathies I have mentioned made him also an early
riser,--was preparing for the road. A stout escort of his followers were
as usual under arms to see him safe in the chaise, the passage to and from
which every day being the critical moment of my father's life.
"'It's all right, your honor,' said his own man, as, armed with a
blunderbuss, he opened the bed-room door.
"'Time enough, Tim,' said my father; 'close the door, for I haven't
finished my breakfast.'
"Now, the real truth was, that my father's attention was at that moment
withdrawn from his own concerns by a scene which was taking place in a
field beneath his window.
"But a few minutes before, a hack-chaise had stopped upon the roadside, out
of which sprang three gentlemen, who, proceeding into the field, seemed
bent upon something, which, whether a survey or a duel, my father could not
make out. He was not long, however, to remain in ignorance. One, with an
easy, lounging gait, strode towards a distant corner; another took an
opposite direction; while a third, a short, pursy gentleman, in a red
handkerchief and rabbit-skin waistcoat, proceeded to open a mahogany
box, which, to the critical eyes of my respected father, was agreeably
suggestive of bloodshed and murder.
"'A duel, by Jupiter!' said my father, rubbing his hands. 'What a heavenly
morning the scoundrels have,--not a leaf stirring, and a sod like a
billiard-table!'
"Meanwhile the little man who officiated as second, it would appear to
both parties, bustled about with an activity little congenial to his
shape; and what between snapping the pistols, examining the flints, and
ramming down the charges, had got himself into a sufficient perspiration
before he commenced to measure the ground.
"'Short distance and no quarter!' shouted one of the combatants, from the
corner of the field.
"'Across a handkerchief, if you like!' roared the other.
"'Gentlemen, every inch of them!' responded my father.
"'Twelve paces!' cried the little man. 'No more and no less. Don't forget
that I am alone in this business!'
"'A very true remark!' observed my father; 'and an awkward predicament
yours will be if they are not both shot!'
"By this time the combatants had taken their places, and the little man,
having delivered the pistols, was leisurely retiring to give the word.
My father, however, whose critical eye was never at fault, detected a
circumstance which promised an immense advantage to one at the expense of
the other; in fact, one of the parties was so placed with his back to the
sun, that his shadow extended in a straight line to the very foot of his
antagonist.
"'Unfair, unfair!' cried my father, opening the window as he spoke, and
addressing himself to him of the rabbit-skin. 'I crave your pardon for the
interruption,' said he; 'but I feel bound to observe that that gentleman's
shadow is likely to make a shade of him.'
"'And so it is,' observed the short man; 'a thousand thanks for your
kindness, but the truth is, I am totally unaccustomed to this kind of
thing, and the affair will not admit of delay.'
"'Not an hour!' said one.
"'No, not five minutes!' growled the other of the combatants.
"'Put them up north and south,' said my father.
"'Is it thus?'
"'Exactly so. But now, again, the gentleman in the brown coat is covered
with the ash-tree.'
"'And so he is!' said rabbit-skin, wiping his forehead with agitation.
"'Move them a little to the left,' said he.
"'That brings me upon an eminence,' said the gentleman in blue. 'I'll be
d--d if I be made a cock shot of!'
"'What an awkward little thief it is in the hairy waistcoat!' said my
father; 'he's lucky if he don't get shot himself!'
"'May I never, if I'm not sick of you both!' ejaculated rabbit-skin, in a
passion. 'I've moved you round every point of the compass, and the devil a
nearer we are than ever!'
"'Give us the word,' said one.
"'The word!'
"'Downright murder,' said my father.
"'I don't care,' said the little man; 'we shall be here till doomsday.'
"'I can't permit this,' said my father; 'allow me.' So saying, he stepped
upon the window-sill, and leaped down into the field.
"'Before I can accept of your politeness,' said he of the rabbit-skin, 'may
I beg to know your name and position in society?'
"'Nothing more reasonable,' said my father. 'I'm Miles O'Shaughnessy,
Colonel of the Royal Raspers,--here is my card.'
"The piece of pasteboard was complacently handed from one to the other of
the party, who saluted my father with a smile of most courteous benignity.
"'Colonel O'Shaughnessy,' said one.
"'Miles O'Shaughnessy,' said the other.
"'Of Killinahoula Castle,' said the third.
"'At your service,' said my father, bowing, as he presented his snuff-box;
'and now to business, if you please, for my time also is limited.'
"'Very true,' observed he of the rabbit-skin; 'and, as you observe, now to
business; in virtue of which, Colonel Miles O'Shaughnessy, I hereby arrest
you in the King's name. Here is the writ; it's at the suit of Barnaby
Kelly, of Loughrea, for the sum of 1,482 19s. 7-1/2d., which--'
"Before he could conclude the sentence, my father discharged one obligation
by implanting his closed knuckles in his face. The blow, well aimed and
well intentioned, sent the little fellow summersetting like a sugar
hogshead. But, alas! it was of no use; the others, strong and able-bodied,
fell both upon him, and after a desperate struggle succeeded in getting him
down. To tie his hands, and convey him to the chaise, was the work of a few
moments; and as my father drove by the inn, the last object which caught
his view was a bloody encounter between his own people and the myrmidons
of the law, who, in great numbers, had laid siege to the house during his
capture. Thus was my father taken; and thus, in reward for yielding to a
virtuous weakness in his character, was he consigned to the ignominious
durance of a prison. Was I not right, then, in saying that such is the
melancholy position of our country, the most beautiful traits in our
character are converted into the elements of our ruin?"
"I dinna think ye ha'e made out your case, Major?" said the Scotch doctor,
who felt sorely puzzled at my friend's logic. "If your faether had na gi'en
the bond--"
"There is no saying what he wouldn't have done to the bailiffs,"
interrupted Dennis, who was following up a very different train of
reasoning.
"I fear me, Doctor," observed Quill, "you are much behind us in Scotland.
Not but that some of your chieftains are respectable men, and wouldn't get
on badly even in Galway."
"I thank ye muckle for the compliment," said the doctor, dryly; "but I ha'e
my doubts they'd think it ane, and they're crusty carls that's no' ower
safe to meddle wi'."
"I'd as soon propose a hand of 'spoiled five' to the Pope of Rome, as a
joke to one of them," returned Maurice.
"May be ye are na wrang there, Maister Quell."
"Well," cried Hampden, "if I may be allowed an opinion, I can safely aver I
know no quarters like Scotland. Edinburgh beyond anything or anywhere I was
ever placed in."
"Always after Dublin," interposed Maurice; while a general chorus of voices
re-echoed the sentiment.
"You are certainly a strong majority," said my friend, "against me; but
still I recant not my original opinion. Edinburgh before the world. For a
hospitality that never tires; for pleasant fellows that improve every day
of your acquaintance; for pretty girls that make you long for a repeal of
the canon about being only singly blessed, and lead you to long for a score
of them, Edinburgh,--I say again, before the world."
"Their ankles are devilish thick," whispered Maurice.
"A calumny, a base calumny!"
"And then they drink--"
"Oh--"
"Yes; they drink very strong tea."
"Shall we ha'e a glass o' sherry together, Hampden?" said the Scotch
doctor, willing to acknowledge his defence of auld Reekie.
"And we'll take O'Malley in," said Hampden; "he looks imploringly."
"And now to return to the charge," quoth Maurice. "In what particular dare
ye contend the palm with Dublin? We'll not speak of beauty. I can't suffer
any such profane turn in the conversation as to dispute the superiority of
Irishwomen's lips, eyes, noses, and eyebrows, to anything under heaven.
We'll not talk of gay fellows; egad, we needn't. I'll give you the
garrison,--a decent present,--and I'll back the Irish bar for more genuine
drollery, more wit, more epigram, more ready sparkling fun, than the whole
rest of the empire--ay, and all her colonies--can boast of."
"They are nae remarkable for passing the bottle, if they resemble their
very gifted advocate," observed the Scotchman.
"But they are for filling and emptying both, making its current, as it
glides by, like a rich stream glittering in the sunbeams with the sparkling
lustre of their wit. Lord, how I'm blown! Fill my pannikin, Charley.
There's no subduing a Scot. Talk with him, drink with him, fight with him,
and he'll always have the last of it; there's only one way of concluding
the treaty--"
"And that is--"
"Blarney him. Lord bless you, he can't stand it! Tell him Holyrood's like
Versailles, and the Trossach's finer than Mont Blanc; that Geordie Buchanan
was Homer, and the Canongate, Herculaneum,--then ye have him on the hip.
Now, ye never can humbug an Irishman that way; he'll know you're quizzing
him when you praise his country."
"Ye are right, Hampden," said the Scotch doctor, in reply to some
observation. "We are vara primitive in the Hielands, and we keep to our ain
national customs in dress and everything; and we are vara slow to learn,
and even when we try we are nae ower successfu' in our imitations, which
sometimes cost us dearly enough. Ye may have heard, may be, of the M'Nab o'
that ilk, and what happened him with the king's equerry?"
"I'm not quite certain," said Hampden, "if I ever heard the story."
"It's nae muckle of a story; but the way of it was this. When Montrose came
back from London, he brought with him a few Englishers to show them the
Highlands, and let them see something of deer-stalking,--among the rest, a
certain Sir George Sowerby, an aide-de-camp or an equerry of the prince.
He was a vara fine gentleman, that never loaded his ain gun, and a'most
thought it too much trouble to pull the trigger. He went out every
morning to shoot with his hair curled like a woman, and dressed like a
dancing-master. Now, there happened to be at the same time at the castle
the Laird o' M'Nab; he was a kind of cousin of the Montrose, and a rough
old tyke of the true Hieland breed, wha' thought that the head of a clan
was fully equal to any king or prince. He sat opposite to Sir George at
dinner the day of his arrival, and could not conceal his surprise at the
many new-fangled ways of feeding himself the Englisher adopted. He ate his
saumon wi' his fork in ae hand, and a bittock of bread in the other. He
would na touch the whiskey; helped himself to a cutlet wi' his fingers. But
what was maist extraordinary of all, he wore a pair o' braw white gloves
during the whole time o' dinner and when they came to tak' away the cloth,
he drew them off with a great air, and threw them into the middle of it,
and then, leisurely taking anither pair off a silver salver which his ain
man presented, he pat them on for dessert. The M'Nab, who, although an
auld-fashioned carl, was aye fond of bringing something new hame to his
friends, remarked the Englisher's proceeding with great care, and the next
day he appeared at dinner wi' a huge pair of Hieland mittens, which he
wore, to the astonishment of all and the amusement of most, through the
whole three courses; and exactly as the Englishman changed his gloves, the
M'Nab produced a fresh pair of goats' wool, four times as large as the
first, which, drawing on with prodigious gravity, he threw the others into
the middle of the cloth, remarking, as he did so,--
"'Ye see, Captain, we are never ower auld to learn.'
"All propriety was now at an end, and a hearty burst of laughter from one
end of the table to the other convulsed the whole company,--the M'Nab and
the Englishman being the only persons who did not join in it, but sat
glowering at each other like twa tigers; and, indeed, it needed, a'
the Montrose's interference that they had na quarrelled upon it in the
morning."
"The M'Nab was a man after my own heart," said Maurice; "there was
something very Irish in the lesson he gave the Englishman."
"I'd rather ye'd told him that than me," said the doctor, dryly; "he would
na hae thanked ye for mistaking him for ane of your countrymen."
"Come, Doctor," said Dennis, "could not ye give us a stave? Have ye nothing
that smacks of the brown fern and the blue lakes in your memory?"
"I have na a sang in my mind just noo except 'Johnny Cope,' which may be
might na be ower pleasant for the Englishers to listen to."
"I never heard a Scotch song worth sixpence," quoth Maurice, who seemed
bent on provoking the doctor's ire. "They contain nothing save some
puling sentimentality about lasses with lint-white locks, or some absurd
laudations of the Barley Bree."
"Hear till him, hear till him!" said the doctor, reddening with impatience.
"Show me anything," said Maurice, "like the 'Cruiskeen Lawn' or the 'Jug
of Punch;' but who can blame them, after all? You can't expect much from a
people with an imagination as naked as their own knees."
"Maurice! Maurice!" cried O'Shaughnessy, reprovingly, who saw that he was
pushing the other's endurance beyond all bounds.
"I mind weel," said the Scotchman, "what happened to ane o' your countrymen
wha took upon him to jest as you are doing now. It was to Laurie Cameron he
did it."
"And what said the redoubted Laurie in reply?"
"He did na say muckle, but he did something."
"And what might it be?" inquired Maurice.
"He threw him ower the brig of Ayr into the water, and he was drowned."
"And did Laurie come to no harm about the matter?"
"Ay, they tried him for it, and found him guilty; but when they asked
him what he had to say in his defence, he merely replied, 'When the carl
sneered about Scotland, I did na suspect that he did na ken how to swim;'
and so the end of it was, they did naething to Laurie."
"Cool that, certainly," said I.
"I prefer your friend with the mittens, I confess," said Maurice, "though
I'm sure both were most agreeable companion. But come, Doctor, couldn't you
give us,--
Sit ye down, my heartie, and gie us a crack,
Let the wind tak' the care o' the world on his back.'"
"You maunna attempt English poethry, my freend Quell; for it must be
confessed ye'e a damnable accent of your ain."
"Milesian-Phoenician-Corkacian; nothing more, my boy, and a coaxing kind
of recitative it is, after all. Don't tell me of your soft Etruscan, your
plethoric. Hoch-Deutsch, your flattering French. To woo and win the
girl of your heart, give me a rich brogue and the least taste in life of
blarney! There's nothing like it, believe me,--every inflection of your
voice suggesting some tender pressure of her soft hand or taper waist,
every cadence falling on her gentle heart like a sea-breeze on a burning
coast, or a soft sirocco over a rose-tree. And then, think, my boys,--and
it is a fine thought after all,--what a glorious gift that is, out of the
reach of kings to give or to take, what neither depends upon the act of
Union nor the Habeas Corpus. No! they may starve us, laugh at us, tax us,
transport us. They may take our mountains, our valleys, and our bogs; but,
bad luck to them, they can't steal our 'blarney;' that's the privilege one
and indivisible with our identity. And while an Englishman raves of his
liberty, a Scotchman of his oaten meal, blarney's our birthright, and a
prettier portion I'd never ask to leave behind me to my sons. If I'd as
large a family as the ould gentleman called Priam we used to hear of at
school, it's the only inheritance I'd give them, and one comfort there
would be besides, the legacy duty would be only a trifle. Charley, my
son, I see you're listening to me, and nothing satisfies me more than to
instruct inspiring youth; so never forget the old song,--
'If at your ease, the girls you'd please,
And win them, like Kate Kearney,
There's but one way, I've heard them say,
Go kiss the Stone of Blarney.'"
"What do you say, Shaugh, if we drink it with all the honors?"
"But gently: do I hear a trumpet there?"
"Ah, there go the bugles. Can it be daybreak already?"
"How short the nights are at this season!" said Quill.
"What an infernal rumpus they're making! It's not possible the troops are
to march so early."
"It wouldn't surprise me in the least," quoth Maurice; "there is no knowing
what the commander-in-chief's not capable of,--the reason's clear enough."
"And why, Maurice?"
"There's not a bit of blarney about him."
The rveil sang out from every brigade, and the drums beat to fall in,
while Mike came galloping up at full speed to say that the bridge of boats
was completed, and that the Twelfth were already ordered to cross. Not a
moment was therefore to be lost; one parting cup we drained to our next
meeting, and amidst a hundred "good-bys" we mounted our horses. Poor
Hampden's brains, sadly confused by the wine and the laughing, he knew
little of what was going on around him, and passed the entire time of our
homeward ride in a vain endeavor to adapt "Mary Draper" to the air of "Rule
Britannia."
CHAPTER XXII.
FUENTES D'ONORO.
From this period the French continued their retreat, closely followed by
the allied armies, and on the 5th of April, Massena once more crossed the
frontier into Spain, leaving thirty thousand of his bravest troops behind
him, fourteen thousand of whom had fallen or been taken prisoners.
Reinforcements, however, came rapidly pouring in. Two divisions of the
Ninth corps had already arrived, and Drouet, with eleven thousand infantry
and cavalry, was preparing to march to his assistance. Thus strengthened,
the French army marched towards the Portuguese frontier, and Lord
Wellington, who had determined not to hazard much by his blockade of Ciudad
Rodrigo, fell back upon the large table-land beyond the Turones and the Dos
Casas, with his left at Fort Conception, and his right resting upon Fuentes
d'Onoro. His position extended to about five miles; and here, although
vastly inferior in numbers, yet relying upon the bravery of the troops, and
the moral ascendency acquired by their pursuit of the enemy, he finally
resolved upon giving them battle.
Being sent with despatches to Pack's brigade, which formed the blockading
force at Almeida, I did not reach Fuentes d'Onoro until the evening of the
3d. The thundering of the guns, which, even at the distance I was at, was
plainly heard, announced that an attack had taken place, but it by no means
prepared me for the scene which presented itself on my return.
The village of Fuentes d'Onoro, one of the most beautiful in Spain, is
situated in a lovely valley, where all the charms of verdure so peculiar to
the Peninsula seemed to have been scattered with a lavish hand. The citron
and the arbutus, growing wild, sheltered every cottage door, and the
olive and the laurel threw their shadows across the little rivulet which
traversed the village. The houses, observing no uniform arrangement,
stood wherever the caprice or the inclination of the builder suggested,
surrounded with little gardens, the inequality of the ground imparting a
picturesque feature to even the lowliest hut, while upon a craggy eminence
above the rest, an ancient convent and a ruined chapel looked down upon the
little peaceful hamlet with an air of tender protection.
Hitherto this lovely spot had escaped all the ravages of war. The light
division of our army had occupied it for months long; and every family was
gratefully remembered by some one or other of our officers, and more than
one of our wounded found in the kind and affectionate watching of these
poor peasants the solace which sickness rarely meets with when far from
home and country.
It was, then, with an anxious heart I pressed my horse forward into a
gallop as the night drew near. The artillery had been distinctly heard
during the day, and while I burned with eagerness to know the result, I
felt scarcely less anxious for the fate of that little hamlet whose name
many a kind story had implanted in my memory. The moon was shining brightly
as I passed the outpost, and leading my horse by the bridle, descended the
steep and rugged causeway to the village beneath me. The lanterns were
moving rapidly to and fro; the measured tread of infantry at night--that
ominous sound, which falls upon the heart so sadly--told me that they
were burying the dead. The air was still and breathless; not a sound was
stirring save the step of the soldiery, and the harsh clash of the shovel
as it struck the earth. I felt sad and sick at heart, and leaned against a
tree; a nightingale concealed in the leaves was pouring forth its plaintive
notes to the night air, and its low warble sounded like the dirge of the
departed. Far beyond, in the plain, the French watch-fires were burning,
and I could see from time to time the fatigue-parties moving in search of
their wounded. At this moment the clock of the convent struck eleven, and a
merry chime rang out, and was taken up by the echoes till it melted away in
the distance. Alas, where were those whose hearts were wont to feel cheered
at that happy peal; whose infancy it had gladdened; whose old age it has
hallowed? The fallen walls, the broken roof-trees, the ruin and desolation
on every side, told too plainly that they had passed away forever! The
smoking embers, the torn-up pathway, denoted the hard-fought struggle; and
as I passed along, I could see that every garden, where the cherry and the
apple-blossom were even still perfuming the air, had now its sepulchre.
"Halt, there!" cried a hoarse voice in front. "You cannot pass this
way,--the commander-in-chief's quarters."
I looked up and beheld a small but neat-looking cottage, which seemed to
have suffered less than the others around. Lights were shining brightly
from the windows, and I could even detect from time to time a figure
muffled up in a cloak passing to and fro across the window; while another,
seated at a table, was occupied in writing. I turned into a narrow path
which led into the little square of the village, and here, as I approached,
the hum and murmur of voices announced a bivouac party. Stopping to ask
what had been the result of the day, I learned that a tremendous attack
had been made by the French in column upon the village, which was at first
successful; but that afterwards the Seventy-first and Seventy-ninth,
marching down from the heights, had repulsed the enemy, and driven them
beyond the Dos Casas. Five hundred had fallen in that fierce encounter,
which was continued through every street and alley of the little hamlet.
The gallant Highlanders now occupied the battle-field; and hearing that the
cavalry brigade was some miles distant, I willingly accepted their offer to
share their bivouac, and passed the remainder of the night among them.
When day broke, our troops were under arms, but the enemy showed no
disposition to renew the attack. We could perceive, however, from the road
to the southward, by the long columns of dust, that reinforcements were
still arriving; and learned during the morning, from a deserter, that
Massena himself had come up, and Bessires also, with twelve hundred
cavalry, and a battery of the Imperial Guard.
From the movements observable in the enemy, it was soon evident that the
battle, though deferred, was not abandoned; and the march of a strong
force towards the left of their position induced our commander-in-chief to
despatch the Seventh Division, under Houston, to occupy the height of Naval
d'Aver--our extreme right--in support of which our brigade of cavalry
marched as a covering force. The British position was thus unavoidably
extended to the enormous length of seven miles, occupying a succession of
small eminences, from the division at Fort Conception to the height of
Naval d'Aver,--Fuentes d'Onoro forming nearly the centre of the line.
It was evident, from the thickening combinations of the French, that a more
dreadful battle was still in reserve for us; and yet never did men look
more anxiously for the morrow.
As for myself, I felt a species of exhilaration I had never before
experienced; the events of the preceding day came dropping in upon me from
every side, and at every new tale of gallantry or daring I felt my heart
bounding with excited eagerness to win also my need of honorable praise.
Crawfurd, too, had recognized me in the kindest manner; and while saying
that he did not wish to withdraw me from my regiment on a day of battle,
added that he would make use of me for the present on his staff. Thus was
I engaged, from early in the morning till late in the evening, bringing
orders and despatches along the line. The troop-horse I rode--for I
reserved my gray for the following day--was scarcely able to carry me
along, as towards dusk I jogged along in the direction of Naval d'Aver.
When I did reach our quarters, the fires were lighted, and around one of
them I had the good fortune to find a party of the Fourteenth occupied in
discussing a very appetizing little supper. The clatter of plates, and the
popping of champagne corks were most agreeable sounds. Indeed, the latter
appeared to me so much too flattering an illusion, that I hesitated giving
credit to my senses in the matter, when Baker called out,--
"Come, Charley, sit down; you're just in the nick. Tom Marsden is giving us
a benefit. You know Tom?"
And here he presented me in due form to that best of commissaries and most
hospitable of horse-dealers.
"I can't introduce you to my friend on my right," continued Baker, "for my
Spanish is only a skeleton battalion; but he's a trump,--that I'll vouch
for; never flinches his glass, and looks as though he enjoyed all our
nonsense."
The Spaniard, who appeared to comprehend that he was alluded to, gravely
saluted me with a low bow, and offered his glass to hobnob with me. I
returned the curtesy with becoming ceremony, while Hampden whispered in my
ear,--
"A fine-looking fellow. You know who he is? Julian, the Guerilla chief."
I had heard much of both the strangers. Tom Marsden was a household word
in every cavalry brigade; equally celebrated were his contracts and his
claret. He knew every one, from Lord Wellington to the last-joined cornet;
and while upon a march, there was no piece of better fortune than to be
asked to dine with him. So in the very thick of battle, Tom's critical eye
was scanning the squadrons engaged, with an accuracy as to the number of
fresh horses that would be required upon the morrow that nothing but long
practice and infinite coolness could have conferred.
Of the Guerilla I need not speak. The bold feats he accomplished, the aid
he rendered to the cause of his country, have made his name historical. Yet
still with all this, fatigue, more powerful than my curiosity, prevailed,
and I sank into a heavy sleep upon the grass, while my merry companions
kept up their revels till near morning. The last piece of consciousness I
am sensible of was seeing Julian spreading his wide mantle over me as I
lay, while I heard his deep voice whisper a kind wish for my repose.
CHAPTER XXIII.
THE BATTLE OF FUENTES D'ONORO.
So soundly did I sleep that the tumult and confusion of the morning never
awoke me; and the Guerilla, whose cavalry were stationed along the edge of
the ravine near the heights of Echora, would not permit of my being roused
before the last moment. Mike stood near me with my horses, and it was only
when the squadrons were actually forming that I sprang to my feet and
looked around me.
The day was just breaking; a thick mist lay upon the parched earth, and
concealed everything a hundred yards from where we stood. From this dense
vapor the cavalry defiled along the base of the hill, followed by the
horse artillery and the Guards, disappearing again as they passed us,
but proving, by the mass of troops now assembled, that our position was
regarded as the probable point of attack.
While the troops continued to take up their position, the sun shone out,
and a slight breeze blowing at the same, moment, the heavy clouds moved
past, and we beheld the magnificent panorama of the battle-field. Before
us, at the distance of less than half a league, the French cavalry were
drawn up in three strong columns; the Cuirassiers of the Guard, plainly
distinguished by their steel cuirasses, flanked by the Polish Lancers and a
strong huzzar brigade; a powerful artillery train supported the left, and
an infantry force occupied the entire space between the right and the
rising ground opposite Poo Velho. Farther to the right again, the column
destined for the attack of Fuentes d'Onoro were forming, and we could see
that, profiting by their past experience, they were bent upon attacking the
village with an overwhelming force.
For above two hours the French continued to manoeuvre, more than one
alteration having taken place in their disposition; fresh battalions were
moved towards the front, and gradually the whole of their cavalry was
assembled on the extreme left in front of our position. Our people were
ordered to breakfast where we stood; and a little after seven o'clock a
staff officer came riding down the line, followed in a few moments after by
General Crawfurd, when no sooner was his well-known brown cob recognized by
the troops than a hearty cheer greeted him along the whole division.
"Thank ye, boys; thank ye, boys, with all my heart. No man feels more
sensibly what that cheer means than I do. Guards, Lord Wellington relies
upon your maintaining this position, which is essential to the safety of
the whole line. You will be supported by the light division. I need say
no more. If such troops cannot keep their ground, none can. Fourteenth,
there's your place; the artillery and the Sixteenth are with you. They've
the odds of us in numbers, lads; but it will tell all the better in the
'Gazette.' I see they're moving; so fall in now, fall in; and Merivale,
move to the front. Ramsey, prepare to open your fire on the attacking
squadrons."
As he spoke, the low murmuring sound of distantly moving cavalry crept
along the earth, growing louder and louder, till at length we could detect
the heavy tramp of the squadrons as they came on in a trot, our pace
being merely a walk. While we thus advanced into the plain, the artillery
unlimbered behind us, and the Spanish cavalry, breaking into skirmishers,
dashed boldly to the front.
It was an exciting moment. The ground dipped between the two armies so
as to conceal the head of the advancing column of the French, and as the
Spanish skirmishers disappeared down the ridge, our beating hearts and
straining eyes followed their last horseman.
"Halt! halt!" was passed from squadron to squadron, and the same instant
the sharp ring of the pistol shots and the clash of steel from the valley,
told us the battle had begun. We could hear the Guerilla war-cry mingle
with the French shout, while the thickening crash of fire-arms implied a
sharper conflict. Our fellows were already manifesting some impatience
to press on, when a Spanish horseman appeared above the ridge, another
followed, and another, and then pell-mell, broken and disordered, they
fell back before the pursuing cavalry in flying masses; while the French,
charging them hotly home, utterly routed and repulsed them.
The leading squadrons of the French now fell back upon their support; the
column of attack thickened, and a thundering noise between their masses
announced their brigade of light guns as they galloped to the front. It was
then for the first time that I felt dispirited; far as my eye could stretch
the dense mass of sabres extended, defiling from the distant hills and
winding its slow length across the plain. I turned to look at our line,
scarce one thousand strong, and could not help feeling that our hour was
come: the feeling flashed vividly across my mind, but the next instant I
felt my cheek redden with shame as I gazed upon the sparkling eyes and bold
looks around me, the lips compressed, the hands knitted to their sabres;
all were motionless, but burning to advance.
The French had halted on the brow of the hill to form, when Merivale came
cantering up to us.
"Fourteenth, are you ready? Are you ready, lads?"
"Ready, sir! ready!" re-echoed along the line.
"Then push them home and charge! Charge!" cried he, raising his voice to a
shout at the last word.
Heavens, what a crash was there! Our horses, in top condition, no sooner
felt the spur than they bounded madly onwards. The pace--for the distance
did not exceed four hundred yards--was like racing. To resist the impetus
of our approach was impossible; and without a shot fired, scarcely a
sabre-cut exchanged, we actually rode down their advanced squadrons,
hurling them headlong upon their supporting division, and rolling men and
horses beneath us on every side. The French fell back upon their artillery;
but before they could succeed in opening their fire upon us, we had
wheeled, and carrying off about seventy prisoners, galloped back to our
position with the loss of but two men in the affair. The whole thing was so
sudden, so bold, and so successful, that I remember well, as we rode
back, a hearty burst of laughter was ringing through the squadron at the
ludicrous display of horsemanship the French presented as they tumbled
headlong down the hill; and I cannot help treasuring the recollection,
for from that moment, all thought of anything short of victory completely
quitted my mind, and many of my brother officers, who had participated in
my feelings at the commencement of the day, confessed to me afterwards that
it was then for the first time they felt assured of beating the enemy.
While we slowly fell back to our position, the French were seen advancing
in great force from the village of Almeida, to the attack of Poo Velho;
they came on at a rapid pace, their artillery upon their front and flank,
large masses of cavalry hovering around them. The attack upon the village
was now opened by the large guns; and amidst the booming of the artillery
and the crashing volleys of small fire-arms, rose the shout of the
assailants, and the wild cry of the Guerilla cavalry, who had formed in
front of the village. The French advanced firmly, driving back the pickets,
and actually inundated the devoted village with a shower of grape; the
blazing fires burst from the ignited roofs; and the black, dense smoke,
rising on high, seemed to rest like a pall over the little hamlet.
The conflict was now a tremendous one; our Seventh Division held the
village with the bayonet; but the French continuing to pour in mass upon
mass, drove them back with loss, and at the end of an hour's hard fighting,
took possession of the place.
The wood upon the left flank was now seen to swarm with light infantry, and
the advancement of their whole left proved that they meditated to turn our
flank; the space between the village and the hill of Naval d'Aver became
thus the central position; and here the Guerilla force, led on by Julian
Sanches, seemed to await the French with confidence. Soon, however, the
cuirassiers came galloping to the spot, and almost without exchanging a
sabre-cut, the Guerillas fell back, and retired behind the Turones. This
movement of Julian was more attributable to anger than to fear; for his
favorite lieutenant, being mistaken for a French officer, was shot by a
soldier of the Guards a few minutes before.
Montbrun pursued the Guerillas with some squadrons of horse, but they
turned resolutely upon the French, and not till overwhelmed by numbers did
they show any disposition to retreat.
The French, however, now threw forward their whole cavalry, and driving
back the English horse, succeeded in turning the right of the Seventh
Division. The battle by this time was general. The staff officers who came
up from the left informed us that Fuentes d'Onoro was attacked in force,
Massena himself leading the assault in person; while thus for seven miles
the fight was maintained hotly at intervals, it was evident that upon the
maintenance of our position the fortune of the day depended. Hitherto we
had been repulsed from the village and the wood; and the dark masses of
infantry which were assembled upon our right, seemed to threaten the hill
of Naval d'Aver with as sad a catastrophe.
Crawfurd came now galloping up among us, his eye flashing fire, and his
uniform splashed and covered with foam:
"Steady Sixteenth, steady! Don't blow your horses! Have your fellows
advanced, Malcolm?" said he, turning to an officer who stood beside him.
"Ay, there they go!" pointing with his finger to the wood where, as he
spoke, the short ringing of the British rifle proclaimed the advance of
that brigade. "Let the cavalry prepare to charge! And now, Ramsey, let us
give it them home!"
Scarcely were the words spoken, when the squadrons were formed, and in an
instant after, the French light infantry were seen retreating from the
wood, and flying in disorderly masses across the plain. Our squadrons
riding down among them, actually cut them to atoms, while the light
artillery, unlimbering, threw in a deadly discharge of grape-shot.
"To the right, Fourteenth, to the right!" cried General Stewart. "Have at
their hussars!"
Whirling by them, we advanced at a gallop, and dashed towards the enemy,
who, not less resolutely bent, came boldly forward to meet us. The shock
was terrific! The leading squadrons on both sides went down almost to a
man, and all order being lost, the encounter became one of hand to hand.
The struggle was deadly; neither party would give way; and while fortune
now inclined hither and thither, Sir Charles Stewart singled out the French
general, Lamotte, and carried him off his prisoner. Meanwhile Montbrun's
cavalry and the cuirassiers came riding up, and the retreat now sounding
through our ranks, we were obliged to fall back upon the infantry. The
French pursued us hotly; and so rapid was their movement, that before
Ramsey's brigade could limber up and away, their squadrons had surrounded
him and captured his guns.
"Where is Ramsey?" cried Crawfurd, as he galloped to the head of our
division. "Cut off--cut off! Taken, by G----! There he goes!" said he,
pointing with his finger, as a dense cloud of mingled smoke and dust moved
darkly across the plain. "Form into column once more!"
As he spoke, the dense mass before us seemed agitated by some mighty
commotion; the flashing of blades, and the rattling of small-arms, mingled
with shouts of triumph or defiance, burst forth, and the ominous cloud
lowering more darkly, seemed peopled by those in deadly strife. An English
cheer pealed high above all other sounds; a second followed; the mass was
rent asunder, and like the forked lightning from a thunder-cloud, Ramsey
rode forth at the head of his battery, the horses bounding madly, while the
guns sprang behind them like things of no weight; the gunners leaped to
their places, and fighting hand to hand with the French cavalry, they flew
across the plain.
"Nobly done, gallant Ramsey!" said a voice behind me. I turned at the
sound; it was Lord Wellington who spoke. My eye fixed upon his stern
features, I forgot all else; when he suddenly recalled me to my
recollection by saying,--
"Follow your brigade, sir. Charge!"
In an instant I was with my people, who, intervening betwixt Ramsey and his
pursuers, repulsed the enemy with loss, and carried off several prisoners.
The French, however, came up in greater strength; overwhelming masses of
cavalry came sweeping upon us, and we were obliged to retire behind the
light division, which rapidly formed into squares to resist the cavalry.
The Seventh Division, which was more advanced, were, however, too late for
this movement, and before they could effect their formation, the French
were upon them. At this moment they owed their safety to the Chasseurs
Britanniques, who poured in a flanking fire, so close, and with so deadly
an aim, that their foes recoiled, beaten and bewildered.
Meanwhile the French had become masters of Pogo Velho; the formidable
masses had nearly outflanked us on the right. The battle was lost if we
could not fall back upon our original position, and concentrate our force
upon Fuentes d'Onoro. To effect this was a work of great difficulty; but
no time was to be lost. The Seventh Division were ordered to cross the
Turones, while Crawfurd, forming the light division into squares, covered
their retreat, and supported by the cavalry, sustained the whole force of
the enemy's attack.
Then was the moment to witness the cool and steady bravery of British
infantry; the squares dotted across the enormous plain seemed as nothing
amidst that confused and flying multitude, composed of commissariat
baggage, camp-followers, peasants, and finally, broken pickets and videttes
arriving from the wood. A cloud of cavalry hovered and darkened around
them; the Polish Lancers shook their long spears, impatient of delay, and
the wild huzzas burst momentarily from their squadrons as they waited for
the word to attack. But the British stood firm and undaunted; and although
the enemy rode round their squares, Montbrun himself at their head, they
never dared to charge them. Meanwhile the Seventh Division fell back, as
if on a parade, and crossing the river, took up their ground at Frenada,
pivoting upon the First Division; the remainder of the line also fell back,
and assumed a position at right angles with their former one, the cavalry
forming in front, and holding the French in check during the movement. This
was a splendid manoeuvre, and when made in face of an overnumbering enemy,
one unmatched during the whole war.
At sight of this new front, the French stopped short, and opened a fire
from their heavy guns. The British batteries replied with vigor and
silenced the enemy's cannon. The cavalry drew out of range, and the
infantry gradually fell back to their former position. While this was going
on, the attack upon Fuentes d'Onoro was continued with unabated vigor.
The three British regiments in the lower town were pierced by the
French tirailleurs, who poured upon them in overwhelming numbers; the
Seventy-ninth were broken, ten companies taken, and Cameron, their colonel,
mortally wounded. Thus the lower village was in the hands of the enemy,
while from the upper town the incessant roll of musketry proclaimed the
obstinate resistance of the British.
At this period the reserves were called up from the right, in time to
resist the additional troops which Drouet continued to bring on. The
French, reinforced by the whole Sixth Corps, now came forward at a
quick-step. Dashing through the ruined streets of the lower town, they
crossed the rivulet, fighting bravely, and charged against the height.
Already their leading files had gained the crag beside the chapel. A French
colonel holding his cap upon his sword-point waved on his men.
The grizzly features of the grenadiers soon appeared, and the dark column,
half-climbing, half-running, were seen scaling the height. A rifle-bullet
sent the French leader tumbling from the precipice; and a cheer--mad and
reckless as the war-cry of an Indian--rent the sky, as the 71st and 79th
Highlanders sprang upon the enemy.
Our part was a short one; advancing in half squadrons, we were concealed
from the observation of the enemy by the thick vineyards which skirted the
lower town, waiting, with impatience, the moment when our gallant infantry
should succeed in turning the tide of battle. We were ordered to dismount,
and stood with our bridles on our arms, anxious and expectant. The charge
of the French column was made close to where we were standing,--the
inspiriting cheers of the officers, the loud vivas of the men, were
plainly heard by us as they rushed to the assault; but the space between
us was intersected by walls and brushwood, which totally prevented the
movements of cavalry.
Fearlessly their dark column moved up the heights, fixing the bayonets
as they went. No tirailleurs preceded them, but the tall shako of the
Grenadier of the Guard was seen in the first rank. Long before the end of
the column had passed us, the leading files were in action. A deafening
peal of musketry--so loud, so dense, it seemed like artillery--burst forth.
A volume of black smoke rolled heavily down from the heights and hid all
from our view, except when the vivid lightning of the platoon firing rent
the veil asunder, and showed us the troops almost in hand to hand conflict.
"It's Picton's Division, I'm certain," cried Merivale; "I hear the bagpipes
of the Highlanders."
"You are right, sir," said Hampden, "the Seventy-first are in the same
brigade, and I know their bugles well. There they go again!"
"Fourteenth! Fourteenth!" cried a voice from behind, and at the same
moment, a staff officer, without his hat, and his horse bleeding from a
recent sabre-cut, came up. "You must move to the rear, Colonel Merivale;
the French have gained the heights! Move round by the causeway; bring up
your squadrons as quickly as you can, and support the infantry!"
In a moment we were in our saddles; but scarcely was the word "to fall in"
given, when a loud cheer rent the very air; the musketry seemed suddenly
to cease, and the dark mass which continued to struggle up the heights
wavered, broke, and turned.
"What can that be?" said Merivale. "What can it mean?"
"I can tell you, sir," said I, proudly, while I felt my heart throb as
though it would bound from my bosom.
"And what is it, boy? Speak!"
"There it goes again! That was an Irish shout! The Eighty-eighth are at
them!"
"By Jove, here they come!" said Hampden. "God help the Frenchmen now!"
The words were not well spoken, when the red coats of our gallant fellows
were seen dashing through the vineyard.
"The steel, boys; nothing but the steel!" shouted a loud voice from the
crag above our heads.
I looked up. It was the stern Picton himself who spoke. The Eighty-eighth
now led the pursuit, and sprang from rock to rock in all the mad
impetuosity of battle; and like some mighty billow rolling before the gale,
the French went down the heights.
"Gallant Eighty-eighth! Gloriously done!" cried Picton, as he waved his
hat.
"Aren't we Connaught robbers, now?" shouted a rich brogue, as its owner,
breathless and bleeding, pressed forward in the charge.
A hearty burst of laughter mingled with the din of the battle.
"Now for it, boys! Now for our work!" said old Merivale, drawing his
sabre as he spoke. "Forward! and charge!"
We waited not a second bidding, but bursting from our concealment,
galloped down into the broken column. It was no regular charge, but an
indiscriminate rush. Scarcely offering resistance, the enemy fell beneath
our sabres, or the still more deadly bayonets of the infantry, who were
inextricably mingled up in the conflict.
The chase was followed up for above half a mile, when we fell back,
fortunately in good time; for the French had opened a heavy fire from their
artillery, and regardless of their own retreating column, poured a shower
of grape among our squadrons. As we retired, the struggling files of the
Rangers joined us,--their faces and accoutrements blackened and begrimed
with powder; many of them, themselves wounded, had captured prisoners; and
one huge fellow of the grenadier company was seen driving before him a
no less powerful Frenchman, and to whom, as he turned from time to time
reluctantly, and scowled upon his jailer, the other vociferated some Irish
imprecation, whose harsh intentions were made most palpably evident by a
flourish of a drawn bayonet.
"Who is he?" said Mike; "who is he, ahagur?"
"Sorra one o' me knows," said the other; "but it's the chap that shot
Lieutenant Mahony, and I never took my eye off him after; and if the
lieutenant's not dead, sure it'll be a satisfaction to him that I cotch
him."
The lower town was now evacuated by the French, who retired beyond the
range of our artillery; the upper continued in the occupation of our
troops; and worn out and exhausted, surrounded by dead and dying, both
parties abandoned the contest, and the battle was over.
Both sides laid claim to the victory; the French, because, having taken the
village of Poo Velho, they had pierced the British line, and compelled
them to fall back and assume a new position; the British, because the
attack upon Fuentes d'Onoro has been successfully resisted, and the
blockade of Almeida--the real object of the battle--maintained. The loss
to each was tremendous; fifteen hundred men and officers, of whom three
hundred were prisoners, were lost by the allies, and a far greater number
fell among the forces of the enemy.
After the action, a brigade of the light division released the troops in
the village, and the armies bivouacked once more in sight of each other.
CHAPTER XXIV.
A RENCONTRE.
"LIEUTENANT O'MALLEY, 14th Light Dragoons, to serve as extra aide-de-camp
to Major-General Crawfurd, until the pleasure of his Royal Highness the
Prince Regent is known." Such was the first paragraph of a general order,
dated Fuentes d'Onoro, the day after the battle, which met me as I woke
from a sound and heavy slumber, the result of thirteen hours on horseback.
A staff appointment was not exactly what I desired at the moment; but I
knew that with Crawfurd my duties were more likely to be at the pickets and
advanced posts of the army, than in the mere details of note-writing or
despatch-bearing; besides that, I felt, whenever anything of importance
was to be done, I should always obtain his permission to do duty with my
regiment.
Taking a hurried breakfast, therefore, I mounted my horse, and cantered
over to Villa Formosa, where the general's quarters were, to return my
thanks for the promotion, and take the necessary steps for assuming my new
functions.
Although the sun had risen about two hours, the fatigue of the previous day
had impressed itself upon all around. The cavalry, men and horses, were
still stretched upon the sward, sunk in sleep; the videttes, weary and
tired, seemed anxiously watching for the relief; and the disordered and
confused appearance of everything bespoke that discipline had relaxed its
stern features, in compassion for the bold exertions of the preceding day.
The only contrast to this general air of exhaustion and weariness on every
side was a corps of sappers, who were busily employed upon the high grounds
above the village. Early as it was, they seemed to have been at work
some hours,--at least so their labors bespoke; for already a rampart
of considerable extent had been thrown up, stockades implanted, and a
breastwork was in a state of active preparation. The officer of the party,
wrapped up in a loose cloak, and mounted upon a sharp-looking hackney, rode
hither and thither as the occasion warranted, and seemed, as well as from
the distance I could guess, something of a tartar. At least I could not
help remarking how, at his approach, the several inferior officers seemed
suddenly so much more on the alert, and the men worked with an additional
vigor and activity. I stopped for some minutes to watch him, and seeing
an engineer captain of my acquaintance among the party, couldn't resist
calling out:--
"I say, Hatchard, your friend on the chestnut mare must have had an easier
day yesterday than some of us, or I'll be hanged if he'd be so active this
morning." Hatchard hung his head in some confusion, and did not reply;
and on my looking round, whom should I see before me but the identical
individual I had so coolly been criticising, and who, to my utter horror
and dismay, was no other than Lord Wellington himself. I did not wait for a
second peep. Helter-skelter, through water, thickets, and brambles, away I
went, clattering down the causeway like a madman. If a French squadron had
been behind me, I should have had a stouter heart, although I did not fear
pursuit. I felt his eye was upon me,--his sharp and piercing glance, that
shot like an arrow into me; and his firm look stared at me in every object
around.
Onward I pressed, feeling in the very recklessness of my course some relief
to my sense of shame, and ardently hoping that some accident--some smashed
arm or broken collar-bone--might befall me and rescue me from any notice
my conduct might otherwise call for. I never drew rein till I reached the
Villa Formosa, and pulled up short at a small cottage where a double sentry
apprised me of the general's quarters. As I came up, the low lattice sprang
quickly open, and a figure, half dressed, and more than half asleep,
protruded his head.
"Well, what has happened? Anything wrong?" said he, whom I now recognized
to be General Crawfurd.
"No, nothing wrong, sir," stammered I, with evident confusion. "I'm merely
come to thank you for your kindness in my behalf."
"You seemed in a devil of a hurry to do it, if I'm to judge by the pace
you came at. Come in and take your breakfast with us; I shall be dressed
presently, and you'll meet some of your brother aides-de-camp."
Having given my horse to an orderly, I walked into a little room, whose
humble accommodations and unpretending appearance seemed in perfect
keeping with the simple and unostentatious character of the general. The
preparations for a good and substantial breakfast were, however, before
me, and an English newspaper of a late date spread its most ample pages
to welcome me. I had not been long absorbed in my reading, when the door
opened, and the general, whose toilet was not yet completed, made his
appearance.
"Egad, O'Malley, you startled me this morning. I thought we were in for it
again."
I took this as the most seasonable opportunity to recount my mishap of the
morning, and accordingly, without more ado, detailed the unlucky meeting
with the commander-in-chief. When I came to the end, Crawfurd threw himself
into a chair and laughed till the very tears coursed down his bronzed
features.
"You don't say so, boy? You don't really tell me you said that? By Jove! I
had rather have faced a platoon of musketry than have stood in your shoes!
You did not wait for a reply, I think?"
"No, faith, sir, that I did not!"
"Do you suspect he knows you?"
"I trust not, sir; the whole thing passed so rapidly!"
"Well, it's most unlucky in more ways than one!" He paused for a few
moments as he said this, and then added, "Have you seen the general order?"
pushing towards me a written paper as he spoke. It ran thus:--
G.O.      ADJUTANT-GENERAL'S OFFICE, VILLA FORMOSA,
May 6, 1811.
Memorandum.--Commanding officers are requested to send in to
the military secretary, as soon as possible, the names of officers they
may wish to have promoted in succession to those who have fallen
in action."
"Now look at this list. The Honorable Harvey Howard, Grenadier Guards,
to be first lieutenant, vice--No, not that. Henry Beauchamp--George
Villiers--ay, here it is! Captain Lyttleton, Fourteenth Light Dragoons,
to be major in the Third Dragoon Guards, vice Godwin, killed in action;
Lieutenant O'Malley to be captain, vice Lyttleton, promoted. You see,
boy, I did not forget you; you were to have had the vacant troop in your
own regiment. Now I almost doubt the prudence of bringing your name under
Lord Wellington's notice. He may have recognized you; and if he did so,
why, I rather think--that is, I suspect--I mean, the quieter you keep the
better."
While I poured forth my gratitude as warmly as I was able for the general's
great kindness to me, I expressed my perfect concurrence in his views.
"Believe me, sir," said I, "I should much rather wait any number of years
for my promotion, than incur the risk of a reprimand; the more so, as it is
not the first time I have blundered with his lordship." I here narrated
my former meeting with Sir Arthur, at which Crawfurd's mirth again burst
forth, and he paced the room, holding his sides in an ecstasy of merriment.
"Come, come, lad, we'll hope for the best; we'll give you the chance that
he has not seen your face, and send the list forward as it is. But here
come our fellows."
As he spoke, the door opened, and three officers of his staff entered, to
whom, being severally introduced, we chatted away about the news of the
morning until breakfast.
"I've frequently heard of you from my friend Hammersley," said Captain
Fitzroy, addressing me. "You were intimately acquainted, I believe?"
"Oh, yes! Pray, where is he now? We have not met for a long time."
"The poor fellow's invalided; that sabre-cut upon his head has turned out
a sad affair, and he's gone back to England on a sick leave. Old Dashwood
took him back with him as private secretary, or something of that sort."
"Ah!" said another, "Dashwood has daughters, hasn't he? No bad notion of
his; for Hammersley will be a baronet some of these days, with a rent-roll
of eight or nine thousand per annum."
"Sir George Dashwood," said I, "has but one daughter, and I am quite sure
that in his kindness to Hammersley no intentions of the kind you mention
were mixed up."
"Well, I don't know," said the third, a pale, sickly youth, with handsome
but delicate features. "I was on Dashwood's staff until a few weeks ago,
and certainly I thought there was something going on between Hammersley
and Miss Lucy, who, be it spoken, is a devilish fine girl, though rather
disposed to give herself airs."
I felt my cheek and my temples boiling like a furnace; my hand trembled as
I lifted my coffee to my lips; and I would have given my expected promotion
twice over to have had any reasonable ground of quarrel with the speaker.
"Egad, lads," said Crawfurd, "that's the very best thing I know about a
command. As a bishop is always sure to portion off his daughters with
deaneries and rectories, so your knowing old general always marries his
among his staff."
This sally was met with the ready laughter of the subordinates, in which,
however little disposed. I was obliged to join.
"You are quite right, sir," rejoined the pale youth; "and Sir George has no
fortune to give his daughter."
"How came it, Horace, that you got off safe?" said Fitzroy, with a certain
air of affected seriousness in his voice and manner. "I wonder they let
such a prize escape them."
"Well, it was not exactly their fault, I do confess. Old Dashwood did the
civil towards me, and la belle Lucie herself was condescending enough to
be less cruel than to the rest of the staff. Her father threw us a good
deal together; and in fact, I believe--I fear--that is--that I didn't
behave quite well."
"You may rest perfectly assured of it, sir," said I; "whatever your
previous conduct may have been, you have completely relieved your mind on
this occasion, and behaved most shamefully."
Had a shell fallen in the midst of us, the faces around me could not have
been more horror-struck than when, in a cool, determined tone, I spoke
these few words. Fitzroy pushed his chair slightly back from the table, and
fixed his eyes full upon me. Crawfurd grew dark-purple over his whole face
and forehead, and looked from one to the other of us without speaking;
while the Honorable Horace Delawar, the individual addressed, never changed
a muscle of his wan and sickly features, but lifting his eyes slowly from
his muffin, lisped softly out,--
"You think so? How very good!"
"General Crawfurd," said I, the moment I could collect myself sufficiently
to speak, "I am deeply grieved that I should so far have forgotten myself
as to disturb the harmony of your table; but when I tell you that Sir
George Dashwood is one of my warmest friends on earth; that from my
intimate knowledge of him, I am certain that gentleman's statements are
either the mere outpourings of folly or worse--"
"By Jove, O'Malley! you have a very singular mode of explaining away the
matter. Delawar, sit down again. Gentlemen, I have only one word to say
about this transaction; I'll have no squabbles nor broils here; from this
room to the guard-house is a five minutes' walk. Promise me, upon your
honors, this altercation ends here, or as sure as my name's Crawfurd, you
shall both be placed under arrest, and the man who refuses to obey me shall
be sent back to England."
Before I well knew in what way to proceed, Mr. Delawar rose and bowed
formally to the general, while I imitated his example; silently we resumed
our places, and after a pause of a few moments, the current of conversation
was renewed, and other topics discussed, but with such evident awkwardness
and constraint that all parties felt relieved when the general rose from
table.
"I say, O'Malley, have you forwarded the returns to the adjutant-general's
office?"
"Yes, sir; I despatched them this morning before leaving my quarters."
"I am glad of it; the irregularities on this score have called forth a
heavy reprimand at headquarters."
I was also glad of it, and it chanced that by mere accident I remembered to
charge Mike with the papers, which, had they not been lying unsealed upon
the table before me, would, in all likelihood, have escaped my attention.
The post started to Lisbon that same morning, to take advantage of which
I had sat up writing for half the night. Little was I aware at the
moment what a mass of trouble and annoyance was in store for me from the
circumstance.
CHAPTER XXV.
ALMEIDA.
On the morning of the 7th we perceived, from a movement in the French camp,
that the wounded were being sent to the rear, and shortly afterwards the
main body of their army commenced its retreat. They moved with slow, and as
it were, reluctant steps; and Bessires, who commanded the Imperial Guard,
turned his eyes more than once to that position which all the bravery of
his troops was unavailing to capture. Although our cavalry lay in force to
the front of our line, no attempt was made to molest the retreating French;
and Massena, having retired beyond the Aguada, left a strong force to watch
the ford, while the remainder of the army fell back upon Cuidad Rodrigo.
During this time we had succeeded in fortifying our position at Fuentes
d'Onoro so strongly as to resist any new attack, and Lord Wellington now
turned his whole attention to the blockade of Almeida, which, by Massena's
retreat, was abandoned to its fate.
On the morning of the 10th I accompanied General Crawfurd in a
reconnoissance of the fortress, which, from the intelligence we had lately
received, could not much longer hold out against our blockade. The fire
from the enemy's artillery was, however, hotly maintained; and as night
fell, some squadrons of the Fourteenth, who were picketed near, were unable
to light their watch-fires, being within reach of their shot. As the
darkness increased so did the cannonade, and the bright flashes from the
walls and the deep booming of the artillery became incessant.
A hundred conjectures were afloat to account for the circumstance; some
asserting that what we heard were mere signals to Massena's army; and
others, that Brennier was destroying and mutilating the fortress before he
evacuated it to the allies.
It was little past midnight when, tired from the fatigues of the day, I had
fallen asleep beneath a tree, an explosion, louder than any which preceded
it, burst suddenly forth, and as I awoke and looked about me, I perceived
the whole heavens illuminated by one bright glare, while the crashing
noise of falling stones and crumbling masonry told me that a mine had been
sprung; the moment after, all was calm and still and motionless; a thick
black smoke increasing the sombre darkness of the night shut out every star
from view, and some drops of heavy rain began to fall.
The silence, ten times more appalling than the din which preceded it,
weighed heavily upon my senses, and a dread of some unknown danger crept
over me; the exhaustion, however, was greater than my fear, and again I
sank into slumber.
Scarcely had I been half an hour asleep, when the blast of a trumpet again
awoke me, and I found, amidst the confusion and excitement about, that
something of importance had occurred. Questions were eagerly asked on all
sides, but no one could explain what had happened. Towards the town all was
as still as death, but a dropping, irregular fire of musketry issued from
the valley beside the Aguada. "What can this mean; what can it be?" we
asked of each other. "A sortie from the garrison," said one; "A night
attack by Massena's troops," cried another; and while thus we disputed and
argued, a horseman was heard advancing along the road at the top of his
speed.
"Where are the cavalry?" cried a voice I recognized as one of my brother
aides-de-camp. "Where are the Fourteenth?"
A cheer from our party answered this question, and the next moment,
breathless and agitated, he rode in among us.
"What is it? Are we attacked?"
"Would to Heaven that were all! But come along, lads, follow me."
"What can it be, then?" said I again; while my anxiety knew no bounds.
"Brennier has escaped; burst his way through Pack's Division, and has
already reached Valde Mula."
"The French have escaped!" was repeated from mouth to mouth; while,
pressing spurs to our horses, we broke into a gallop, and dashed forward in
the direction of the musketry. We soon came up with the 36th Infantry, who,
having thrown away their knapsacks, were rapidly pressing the pursuit. The
maledictions which burst from every side proved how severely the misfortune
was felt by all, while the eager advance of the men bespoke how ardently
they longed to repair the mishap.
Dark as was the night, we passed them in a gallop, when suddenly the
officer who commanded the leading squadron called out to halt.
"Take care there, lads!" cried he; "I hear the infantry before us; we shall
be down upon our own people."
The words were hardly spoken, when a bright flash blazed out before us, and
a smashing volley was poured into the squadron.
"The French! the French, by Jove!" said Hampden. "Forward, boys! charge
them!"
Breaking into open order, to avoid our wounded comrades, several of whom
had fallen by the fire, we rode down among them. In a moment their order
was broken, their ranks pierced, and fresh squadrons coming up at the
instant, they were sabred to a man.
After this the French pursued their march in silence, and even when
assembling in force we rode down upon their squares, they never halted nor
fired a shot. At Barba del Puerco, the ground being unfit for cavalry, the
Thirty-sixth took our place, and pressed them hotly home. Several of
the French were killed, and above three hundred made prisoners, but our
fellows, following up the pursuit too rashly, came upon an advanced body of
Massena's force, drawn up to await and cover Brennier's retreat; the result
was the loss of above thirty men in killed and wounded.
Thus were the great efforts of the three preceding days rendered fruitless
and nugatory. To maintain this blockade, Lord Wellington, with an inferior
force, and a position by no means strong, had ventured to give the enemy
battle; and now by the unskilfulness of some, and the negligence of others,
were all his combinations thwarted, and the French general enabled to march
his force through the midst of the blockading columns almost unmolested and
uninjured.
Lord Wellington's indignation was great, as well it might be; the prize for
which he had contested was torn from his grasp at the very moment he had
won it, and although the gallantry of the troops in the pursuit might,
under other circumstances, have called forth eulogium, his only observation
on the matter was a half-sarcastic allusion to the inconclusive effects of
undisciplined bravery. "Notwithstanding," says the general order of the
day, "what has been printed in gazettes and newspapers, we have never seen
small bodies, unsupported, successfully opposed to large; nor has the
experience of any officer realized the stories which all have read, of
whole armies being driven by a handful of light infantry and dragoons."
CHAPTER XXVI.
A NIGHT ON THE AZAVA.
Massena was now recalled, and Marmont, having assumed the command of
the French, army, retired towards Salamanca, while our troops went into
cantonments upon the Aguada. A period of inaction succeeded to our previous
life of bustle and excitement, and the whole interest of the campaign was
now centred in Beresford's army, exposed to Soult in Estramadura.
On the 15th Lord Wellington set out for that province, having already
directed a strong force to march upon Badajos.
"Well, O'Malley," said Crawfurd, as he returned from bidding Lord
Wellington good-by, "your business is all right; the commander-in-chief has
signed my recommendation, and you will get your troop."
While I continued to express my grateful acknowledgments for his kindness,
the general, apparently inattentive to all I was saying, paced the room
with hurried steps, stopping every now and then to glance at a large map of
Spain which covered one wall of the apartment, while he muttered to himself
some broken and disjointed sentences.
"Eight leagues--too weak in cavalry--with the left upon Fuenta Grenaldo--a
strong position. O'Malley, you'll take a troop of dragoons and patrol the
country towards Castro; you'll reconnoitre the position the Sixth Corps
occupies, but avoid any collision with the enemy's pickets, keeping the
Azava between you and them. Take rations for three days."
"When shall I set out, sir?"
"Now!" was the reply.
Knowing with what pleasure the hardy veteran recognized anything like
alacrity and despatch, I resolved to gratify him; and before half an hour
had elapsed, was ready with my troop to receive his final orders.
"Well done, boy!" said he, as he came to the door of the hut, "you've lost
no time. I don't believe I have any further instructions to give you; to
ascertain as far as possible the probable movement of the enemy is my
object, that's all." As he spoke this, he waved his hand, and wishing me
"Good-by," walked leisurely back into the house. I saw that his mind was
occupied by other thoughts; and although I desired to obtain some more
accurate information for my guidance, knowing his dislike to questions, I
merely returned his salute, and set forth upon my journey.
The morning was beautiful; the sun had risen about an hour, and the earth,
refreshed by the heavy dew of the night, was breathing forth all its
luxuriant fragrance. The river which flowed beside us was clear as crystal,
showing beneath its eddying current the shining, pebbly bed, while upon
the surface, the water-lilies floated or sank as the motion of the stream
inclined. The tall cork-trees spread their shadows about us, and the richly
plumed birds hopped from branch to branch awaking the echoes with their
notes.
It is but seldom that the heart of man is thoroughly attuned to the
circumstances of the scenery around him. How often do we need a struggle
with ourselves to enjoy the rich and beautiful landscape which lies smiling
in its freshness before us! How frequently do the blue sky and the calm air
look down upon the heart darkened and shadowed with affliction! And how
often have we felt the discrepancy between the lowering look of winter and
the glad sunshine of our hearts! The harmony of the world without with our
thoughts within is one of the purest, as it is one of the greatest, sources
of happiness. Our hopes and our ambitions lose their selfish character when
we feel that fortune smiles upon us from all around, and the flattery which
speaks to our hearts from the bright stars and the blue sky, the peaked
mountain or the humble flower, is greater in its mute eloquence than all
the tongue of man can tell us.
This feeling did I experience in all its fulness as I ruminated upon my
bettered fortunes, and felt within myself that secret instinct that tells
of happiness to come. In such moods of mind my thoughts strayed ever
homewards, and I could not help confessing how little were all my successes
in my eyes, did I not-hope for the day when I should pour forth my tale of
war and battle-field to the ears of those who loved me.
I resolved to write home at once to my uncle. I longed to tell him each
incident of my career, and my heart glowed as I thought over the broken
and disjointed sentences which every cotter around would whisper of my
fortunes, far prouder as they would be in the humble deeds of one they
knew, than in the proudest triumphs of a nation's glory.
Indeed, Mike himself gave the current to my thoughts. After riding beside
me for some time in silence, he remarked,--
"And isn't it Father Rush will be proud when he sees your honor's a
captain; to think of the little boy that he used to take before him on the
ould gray mare for a ride down the avenue,--to think of him being a real
captain, six feet two without his boots, and galloping over the French as
if they were lurchers! Peggy Mahon, that nursed you, will be the proud
woman the day she hears it; and there won't be a soldier sober in his
quarters that night in Portumna barracks! 'Pon my soul, there's not a thing
with a red coat on it, if it was even a scarecrow to frighten the birds
from the barley, that won't be treated with respect when they hear of the
news."
The country through which we travelled was marked at every step by the
traces of a retreating army: the fields of rich corn lay flattened beneath
the tramp of cavalry, or the wheels of the baggage-wagons; the roads, cut
up and nearly impassable, were studded here and there with marks which
indicated a bivouac. At the same time, everything around bore a very
different aspect from what we had observed in Portugal; there, the
vindictive cruelty of the French soldiery had been seen in full sway: the
ruined chteau, the burned villages, the desecrated altars, the murdered
peasantry,--all attested the revengeful spirit of a beaten and baffled
enemy. No sooner, however, had they crossed the frontiers, than, as if by
magic, their character became totally changed. Discipline and obedience
succeeded to recklessness and pillage; and instead of treating the natives
with, inhumanity and cruelty, in all their intercourse with the Spaniards
the French behaved with moderation and even kindness. Paying for
everything, obtaining their billets peaceably and quietly, marching with
order and regularity, they advanced into the heart of the country, showing,
by the most irrefragable proof, the astonishing evidences of a discipline
which, by a word, could convert the lawless irregularities of a ruffian
soldiery into the orderly habits and obedient conduct of a highly-organized
army.
As we neared the Azava, the tracks of the retiring enemy became gradually
less perceptible, and the country, uninjured by the march, extended for
miles around us in all the richness and abundance of a favored climate. The
tall corn, waving its yellow gold, reflected like a sea the clouds that
moved slowly above it. The wild gentian and the laurel grew thickly around,
and the cattle stood basking in the clear streams, while some listless
peasant lounged upon the bank beside them. Strange as all these evidences
of peace and tranquillity were, so near to the devastating track of a
mighty army, yet I have more than once witnessed the fact, and remarked
how, but a short distance from the line of our hurried march, the country
lay untouched and uninjured; and though the clank of arms and the dull roll
of the artillery may have struck upon the ear of the far-off dweller in his
native valley, he listened as he would have done to the passing thunder as
it crashed above him; and when the bright sky and pure air succeeded to
the lowering atmosphere and the darkening storm, he looked forth upon his
smiling fields and happy home, while he muttered to his heart a prayer of
thanksgiving that the scourge was passed.
We bivouacked upon the bank of the river, a truly Salvator Rosa scene;
the rocks, towering high above us, were fissured by the channel of many a
trickling stream, seeking, in its zigzag current, the bright river below.
The dark pine-tree and the oak mingled their foliage with the graceful
cedar, which spread its fan-like branches about us. Through the thick shade
some occasional glimpses of a starry sky could yet be seen, and a faint
yellow streak upon the silent river told that the queen of night was there.
When I had eaten my frugal supper, I wandered forth alone upon the bank
of the stream, now standing to watch its bold sweeps as it traversed the
lonely valley before me, now turning to catch a passing glance at our
red watch-fires and the hardy features which sat around. The hoarse and
careless laugh, the deep-toned voice of some old campaigner holding forth
his tale of flood and field, were the only sounds I heard; and gradually I
strolled beyond the reach of even these. The path beside the river, which
seemed scarped from the rock, was barely sufficient for the passage of
one man, a rude balustrade of wood being the only defence against the
precipice, which, from a height of full thirty feet, looked down upon the
stream. Here and there some broad gleam of moonlight would fall upon the
opposite bank, which, unlike the one I occupied, stretched out into rich
meadow and pasturage, broken by occasional clumps of ilex and beech. River
scenery has been ever a passion with me. I can glory in the bold and broken
outline of a mighty mountain; I can gaze with delighted eyes upon the
boundless seas, and know not whether to like it more in all the mighty
outpouring of its wrath, when the white waves lift their heads to heaven
and break themselves in foam upon the rocky beach, or in the calm beauty of
its broad and mirrored surface, in which the bright world of sun and sky
are seen full many a fathom deep. But far before these, I love the happy
and tranquil beauty of some bright river, tracing its winding current
through valley and through plain, now spreading into some calm and waveless
lake, now narrowing to an eddying stream with mossy rocks and waving trees
darkening over it. There's not a hut, however lowly, where the net of the
fisherman is stretched upon the sward, around whose hearth I do not picture
before me the faces of happy toil and humble contentment, while, from the
ruined tower upon the crag, methinks I hear the ancient sounds of wassail
and of welcome; and though the keep be fissured and the curtain fallen, and
though for banner there "waves some tall wall-flower," I can people its
crumbling walls with images of the past; and the merry laugh of the warder,
and the clanking tread of the mailed warrior, are as palpably before me as
the tangled lichen that now trails from its battlements.
As I wandered on, I reached the little rustic stair which led downward from
the path to the river's side; and on examining farther, perceived that at
this place the stream was fordable; a huge flat rock, filling up a great
part of the river's bed, occupied the middle, on either side of which the
current ran with increased force.
Bent upon exploring, I descended the cliff, and was preparing to cross,
when my attention was attracted by the twinkle of a fire at some distance
from me, on the opposite side; the flame rose and fell in fitful flashes,
as though some hand were ministering to it at the moment. As it was
impossible, from the silence on every side, that it could proceed from a
bivouac of the enemy, I resolved on approaching it, and examining it for
myself. I knew that the shepherds in remote districts were accustomed thus
to pass the summer nights, with no other covering save the blue vault above
them. It was not impossible, too, that it might prove a Guerilla party, who
frequently, in small numbers, hang upon the rear of a retreating army. Thus
conjecturing, I crossed the stream, and quickening my pace, walked forward
in the direction of the blaze. For a moment a projecting rock obstructed my
progress; and while I was devising some means of proceeding farther, the
sound of voices near me arrested my attention. I listened, and what was my
astonishment to hear that they spoke in French. I now crept cautiously to
the verge of the rock and looked over; the moon was streaming in its full
brilliancy upon a little shelving strand beside the stream, and here I
now beheld the figure of a French officer. He was habited in the undress
uniform of a chasseur  cheval, but wore no arms; indeed his occupation
at the moment was anything but a warlike one, he being leisurely employed
in collecting some flasks of champagne which apparently had been left to
cool within the stream.
"Eh bien, Alphonse!" said a voice in the direction of the fire, "what are
you delaying for?"
"I'm coming, I'm coming," said the other; "but, par Dieu! I can only find
five of our bottles; one seems to have been carried away by the stream."
"No matter," replied the other, "we are but three of us, and one is, or
should be, on the sick list."
The only answer to this was the muttered chorus of a French drinking-song,
interrupted at intervals by an imprecation upon the missing flask. It
chanced, at this moment, that a slight clinking noise attracted me, and on
looking down, I perceived at the foot of the rock the prize he sought for.
It had been, as he conceived, carried away by an eddy of the stream and was
borne, as a true prisoner-of-war, within my grasp. I avow that from this
moment my interest in the scene became considerably heightened; such a waif
as a bottle of champagne was not to be despised in circumstances like mine;
and I watched with anxious eyes every gesture of the impatient Frenchman,
and alternately vibrated between hope and fear, as he neared or receded
from the missing flask.
"Let it go to the devil," shouted his companion, once more. "Jacques has
lost all patience with you."
"Be it so, then," said the other, as he prepared to take up his burden. At
this instant I made a slight effort so to change my position as to obtain
a view of the rest of the party. The branch by which I supported myself,
however, gave way beneath my grasp with a loud crash. I lost my footing,
and slipping downward from the rock, came plump into the stream below. The
noise, the splash, and more than all, the sudden appearance of a man beside
him, astounded the Frenchman, who almost let fall his pannier, and thus we
stood confronting each other for at least a couple of minutes in silence. A
hearty burst of laughter from both parties terminated this awkward moment,
while the Frenchman, with the readiness of his country, was the first to
open the negotiation.
"Sacr Dieu!" said he, "what can you be doing here? You're English,
without doubt."
"Even so," said I; "but that is the very question I was about to ask you;
what are you doing here?"
"Eh bien," replied the other, gayly, "you shall be answered in all
frankness. Our captain was wounded in the action of the 8th, and we heard
had been carried up the country by some peasants. As the army fell back, we
obtained permission to go in search of him. For two days all was fruitless;
the peasantry fled at our approach; and although we captured some of our
stolen property--among other things, the contents of this basket--yet we
never came upon the track of our comrade till this evening. A good-hearted
shepherd had taken him to his hut, and treated him with every kindness,
but no sooner did he hear the gallop of our horses and the clank of our
equipments, than, fearing himself to be made a prisoner, he fled up the
mountains, leaving our friend behind him; voil notre histoire. Here we
are, three in all, one of us with a deep sabre-cut in his shoulder. If you
are the stronger party, we are, I suppose, your prisoners; if not--"
What was to have followed I know not, for at this moment his companion, who
had finally lost all patience, came suddenly to the spot.
"A prisoner," cried he, placing a heavy hand upon my shoulder, while with
the other he held his drawn sword pointed towards my breast.
To draw a pistol from my bosom was the work of a second; and while gently
turning the point of his weapon away, I coolly said,--
"Not so fast, my friend, not so fast! The game is in my hands, not yours. I
have only to pull this trigger, and my dragoons are upon you; whatever fate
befall me, yours is certain."
A half-scornful laugh betrayed the incredulity of him I addressed, while
the other, apparently anxious to relieve the awkwardness of the moment,
suddenly broke in with,--
"He is right, Auguste, and you are wrong; we are in his power; that is,"
added he, smiling, "if he believes there is any triumph in capturing such
pauvres diables as ourselves."
The features of him he addressed suddenly lost their scornful expression,
and sheathing his sword with an air of almost melodramatic solemnity,
he gravely pulled up his mustaches, and after a pause of a few seconds,
solemnly ejaculated a malediction upon his fortune.
"C'est toujours ainsi," said he, with a bitterness that only a Frenchman
can convey when cursing his destiny. "Soyez bon enfant, and see what will
come of it. Only be good-natured, only be kind, and if you haven't bad luck
at the end of it, it's only because fortune has a heavier stroke in reserve
for you hereafter."
I could not help smiling at the Frenchman's philosophy, which, assuming
as a good augury, he gayly said, "So, then, you'll not make us prisoners.
Isn't it so?"
"Prisoners," said the other, "nothing of the kind. Come and sup with us;
I'll venture to say our larder is as well stocked as your own; in any case
an omelette, a cold chicken, and a glass of champagne are not bad things in
our circumstances."
I could not help laughing outright at the strangeness of the proposal.
"I fear I must decline," said I; "you seem to forget I am placed here to
watch, not to join you."
"A la bonne heure," cried the younger of the two; "do both. Come along;
soyez bon camarade; you are always near your own people, so don't refuse
us."
In proportion as I declined, they both became more pressing in their
entreaties, and at last, I began to dread lest my refusal might seem to
proceed from some fear as to the good faith of the invitation, and I never
felt so awkwardly placed as when one plumply pressed me by saying,--
"Mais pourquoi pas, mon cher?"
I stammered out something about duty and discipline, when they both
interrupted me by a long burst of laughter.
"Come, come!" said they; "in an hour--in half an hour, if you will--you
shall be back with your own people. We've had plenty of fighting latterly,
and we are likely to have enough in future; we know something of each other
by this time in the field; let us see how we get on in the bivouac!"
Resolving not to be outdone in generosity, I replied at once, "Here goes,
then!"
Five minutes afterwards I found myself seated at their bivouac fire. The
captain, who was the oldest of the party, was a fine soldier-like fellow of
some forty years old; he had served in the Imperial Guard through all the
campaigns of Italy and Austria, and abounded in anecdotes of the French
army. From him I learned many of those characteristic traits which so
eminently distinguish the imperial troops, and saw how completely their
bravest and boldest feats of arms depended upon the personal valor of him
who led them on. From the daring enterprise of Napoleon at Lodi to the
conduct of the lowest corporal in the grande arme, the picture presents
nothing but a series of brilliant and splendid chivalry; while, at the same
time, the warlike character of the nation is displayed by that instinctive
appreciation of courage and daring which teaches them to follow their
officers to the very cannon's mouth.
"It was at Elchingen," said the captain, "you should have seen them. The
regiment in which I was a lieutenant was ordered to form close column, and
charge through a narrow ravine to carry a brigade of guns, which, by a
flanking fire, were devastating our troops. Before we could reach the
causeway, we were obliged to pass an open plain in which the ground dipped
for about a hundred yards; the column moved on, and though it descended one
hill, not a man ever mounted the opposite one. A very avalanche of balls
swept the entire valley; and yet amidst the thunder and the smoke, the red
glare of the artillery, and the carnage around them, our grenadiers marched
firmly up. At last, Marshal Ney sent an aide-de-camp with orders to the
troops to lie flat down, and in this position the artillery played over
us for above half an hour. The Austrians gradually slackened, and finally
discontinued their fire; this was the moment to resume the attack. I crept
cautiously to my knees and looked about. One word brought my men around me;
but I found to my horror that of a battalion who came into action fourteen
hundred strong, not five hundred remained; and that I myself, a mere
lieutenant, was now the senior officer of the regiment. Our gallant colonel
lay dead beside my feet. At this instant a thought struck me. I remembered
a habit he possessed in moments of difficulty and danger, of placing in his
shako a small red plume which he commonly carried in his belt. I searched
for it, and found it. As I held it aloft, a maddening cheer burst around
me, while from out the line each officer sprang madly forward, and rushed
to the head of the column. It was no longer a march. With a loud cry of
vengeance, the mass rushed forward, the men trying to outstrip their
officers, and come first in contact with the foe. Like tigers on the
spring, they fell upon the enemy, who, crushed, overwhelmed, and massacred,
lay in slaughtered heaps around the cannon. The cavalry of the Guard came
thundering on behind us; a whole division followed; and three thousand five
hundred prisoners, and fourteen pieces of artillery were captured.
"I sat upon the carriage of a gun, my face begrimed with powder, and my
uniform blackened and blood-stained. The whole thing appeared like some
shocking dream. I felt a hand upon my shoulder, while a rough voice called
in my ear, 'Capitaine du soixante-neuvime, tu es mon frre!'
"It was Ney who spoke. This," added the brave captain, his eyes filling as
he said the words,--"this is the sabre he gave me."
I know not why I have narrated this anecdote; it has little in itself, but
somehow, to me it brings back in all its fulness the recollection of that
night.
There was something so strongly characteristic of the old Napoleonist
in the tone of his narrative that I listened throughout with breathless
attention. I began to feel too, for the first time, what a powerful arm
in war the Emperor had created by fostering the spirit of individual
enterprise. The field thus opened to fame and distinction left no bounds
to the ambition of any. The humble conscript, as he tore himself from the
embraces of his mother, wiped his tearful eyes to see before him in the
distance the bton of a marshal. The bold soldier who stormed a battery
felt his heart beat more proudly and more securely beneath the cordon of
the Legion than behind a cuirass of steel; and to a people in whom the
sense of duty alone would seem cold, barren, and inglorious, he had
substituted a highly-wrought chivalrous enthusiasm; and by the prestige
of his own name, the proud memory of his battles, and the glory of those
mighty tournaments at which all Europe were the spectators, he had
converted a nation into an army.
By a silent and instinctive compact we appeared to avoid those topics of
the campaign in which the honor of our respective arms was interested; and
once, when, by mere accident, the youngest of the party adverted to Fuentes
d'Onoro, the old captain adroitly turned the current of the conversation by
saying, "Come, Alphonse, let's have a song."
"Yes," said the other. "Les Pas de Charge."
"No, no," said the captain; "if I am to have a choice, let it be that
little Breton song you gave us on the Danube."
"So be it then," said Alphonse. "Here goes!"
I have endeavored to convey, by a translation, the words he sang; but I
feel conscious how totally their feeling and simplicity are lost when
deprived of their own patois, and the wild but touching melody that
accompanied them.
THE BRETON HOME.
When the battle is o'er, and the sounds of fight
Have closed with the closing day,
How happy around the watch-fire's light
To chat the long hours away;
To chat the long hours away, my boy,
And talk of the days to come,
Or a better still and a purer joy,
To think of our far-off home.
How many a cheek will then grow pale,
That never felt a tear!
And many a stalwart heart will quail,
That never quailed in fear!
And the breast that like some mighty rock
Amidst the foaming sea
Bore high against the battle's shock
Now heaves like infancy.
And those who knew each other not
Their hands together steal,
Each thinks of some long hallowed spot,
And all like brothers feel:
Such holy thoughts to all are given;
The lowliest has his part;
The love of home, like love of heaven,
Is woven in our heart.
There was a pause as he concluded, each sank in his own reflections. How
long we should have thus remained, I know not; but we were speedily aroused
from our reveries by the tramp of horses near us. We listened, and could
plainly detect in their rude voices and coarse laughter the approach of a
body of Guerillas. We looked from one to the other in silence and in fear.
Nothing could be more unfortunate should we be discovered. Upon this point
we were left little time to deliberate; for with a loud cheer, four Spanish
horsemen galloped up to the spot, their carbines in the rest. The Frenchmen
sprang to their feet, and seized their sabres, bent upon making a resolute
resistance. As for me, my determination was at once taken. Remaining
quietly seated upon the grass, I stirred not for a moment, but addressing
him who appeared to be the chief of the Guerillas, said, in Spanish:--
"These are my prisoners; I am a British officer of dragoons, and my party
is yonder."
This evidently unexpected declaration seemed to surprise them, and they
conferred for a few moments together. Meanwhile they were joined by two
others, in one of whom we could recognize, by his costume, the real leader
of the party.
"I am captain in the light dragoons," said I, repeating my declaration.
"Morte de Dios!" replied he; "it is false; you are a spy!"
The word was repeated from lip to lip by his party, and I saw, in their
lowering looks and darkened features, that the moment was a critical one
for me.
"Down with your arms!" cried he, turning to the Frenchmen. "Surrender
yourselves our prisoners; I'll not bid ye twice!"
The Frenchmen turned upon me an inquiring look, as though to say that upon
me now their hopes entirely reposed.
"Do as he bids you," said I; while at the same moment I sprang to my legs,
and gave a loud, shrill whistle, the last echo of which had not died away
in the distance ere it was replied to.
[Illustration: THE TABLES TURNED.]
"Make no resistance now," said I to the Frenchmen; "our safety depends on
this."
While this was passing two of the Spaniards had dismounted, and detaching a
coil of rope which hung from their saddle-peak, were proceeding to tie the
prisoners wrist to wrist; the others, with their carbines to the shoulder,
covered us man by man, the chief of the party having singled out me as his
peculiar prey.
"The fate of Mascarenhas might have taught you better," said he, "than to
play this game." And then added with a grim smile, "But we'll see if an
Englishman will not make as good a carbonado as a Portuguese!"
This cruel speech made my blood run cold, for I knew well to what he
alluded. I was at Lisbon at the time it happened, but the melancholy fate
of Julian Mascarenhas, the Portuguese spy, had reached me there. He was
burned to death at Torres Vedras!
The Spaniard's triumph over my terror was short-lived, indeed, for scarcely
had the words fallen from his lips, when a party of the Fourteenth,
dashing through the river at a gallop, came riding up. The attitude of the
Guerillas, as they sat with presented arms, was sufficient for my fellows
who needed not the exhortation of him who rode foremost of the party:--
"Ride them down, boys! Tumble them over! Flatten their broad beavers, the
infernal thieves!"
"Whoop!" shouted Mike, as he rode at the chief with the force of a
catapult. Down went the Spaniard, horse and all; and before he could
disentangle himself, Mike was upon him, his knee pressed upon his neck.
"Isn't it enough for ye to pillage the whole country without robbing the
king's throops!" cried he, as he held him fast to the earth with one hand,
while he presented a loaded pistol to his face.
By this time the scene around me was sufficiently ludicrous. Such of the
Guerillas as had not been thrown by force from their saddles, had slid
peaceably down, and depositing their arms upon the ground, dropped upon
their knees in a semicircle around us, and amidst the hoarse laughter of
the troopers, and the irrepressible merriment of the Frenchmen, rose up the
muttered prayers of the miserable Spaniards, who believed that now their
last hour was come.
"Madre de Dios, indeed!" cried Mike, imitating the tone of a repentant
old sinner in a patched mantle; "it's much the blessed Virgin thinks of
the like o' ye, thieves and rogues as ye are; it a'most puts me beyond my
senses to see ye there crossing yourselves like rale Christians."
If I could not help indulging myself in this retributive cruelty towards
the chief, and leaving him to the tender mercies of Mike, I ordered the
others to rise and form in line before me. Affecting to occupy myself
entirely with them, I withdrew the attention of all from the French
officers, who remained quiet spectators of the scene around them.
"Point de faons, gentlemen," said I, in a whisper. "Get to your horses
and away! Now's your time. Good-by!"
A warm grasp of the hand from each was the only reply, and I turned once
more to my discomforted friends the Guerillas.
"There, Mike, let the poor devil rise. I confess appearances were strong
against me just now."
"Well, Captain, are you convinced by this time that I was not deceiving
you?"
The Guerilla muttered some words of apology between his teeth, and while he
shook the dust from his cloak, and arranged the broken feather of his
hat, cast a look of scowling and indignant meaning upon Mike, whose rough
treatment he had evidently not forgiven.
"Don't be looking at me that way, you black thief! or I'll--"
"Hold there!" said I; "no more of this. Come, gentlemen, we must be
friends. If I mistake not, we've got something like refreshment at our
bivouac. In any case you'll partake of our watch-fire till morning."
They gladly accepted our invitation, and ere half an hour elapsed Mike's
performance in the part of host had completely erased every unpleasant
impression his first appearance gave rise to; and as for myself, when I did
sleep at last, the confused mixture of Spanish and Irish airs which issued
from the thicket beside me, proved that a most intimate alliance had grown
up between the parties.
CHAPTER XXVII.
MIKE'S MISTAKE.
An hour before daybreak the Guerillas were in motion, and having taken a
most ceremonious leave of us, they mounted their horses and set out upon
their journey. I saw their gaunt figures wind down the valley, and watched
them till they disappeared in the distance. "Yes, brigands though they be,"
thought I, "there is something fine, something heroic in the spirit of
their unrelenting vengeance." The sleuth-hound never sought the lair of
his victim with a more ravening appetite for blood than they track the
retreating columns of the enemy. Hovering around the line of march, they
sometimes swoop down in masses, and carry off a part of the baggage, or the
wounded. The wearied soldier, overcome by heat and exhaustion, who drops
behind his ranks, is their certain victim; the sentry on an advanced post
is scarcely less so. Whole pickets are sometimes attacked and carried off
to a man; and when traversing the lonely passes of some mountain gorge, or
defiling through the dense shadows of a wooded glen, the stoutest heart has
felt a fear, lest from behind the rock that frowned above him, or from the
leafy thicket whose branches stirred without a breeze, the sharp ring of a
Guerilla carbine might sound his death-knell.
It was thus in the retreat upon Corunna fell Colonel Lefebvre. Ever
foremost in the attack upon our rear-guard, this gallant youth (he was
scarce six-and-twenty), a colonel of his regiment, and decorated with the
Legion of Honor, he led on every charge of his bold "sabreurs," riding
up to the very bayonets of our squares, waving his hat above his head, and
seeming actually to court his death-wound; but so struck were our brave
fellows with his gallant bearing, that they cheered him as he came on.
It was in one of these moments as, rising high in his stirrups, he bore
down upon the unflinching ranks of the British infantry, the shrill whistle
of a ball strewed the leaves upon the roadside, the exulting shout of a
Guerilla followed it, and the same instant Lefebvre fell forward upon his
horse's mane, a deluge of blood bursting from his bosom. A broken cry
escaped his lips,--a last effort to cheer on his men; his noble charger
galloped forward between our squares, bearing to us our prisoner, the
corpse of his rider.
"Captain O'Malley," said a mounted dragoon to the advanced sentry at the
bottom of the little hill upon which I was standing. "Despatches from
headquarters, sir," delivering into my hands a large sealed packet from the
adjutant-general's office. While he proceeded to search for another letter
of which he was the bearer, I broke the seal and read as follows:--
ADJUTANT-GENERAL'S OFFICE.
May 15.
Sir,--On the receipt of this order you are directed, having previously
resigned your command to the officer next in seniority, to
repair to headquarters at Fueutes d'Onoro, there to report yourself
under arrest.
I have the honor to be your obedient servant,
GEORGE HOPETON,
Military Secretary.
"What the devil can this mean?" said I to myself, as I read the lines over
again and again. "What have I done lately, or what have I left undone to
involve me in this scrape? Ah!" thought I, "to be sure, it can be nothing
else. Lord Wellington did recognize me that unlucky morning, and has
determined not to let me pass unpunished. How unfortunate. Scarcely
twenty-four hours have elapsed since fortune seemed to smile upon me from
every side, and now the very destiny I most dreaded stares me fully in the
face." A reprimand, or the sentence of a court-martial, I shrank from with
a coward's fear. It mattered comparatively little from what source arising,
the injury to my pride as a man and my spirit as a soldier would be almost
the same.
"This is the letter, sir," said the orderly, presenting me with a packet,
the address of which was in Power's hand-writing. Eagerly tearing it open,
I sought for something which might explain my unhappy position. It bore the
same date as the official letter, and ran thus:--
My Dear Charley,--I joined yesterday, just in time to enjoy the
heartiest laugh I have had since our meeting. If notoriety can gratify
you, by Jove, you have it; for Charles O'Malley and his man Mickey
Free are bywords in every mess from Villa Formosa to the rear-guard.
As it's only fair you should participate a little in the fun you've
originated, let me explain the cause. Your inimitable man Mike, to
whom it appears you intrusted the report of killed and wounded for
the adjutant-general, having just at that moment accomplished a
letter to his friends at home, substituted his correspondence for your
returns, and doubtless, sent the list of the casualties as very
interesting information to his sweetheart in Ireland. If such be the
case, I hope and trust she has taken the blunder in better part than
old Colbourn, who swears he'll bring you to a court-martial, under
Heaven knows what charges. In fact, his passion has known no bounds
since the event; and a fit of jaundice has given his face a kind of
neutral tint between green and yellow, like nothing I know of except
the facings of the "dirty half-hundred." [2]
[Footnote 2: For the information of my unmilitary readers, I may
remark that this sobriquet was applied to the 50th Regiment.]
As Mr. Free's letter may be as great a curiosity to you as it has
been to us, I enclose you a copy of it, which Hopeton obtained for
me. It certainly places the estimable Mike in a strong light as a
despatch-writer. The occasional interruption to the current of the
letter, you will perceive, arises from Mike having used the pen of a
comrade, writing being, doubtless, an accomplishment forgotten in
the haste of preparing Mr. Free for the world; and the amanuensis
has, in more than one instance, committed to paper more than was
meant by the author:--
Mrs. M'Gra,--Tear an' ages, sure I need not be treating he
way. Now, just say Mrs. Mary--ay, that'll do--Mrs. Mary, it's may be
surprised you'll be to be reading a letter from your humble servant,
sitting on the top of the Alps,--arrah, may be it's not the Alps; but
sure she'll never know,--fornent the whole French army, with Bony
himself and all his jinnerals--God be between us and harm--ready to
murther every mother's son of us, av they were able, Molly darlin';
but, with the blessing of Providence, and Lord Wellington and Mister
Charles, we'll bate them yet, as we bate them afore.
My lips is wathering at the thought o' the plunder. I often
of Tim Riley, that was hanged for sheep-stealing; he'd be worth his
weight in gold here.
Mr. Charles is now a captain--devil a less--and myself might be
somethin' that same, but ye see I was always of a bashful n
and recommended the master in my place. "He's mighty young, Mister
Charles is," says my Lord Wellington to me,--"He's mighty young, Mr.
Free." "He is, my lord," says I; "he's young, as you obsarve, but
he's as much divilment in him as many that might be his father."
"That's somethin', Mr. Free," says my lord; "ye say he comes from a
good stock?" "The rale sort, my lord," says I; "an ould, ancient
family, that's spent every sixpence they had in treating their
neighbors. My father lived near him for years,"--you see, Molly, I
said that to season the discourse. "We'll make him a captain," says
my lord; "but, Mr. Free, could we do nothing for you?" "Nothing, at
present, my lord. When my friends comes into power," says I, "they'll
think of me. There's many a little thing to give away in Ireland, and
they often find it mighty hard to find a man for lord-lieutenant; and
if that same, or a tide-waiter's place was vacant--" "Just tell me,"
says my lord. "It's what I'll do," says I. "And now, wishing you
happy dreams, I'll take my lave." Just so, Molly, it's hand and glove
we are. A pleasant face, agreeable manners seasoned with natural
modesty, and a good pair of legs, them's the gifts to push a man's
way in the world. And even with the ladies--but sure I am forgetting,
my master was proposed for, and your humble servant too, by two
illigant creatures in Lisbon; but it wouldn't do, Molly, it's higher
nor that we'll be looking,--rale princesses, the devil a less. Tell
Kitty Hannigan I hope she's well; she was a disarving young
in her situation in life. Shusey Dogherty, at the cross road--
I don't forget the name--was a good-looking slip too; give her my
affectionate salutations, as we say in the Portuguese. I hope I'll be
able to bear the inclementuous nature of your climate when I go back;
but I can't expect to stay long--for Lord Wellington can't do without
me. We play duets on the guitar together every evening. The master is
shouting for a blanket, so no more at present from,
Your very affectionate friend,
MICKEY FREE.
P. S.--I don't write this myself, for the Spanish tongue p
out o' the habit of English. Tell Father Rush, if he'd study the
Portuguese, I'd use my interest for him with the Bishop of Toledo.
It's a country he'd like--no regular stations, but promiscuous eating
and drinking, and as pretty girls as ever confessed their sins.
My poor Charley, I think I am looking at you. I think I can
see the struggle between indignation, and laughter, which every line
of this letter inflicts upon you. Get back as quickly as you can, and
we'll try if Crawfurd won't pull you through the business. In any
case, expect no sympathy; and if you feel disposed to be angry with
all who laugh at you, you had better publish a challenge in the next
general order. George Scott, of, the Greys, bids me say, that if
you're hard up for cash, he'll give you a couple of hundred for
Mickey Free. I told him I thought you'd accept it, as your uncle
has the breed of those fellows upon his estate, and might have no
objection to weed his stud. Hammersley's gone back with the Dashwoods;
but I don't think you need fear anything in that quarter.
At the same time, if you wish for success, make a bold push for the
peerage and half-a-dozen decorations, for Miss Lucy is most decidedly
gone wild about military distinction. As for me, my affairs go on
well: I've had half-a-dozen quarrels with Inez, but we parted good
friends, and my bad Portuguese has got me out of all difficulties with
papa, who pressed me tolerably close as to fortune. I shall want
your assistance in this matter yet. If parchments will satisfy him, I
think I could get up a qualification; but somehow the matter must
be done, for I'm resolved to have his daughter.
The orderly is starting, so no more till we meet.
Yours ever,            FRED POWER.
"Godwin," said I, as I closed the letter, "I find myself in a scrape at
headquarters; you are to take the command of the detachment, for I must set
out at once."
"Nothing serious, I hope. O'Malley?"
"Oh, no; nothing of consequence. A most absurd blunder of my rascally
servant."
"The Irish fellow yonder?"
"The same."
"He seems to take it easily, however."
"Oh, confound him! he does not know what trouble he has involved me in; not
that he'll care much when he does."
"Why, he does not seem to be of a very desponding temperament. Listen to
the fellow! I'll be hanged, if he's not singing!"
"I'm devilishly disposed to spoil his mirth. They tell me, however, he
always keeps the troop in good humor; and see, the fellows are actually
cleaning his horses for him, while he is sitting on the bank!"
"Faith, O'Malley, that fellow knows the world. Just hear him."
Mr. Free was, as described, most leisurely reposing on a bank, a mug of
something drinkable beside him, and a pipe of that curtailed proportion
which an Irishman loves held daintily between his fingers. He appeared to
be giving his directions to some soldiers of the troop, who were busily
cleaning his horses and accoutrements for him.
[Illustration: MR. FREE PIPES WHILE HIS FRIENDS PIPE-CLAY.]
"That's it, Jim! Rub 'em down along the hocks; he won't kick; it's only
play. Scrub away, honey; that's the devil's own carbine to get clean."
"Well, I say, Mr. Free, are you going to give us that ere song?"
"Yes. I'll be danged if I burnish your sabre, if you don't sing."
"Tear an' ages! ain't I composing it? Av I was Tommy Moore, I couldn't be
quicker."
"Well, come along, my hearty; let's hear it."
"Oh, murther!" said Mike, draining the pot to its last few drops, which he
poured pathetically upon the grass before him; and then having emptied the
ashes from his pipe, he heaved a deep sigh, as though to say life had no
pleasures in store for him. A brief pause followed, after which, to the
evident delight of his expectant audience, he began the following song, to
the popular air of "Paddy O'Carroll":--
BAD LUCK TO THIS MARCHING.
Air,--Paddy O'Carroll.
Bad luck to this marching,
Pipe-claying, and starching,
How neat one must be to be killed by the French,
I'm sick of parading,
Through wet and cowld wading,
Or standing all night to be shot in a trench.
To the tune of a fife
They dispose of your life,
You surrender your soul to some illigant lilt;
Now, I like Garryowen,
When I hear it at home,
But it's not half so sweet when you're going to be kilt.
Then, though up late and early,
Our pay comes so rarely,
The devil a farthing we've ever to spare;
They say some disaster
Befell the paymaster;
On my conscience, I think that the money's not there.
And just think what a blunder,
They won't let us plunder,
While the convents invite us to rob them, 'tis clear;
Though there isn't a village,
But cries, "Come and pillage,"
Yet we leave all the mutton behind for Mounseer.
Like a sailor that's nigh land,
I long for that island
Where even the kisses we steal if we please;
Where it is no disgrace
If you don't wash your face,
And you've nothing to do but to stand at your ease.
With no sergeant t'abuse us,
We fight to amuse us;
Sure, it's better bate Christians than kick a baboon.
How I'd dance like a fairy
To see ould Dunleary,
And think twice ere I'd leave it to be a dragoon!
"There's a sweet little bit for you," said Mike, as he concluded; "thrown
off as aisy as a game at football."
"I say, Mr. Free, the captain's looking for you; he's just received
despatches from the camp, and wants his horses."
"In that case, gentlemen, I must take my leave of you; with the more
regret, too, that I was thinking of treating you to a supper this evening.
You needn't be laughing; it's in earnest I am. Coming, sir, coming!"
shouted he, in a louder tone, answering some imaginary call, as an excuse
for his exit.
When he appeared before me, an air of most business-like alacrity had
succeeded to his late appearance, and having taken my orders to get the
horses in readiness, he left me at once, and in less than half an hour we
were upon the road.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
MONSOON IN TROUBLE.
As I rode along towards Fuentes d'Onoro, I could not help feeling provoked
at the absurd circumstances in which I was involved. To be made the subject
of laughter for a whole army was by no means a pleasant consideration; but
what I felt far worse was the possibility that the mention of my name in
connection with a reprimand might reach the ears of those who knew nothing
of the cause.
Mr. Free himself seemed little under the influence of similar feelings; for
when, after a silence of a couple of hours, I turned suddenly towards him
with a half-angry look, and remarked, "You see, sir, what your confounded
blundering has done," his cool reply was,--
"Ah, then! won't Mrs. M'Gra be frightened out of her life when she reads
all about the killed and wounded in your honor's report? I wonder if they
ever had the manners to send my own letter afterwards, when they found out
their mistake!"
"Their mistake, do you say? rather yours! You appear to have a happy
knack of shifting blame from your own shoulders. And do you fancy that
they've nothing else to do than to trouble their heads about your absurd
letters?"
"Faith, it's easily seen you never saw my letter, or you wouldn't be saying
that. And sure, it's not much trouble it would give Colonel Fitzroy or any
o' the staff that write a good hand just to put in a line to Mrs. M'Gra, to
prevent her feeling alarmed about that murthering paper. Well, well; it's
God's blessing! I don't think there's anybody of the name of Mickey Free
high up in the army but myself; so that the family won't be going into
mourning for me on a false alarm."
I had not patience to participate in this view of the case; so that I
continued my journey without speaking. We had jogged along for some time
after dark, when the distant twinkle of the-watch-fires announced our
approach to the camp. A detachment of the Fourteenth formed the advanced
post, and from the officer in command I learned that Power was quartered
at a small mill about half a mile distant; thither I accordingly turned my
steps, but finding that the path which led abruptly down to it was broken
and cut up in many places, I sent Mike back with the horses, and continued
my way alone on foot.
The night was deliciously calm; and as I approached the little rustic mill,
I could not help feeling struck with Power's taste in a billet.
A little vine-clad cottage, built close against a rock, nearly concealed
by the dense foliage around it, stood beside a clear rivulet whose eddying
current supplied water to the mill, and rose in a dew-like spray which
sparkled like gems in the pale moonlight. All was still within, but as I
came nearer I thought I could detect the chords of a guitar. "Can it be,"
thought I, "that Master Fred has given himself up to minstrelsy; or is
it some little dress rehearsal for a serenade? But no," thought I, "that
certainly is not Power's voice." I crept stealthily down the little path,
and approached the window; the lattice lay open, and as the curtain waved
to and fro with the night air, I could see plainly all who were in the
room.
Close beside the window sat a large, dark-featured Spaniard, his hands
crossed upon his bosom and his head inclined heavily forward, the attitude
perfectly denoting deep sleep, even had not his cigar, which remained
passively between his lips, ceased to give forth its blue smoke wreath. At
a little distance from him sat a young girl, who, even by the uncertain
light, I could perceive was possessed of all that delicacy of form and
gracefulness of carriage which characterize her nation.
Her pale features--paler still from the contrast with her jet black
hair and dark costume--were lit up with an expression of animation and
enthusiasm as her fingers swept rapidly and boldly across the strings of a
guitar.
"And you're not tired of it yet?" said she, bending her head downwards
towards one whom I now for the first time perceived.
Reclining carelessly at her feet, his arm leaning upon her chair, while his
hand occasionally touched her taper fingers, lay my good friend, Master
Fred Power. An undress jacket, thrown loosely open, and a black neck-cloth,
negligently knotted, bespoke the easy nonchalance with which he
prosecuted his courtship.
"Do sing it again?" said he, pressing her fingers to his lips.
What she replied, I could not catch; but Fred resumed: "No, no; he never
wakes. The infernal clatter of that mill is his lullaby."
"But your friend will be here soon," said she. "Is it not so?"
"Oh, poor Charley! I'd almost forgotten him. By-the-bye, you mustn't fall
in love with him. There now, do not look angry; I only meant that, as I
knew he'd be desperately smitten, you shouldn't let him fancy he got any
encouragement."
"What would you have me do?" said she, artlessly.
"I have been thinking over that, too. In the first place, you'd better
never let him hear you sing; scarcely ever smile; and as far as possible,
keep out of his sight."
"One would think, Senhor, that all these precautions were to be taken more
on my account than on his. Is he so very dangerous, then?"
"Not a bit of it! Good-looking enough he is, but, only a boy; at the same
time, a devilish bold one! And he'd think no more of springing through that
window and throwing his arms round your neck, the very first moment of his
arrival, than I should of whispering how much I love you."
"How very odd he must be! I'm sure I should like him."
"Many thanks to both for your kind hints; and now to take advantage of
them." So saying, I stepped lightly upon the window-sill, cleared the
miller with one spring, and before Power could recover his legs or
Margeritta her astonishment, I clasped her in my arms, and kissed her on
either cheek.
"Charley! Charley! Damn it, man, it won't do!" cried Fred; while the young
lady, evidently more amused at his discomfiture than affronted at the
liberty, threw herself into a seat, and laughed immoderately.
"Ha! Hilloa there! What is't?" shouted the miller, rousing himself from his
nap, and looking eagerly round. "Are they coming? Are the French coming?"
A hearty renewal of his daughter's laughter was the only reply; while Power
relieved his anxiety by saying,--
"No, no, Pedrillo, not the French; a mere marauding party,--nothing more. I
say, Charley," continued he, in a lower tone, "you had better lose no time
in reporting yourself at headquarters. We'll walk up together. Devilish
awkward scrape, yours."
"Never fear, Fred; time enough for all that. For the present, if you permit
me, I'll follow up my acquaintance with our fair friend here."
"Gently, gently!" said he, with a look of most imposing seriousness. "Don't
mistake her; she's not a mere country girl: you understand?--been bred in a
convent here,--rather superior kind of thing."
"Come, come, Fred, I'm not the man to interfere with you for a moment."
"Good-night, Senhor," said the old miller, who had been waiting patiently
all this time to pay his respects before going.
"Yes, that's it!" cried Power, eagerly. "Good-night, Pedrillo."
"Buonos noches," lisped out Margeritta, with a slight curtsy.
I sprang forward to acknowledge her salutation, when Power coolly
interposed between us, and closing the door after them, placed his back
against it.
"Master Charley, I must read you a lesson--"
"You inveterate hypocrite, don't attempt this nonsense with me. But come,
tell me how long you have been here?"
"Just twenty-four of the shortest hours I ever passed at an outpost. But
listen,--do you know that voice? Isn't it O'Shaughnessy?"
"To be sure it is. Hear the fellow's song."
"My father cared little for shot or shell,
He laughed at death and dangers;
And he'd storm the very gates of hell
With a company of the 'Rangers.'
So sing tow, row, row, row, row," etc.
"Ah, then, Mister Power, it's twice I'd think of returning your visit, if I
knew the state of your avenue. If there's a grand jury in Spain, they might
give you a presentment for this bit of road. My knees are as bare as a
commissary's conscience, and I've knocked as much flesh off my shin-bones
as would make a cornet in the hussars!"
A regular roar of laughter from both of us apprized Dennis of our vicinity.
"And it's laughing ye are? Wouldn't it be as polite just to hold a candle
or lantern for me in this confounded watercourse?"
"How goes it, Major?" cried I, extending my hand to him through the window.
"Charley--Charley O'Malley, my son! I'm glad to see you. It's a hearty
laugh you gave us this morning. My friend Mickey's a pleasant fellow for a
secretary-at-war. But it's all settled now; Crawfurd arranged it for you
this afternoon."
"You don't say so! Pray tell me all about it."
"That's just what I won't; for ye see I don't know it; but I believe old
Monsoon's affair has put everything out of their heads."
"Monsoon's affair! What is that? Out with it, Dennis."
"Faith, I'll be just as discreet about that as your own business. All I can
tell you is, that they brought him up to headquarters this evening with
a sergeant's guard, and they say he's to be tried by court-martial; and
Picton is in a blessed humor about it."
"What could it possibly have been? Some plundering affair, depend on it."
"Faith, you may swear it wasn't for his little charities, as Dr. Pangloss
calls them, they've pulled him up," cried Power.
"Maurice is in high feather about it," said Dennis. "There are five of them
up at Fuentes, making a list of the charges to send to Monsoon; for Bob
Mahon, it seems, heard of the old fellow's doings up the mountains."
"What glorious fun!" said Tower. "Let's haste and join them, boys."
"Agreed," said I. "Is it far from this?"
"Another stage. When we've got something to eat," said the major, "if Power
has any intentions that way--"
"Well, I really did begin to fear Fred's memory was lapsing; but somehow,
poor fellow, smiles have been more in his way than sandwiches lately."
An admonishing look from Power was his only reply, as he walked towards the
door. Bent upon teasing him, however, I continued,--
"My only fear is, he may do something silly."
"Who? Monsoon, is it?"
"No, no. Not Monsoon; another friend of ours."
"Faith, I scarcely thought your fears of old Monsoon were called for. He's
a fox--the devil a less."
"No, no, Dennis. I wasn't thinking of him. My anxieties were for a most
soft-hearted young gentleman,--one Fred Power."
"Charley, Charley!" said Fred, from the door, where he had been giving
directions to his servant about supper. "A man can scarce do a more silly
thing than marry in the army; all the disagreeables of married life, with
none of its better features."
"Marry--marry!" shouted O'Shaughnessy, "upon my conscience, it's
incomprehensible to me how a man can be guilty of it. To be sure, I don't
mean to say that there are not circumstances,--such as half-pay, old age,
infirmity, the loss of your limbs, and the like; but that, with good health
and a small balance at your banker's, you should be led into such an
embarrassment--"
"Men will flirt," said I, interrupting; "men will press taper fingers, look
into bright eyes, and feel their witchery; and although the fair owners be
only quizzing them half the time, and amusing themselves the other, and
though they be the veriest hackneyed coquettes--"
"Did you ever meet the Dalrymple girls, Dennis?" said Fred, with a look I
shall never forget.
What the reply was I cannot tell. My shame and confusion were overwhelming,
and Power's victory complete.
"Here comes the prog," cried Dennis, as Power's servant entered with a very
plausible-looking tray, while Fred proceeded to place before us a strong
army of decanters.
Our supper was excellent, and we were enjoying ourselves to the utmost,
when an orderly sergeant suddenly opened the door, and raising his hand to
his cap, asked if Major Power was there.
"A letter for you, sir."
"Monsoon's writing, by Jove! Come, boys, let us see what it means. What a
hand the old fellow writes! The letters look all crazy, and are tumbling
against each other on every side. Did you ever see anything half so tipsy
as the crossing of that t?"
"Read it. Read it out, Fred!"
Tuesday Evening.
Dear Power,--I'm in such a scrape! Come up and see me at
once, bring a little sherry with you, and we'll talk over what's to be
done.
Yours ever,
B. MONSOON.
Quarter-General.
We resolved to finish our evening with the major; so that, each having
armed himself with a bottle or two, and the remnants of our supper, we set
out towards his quarters, under the guidance of the orderly. After a sharp
walk of half an hour, we reached a small hut, where two sentries of the
Eighty-eighth were posted at the door.
O'Shaughnessy procured admittance for us, and in we went. At a small table,
lighted by a thin tallow candle, sat old Monsoon, who, the weather being
hot, had neither coat nor wig on; an old cracked china tea-pot, in which
as we found afterwards he had mixed a little grog, stood before him, and a
large mass of papers lay scattered around on every side,--he himself being
occupied in poring over their contents, and taking occasional draughts from
his uncouth goblet.
As we entered noiselessly, he never perceived us, but continued to mumble
over, in a low tone, from the documents before him:--
"Upon my life, it's like a dream to me! What infernal stuff this brandy
is!"
CHARGE No. 8.--For conduct highly unbecoming an officer and
a gentleman, in forcing the cellar of the San Nicholas convent at
Banos, taking large quantities of wine therefrom, and subsequently
compelling the prior to dance a bolero, thus creating a riot, and
tending to destroy the harmony between the British and the Portuguese,
so strongly inculcated to be preserved by the general orders.
"Destroy the harmony! Bless their hearts! How little they know of it! I've
never passed a jollier night in the Peninsula! The prior's a trump, and
as for the bolero, he would dance it. I hope they say nothing about my
hornpipe."
CHARGE No. 9.--For a gross violation of his duty as an officer, in
sending a part of his brigade to attack and pillage the alcalde of
Banos; thereby endangering the public peace of the town, being a
flagrant breach of discipline and direct violation of the articles of
war.
"Well, I'm afraid I was rather sharp on the alcalde, but we did him no harm
except the fright. What sherry the fellow had! 't would have been a sin to
let it fall into the hands of the French."
CHARGE No. 10.--For threatening, on or about the night of the
3d, to place the town of Banos under contribution, and subsequently
forcing the authorities to walk in procession before him, in absurd
and ridiculous costumes.
"Lord, how good it was! I shall never forget the old alcalde! One of my
fellows fastened a dead lamb round his neck, and told him it was the golden
fleece. The commander-in-chief would have laughed himself if he had been
there. Picton's much too grave,--never likes a joke."
CHARGE No. 11.--For insubordination and disobedience, in refusing
to give up his sword, and rendering it necessary for the Portuguese
guard to take it by force,--thereby placing himself in a
situation highly degrading to a British officer.
"Didn't I lay about me before they got it! Who's that? Who's laughing
there? Ah, boys, I'm glad to see you! How are you, Fred? Well, Charley,
I've heard of your scrape; very sad thing for so young a fellow as you are.
I don't think you'll be broke; I'll do what I can. I'll see what I can do
with Picton; we are very old friends, were at Eton together."
"Many thanks, Major; but I hear your own affairs are not flourishing.
What's all this court-martial about?"
"A mere trifle; some little insubordination in the legion. Those Portuguese
are sad dogs. How very good of you, Fred, to think of that little supper."
While the major was speaking, his servant, with a dexterity the fruit of
long habit, had garnished the table with the contents of our baskets, and
Monsoon, apologizing for not putting on his wig, sat down among us with a
face as cheerful as though the floor was not covered with the charges of
the court-martial to be held on him.
As we chatted away over the campaign and its chances, Monsoon seemed little
disposed to recur to his own fortunes. In fact, he appeared to suffer much
more from what he termed my unlucky predicament than from his own mishaps.
At the same time, as the evening wore on, and the sherry began to tell upon
him, his heart expanded into its habitual moral tendency, and by an easy
transition, he was led from the religious association of convents to the
pleasures of pillaging them.
"What wine they have in their old cellars! It's such fun drinking it out of
great silver vessels as old as Methuselah. 'There's much treasure in the
house of the righteous,' as David says; and any one who has ever sacked a
nunnery knows that."
"I should like to have seen that prior dancing the bolero," said Power.
"Wasn't it good, though! He grew jealous of me, for I performed a hornpipe.
Very good fellow the prior; not like the alcalde,--there was no fun in him.
Lord bless him! he'll never forget me."
"What did you do with him, Major?"
"Well, I'll tell you; but you mustn't let it be known, for I see they have
not put it in the court-martial. Is there no more sherry there? There, that
will do; I'm always contented. 'Better a dry morsel with quietness,' as
Moses says. Ay, Charley, never forget that 'a merry heart is just like
medicine.' Job found out that, you know."
"Well, but the alcalde, Major."
"Oh! the alcalde, to be sure. These pious meditations make me forget
earthly matters."
"This old alcalde at Banos, I found out, was quite spoiled by Lord
Wellington. He used to read all the general orders, and got an absurd
notion in his head that because we were his allies, we were not allowed to
plunder. Only think, he used to snap his fingers at Beresford, didn't care
twopence about the legion, and laughed outright at Wilson. So, when I was
ordered down there, I took another way with him. I waited till night-fall,
ordered two squadrons to turn their jackets, and sent forward one of my
aides-de-camp, with a few troopers, to the alcalde's house. They galloped
into the courtyard, blowing trumpets and making an infernal hubbub. Down
came the alcalde in a passion. 'Prepare quarters quickly, and rations for
eight hundred men.'
"'Who dares to issue such an order?' said he.
"The aide-de-camp whispered one word in his ear, and the old fellow
grew pale as death. 'Is he here; is he coming,--is he coming?' said he,
trembling from head to foot.
"I rode in myself at this moment looking thus,--
"'O est le malheureux?' said I, in French,--you know I speak French like
Portuguese."
"Devilish like, I've no doubt," muttered Power.
"'Pardon, gracias eccellenza!' said the alcalde, on his knees."
"Who the deuce did he take you for, Major?"
"You shall hear; you'll never guess, though. Lord, I shall never forget it!
He thought I was Marmont; my aide-de-camp told him so."
One loud burst of laughter interrupted the major at this moment, and it was
some considerable time before he could continue his narrative.
"And do you really mean," said I, "that you personated the Duke de Raguse?"
"Did I not, though? If you had only seen me with a pair of great mustaches,
and a drawn sabre in my hand, pacing the room up and down in presence of
the assembled authorities. Napoleon himself might have been deceived. My
first order was to cut off all their heads; but I commuted the sentence
to a heavy fine. Ah, boys, if they only understood at headquarters how to
carry on a war in the Peninsula, they'd never have to grumble in England
about increased taxation! How I'd mulet the nunneries! How I'd grind the
corporate towns! How I'd inundate the country with exchequer bills! I'd
sell the priors at so much a head, and put the nuns up to auction by the
dozen."
"You sacrilegious old villain! But continue the account of your exploits."
"Faith, I remember little more. After dinner I grew somewhat mellow, and
a kind of moral bewilderment, which usually steals over me about eleven
o'clock, induced me to invite the alcalde and all the aldermen to come and
sup. Apparently, we had a merry night of it, and when morning broke,
we were not quite clear in our intellects. Hence came that infernal
procession; for when the alcalde rode round the town with a paper cap, and
all the aldermen after him, the inhabitants felt offended, it seems, and
sent for a large Guerilla force, who captured me and my staff, after a very
vigorous resistance. The alcalde fought like a trump for us, for I promised
to make him Prefect of the Seine; but we were overpowered, disarmed, and
carried off. The remainder you can read in the court-martial, for you may
think that after sacking the town, drinking all night, and fighting in the
morning, my memory was none of the clearest."
"Did you not explain that you were not the marshal-general?"
"No, faith, I know better than that; they'd have murdered me had they known
their mistake. They brought me to headquarters in the hope of a great
reward, and it was only when they reached this that they found out I
was not the Duke de Raguse; so you see, boys, it's a very complicated
business."
"'Gad, and so it is," said Power, "and an awkward one, too."
"He'll be hanged, as sure as my name's Dennis!" vociferated O'Shaughnessy,
with an energy that made the major jump from his chair. "Picton will hang
him!"
"I'm not afraid," said Monsoon; "they know me so well. Lord bless you,
Beresford couldn't get on without me!"
"Well, Major," said I, "in any case, you certainly take no gloomy nor
desponding view of your case."
"Not I, boy. You know what Jeremiah says: 'a merry heart is a continual
feast;' and so it is. I may die of repletion, but they'll never find me
starved with sorrow."
"And, faith, it's a strange thing!" muttered O'Shaughnessy, thinking aloud;
"a most extraordinary thing! An honest fellow would be sure to be hanged;
and there's that old rogue, that's been melting down more saints and
blessed Virgins than the whole army together, he'll escape. Ye'll see he
will!"
"There goes the patrol," said Fred; "we must start."
"Leave the sherry, boys; you'll be back again. I'll have it put up
carefully."
We could scarcely resist a roar of laughter as we said, "Good-night."
"Adieu, Major," said I; "we shall meet soon."
So saying, I followed Power and O'Shaughnessy towards their quarters.
"Maurice has done it beautifully!" said Power. "Pleasant revelations the
old fellow will make on the court-martial, if he only remembers what we've
heard to-night! But here we are, Charley; so good-night, and remember, you
breakfast with me to-morrow."
CHAPTER XXIX.
THE CONFIDENCE.
"I have changed the venue, Charley," said Power, as he came into my room
the following morning,--"I've changed the venue, and come to breakfast with
you."
I could not help smiling as a certain suspicion crossed my mind; perceiving
which, he quickly added,--
"No, no, boy! I guess what you're thinking of. I'm not a bit jealous in
that quarter. The fact is, you know, one cannot be too guarded."
"Nor too suspicious of one's friends, apparently."
"A truce with quizzing. I say, have you reported yourself?"
"Yes; and received this moment a most kind note from the general. But it
appears I'm not destined to have a long sojourn among you, for I'm desired
to hold myself in readiness for a journey this very day."
"Where the deuce are they going to send you now?"
"I'm not certain of my destination. I rather suspect there are despatches
for Badajos. Just tell Mike to get breakfast, and I'll join you
immediately."
When I walked into the little room which served as my salon, I found
Power pacing up and down, apparently wrapped in meditation.
"I've been thinking, Charley," said he, after a pause of about ten
minutes,--"I've been thinking over our adventures in Lisbon. Devilish
strange girl that senhora! When you resigned in my favor, I took it for
granted that all difficulty was removed. Confound it! I no sooner began to
profit by your absence, in pressing my suit, than she turned short round,
treated me with marked coldness, exhibited a hundred wilful and capricious
fancies, and concluded one day by quietly confessing to me you were the
only man she cared for."
"You are not serious in all this, Fred?" said I.
"Ain't I though, by Jove! I wish to Heaven I were not! My dear Charley,
the girl is an inveterate flirt,--a decided coquette. Whether she has a
particle of heart or not, I can't say; but certainly her greatest pleasure
is to trifle with that of another. Some absurd suspicion that you were in
love with Lucy Dashwood piqued her vanity, and the anxiety to recover a
lapsing allegiance led her to suppose herself attached to you, and made her
treat all my advances with the most frigid indifference or wayward caprice;
the more provoking," continued he, with a kind of bitterness in his tone,
"as her father was disposed to take the thing favorably; and, if I must say
it, I felt devilish spooney about her myself.
"It was only two days before I left, that in a conversation with Don
Emanuel, he consented to receive my addresses to his daughter on my
becoming lieutenant-colonel. I hastened back with delight to bring her the
intelligence, and found her with a lock of hair on the book before her,
over which she was weeping. Confound me, if it was not yours! I don't
know what I said, nor what she replied; but when we parted, it was with a
perfect understanding we were never to meet again. Strange girl! She came
that evening, put her arm within mine as I was walking alone in the garden,
and half in jest, half in earnest, talked me out of all my suspicions, and
left me fifty times more in love with her than ever. Egad! I thought I used
to know something about women, but here is a chapter I've yet to read.
Come, now, Charley, be frank with me; tell me all you know."
"My poor Fred, if you were not head and ears in love, you would see as
plainly as I do that your affairs prosper. And after all, how invariable
is it that the man who has been the veriest flirt with women,--sighing,
serenading, sonneteering, flinging himself at the feet of every pretty girl
he meets with,--should become the most thorough dupe to his own feelings
when his heart is really touched. Your man of eight-and-thirty is always
the greatest fool about women."
"Confound your impertinence! How the devil can a fellow with a mustache not
stronger that a Circassian's eyebrow read such a lecture to me?"
"Just for the very reason you've mentioned. You glide into an attachment
at my time of life; you fall in love at yours."
"Yes," said Power, musingly, "there is some truth in that. This flirting is
sad work. It is just like sparring with a friend; you put on the gloves in
perfect good humor, with the most friendly intentions of exchanging a few
amicable blows; you find yourself insensibly warm with the enthusiasm of
the conflict, and some unlucky hard knock decides the matter, and it ends
in a downright fight.
"Few men, believe me, are regular seducers; and among those who behave
'vilely' (as they call it), three-fourths of the number have been more
sinned against than sinning. You adventure upon love as upon a voyage to
India. Leaving the cold northern latitudes of first acquaintance behind
you, you gradually glide into the warmer and more genial climate of
intimacy. Each day you travel southward shortens the miles and the hours of
your existence; so tranquil is the passage, and so easy the transition, you
suffer no shock by the change of temperature about you. Happy were it for
us that in our courtship, as in our voyage, there were some certain Rubicon
to remind us of the miles we have journeyed! Well were it if there were
some meridian in love!"
"I'm not sure, Fred, that there is not that same shaving process they
practise on the line, occasionally performed for us by parents and
guardians at home; and I'm not certain that the iron hoop of old Neptune is
not a pleasanter acquaintance than the hair-trigger of some indignant
and fire-eating brother. But come, Fred, you have not told me the most
important point,--how fare your fortunes now; or in other words, what are
your present prospects as regards the senhora?"
"What a question to ask me! Why not request me to tell you where Soult will
fight us next, and when Marmont will cross the frontier? My dear boy, I
have not seen her for a week, an entire week,--seven full days and nights,
each with their twenty-four hours of change and vacillation."
"Well, then, give me the last bulletin from the seat of war; that at least
you can do. Tell me how you parted."
"Strangely enough. You must know we had a grand dinner at the villa the
day before I left; and when we adjourned for our coffee to the garden, my
spirits were at the top of their bent. Inez never looked so beautiful,
never was one half so gracious; and as she leaned upon my arm, instead
of following the others towards the little summer-house, I turned, as if
inadvertently, into a narrow, dark alley that skirts the lake."
"I know it well; continue."
Power reddened slightly, and went on:--
"'Why are we taking this path?' said Donna Inez; 'this is, surely, not a
short way?'
"'Oh, I wished to make my adieux to my old friends the swans. You know I go
to-morrow.'
"'Ah, that's true,' added she. 'I'd quite forgotten it.'
"This speech was not very encouraging; but as I felt myself in for the
battle, I was not going to retreat at the skirmish. 'Now or never,' thought
I. I'll not tell you what I said. I couldn't, if I would. It is only with
a pretty woman upon one's arm; it is only when stealing a glance at her
bright eyes, as you bend beyond the border of her bonnet,--that you know
what it is to be eloquent. Watching the changeful color of her cheek with
a more anxious heart than ever did mariner gaze upon the fitful sky above
him, you pour out your whole soul in love; you leave no time for doubt, you
leave no space for reply. The difficulties that shoot across her mind you
reply to ere she is well conscious of them; and when you feel her hand
tremble, or see her eyelids fall, like the leader of a storming party when
the guns slacken in their fire, you spring boldly forward in the breach,
and blind to every danger around you, rush madly on, and plant your
standard upon the walls."
"I hope you allow the vanquished the honors of war," said I, interrupting.
Without noticing my observation, he continued:--
"I was on my knee before her, her hand passively resting in mine, her eyes
bent upon me softly and tearfully--"
"The game was your own, in fact."
"You shall hear.
"'Have we stood long enough thus, Senhor?' said she, bursting into a fit of
laughter.
"I sprang to my legs in anger and indignation.
"'There, don't be passionate; it is so tiresome. What do you call that tree
there?'
"'It is a tulip-tree,' said I, coldly.
"'Then, to put your gallantry to the test, do climb up there and pluck me
that flower. No, the far one. If you fall into the lake and are drowned,
why it would put an end to this foolish interview.'
"'And if not?' said I.
"'Oh, then I shall take twelve hours to consider of it; and if my decision
be in your favor, I'll give you the flower ere you leave to-morrow.'
"It's somewhat about thirty years since I went bird-nesting, and hang me,
if a tight jacket and spurs are the best equipment for climbing a tree; but
up I went, and, amidst a running fire of laughter and quizzing, reached the
branch and brought it down safely.
"Inez took especial care to avoid me the rest of the evening. We did not
meet until breakfast the following morning. I perceived then that she wore
the flower in her belt; but, alas! I knew her too well to augur favorably
from that; besides that, instead of any trace of sorrow or depression at my
approaching departure, she was in high spirits, and the life of the party.
'How can I manage to speak with her?' said I to myself. 'But one word,--I
already anticipate what it must be; but let the blow fall--anything is
better than this uncertainty.'
"'The general and the staff have passed the gate, sir,' said my servant at
this moment.
"'Are my horses ready?'
"'At the door, sir; and the baggage gone forward.'
"I gave Inez one look--
"'Did you say more coffee?' said she, smiling.
"I bowed coldly, and rose from the table. They all assembled upon the
terrace to see me ride away.
"'You'll let us hear from you,' said Don Emanuel.
"'And pray don't forget the letter to my brother,' cried old Madame Forjas.
"Twenty similar injunctions burst from the party, but not a word said Inez.
"'Adieu, then!' said I. 'Farewell.'
"'Adios! Go with God!' chorused the party.
"'Good-by, Senhora,' said I. 'Have you nothing to tell me ere we part?'
"'Not that I remember,' said she, carelessly. 'I hope you'll have good
weather.'
"'There is a storm threatening,' said I, gloomily.
"'Well, a soldier cares little for a wet jacket.'
"'Adieu!' said I, sharply, darting at her a look that spoke my meaning.
"'Farewell!' repeated she, curtsying slightly, and giving one of her
sweetest smiles.
"I drove the spurs into my horse's flanks, but holding him firmly on the
curb at the same moment, instead of dashing forward, he bounded madly in
the air.
"'What a pretty creature!' said she, as she turned towards the house; then
stopping carelessly, she looked round,--
"'Should you like this bouquet?'
"Before I could reply, she disengaged it from her belt, and threw it
towards me. The door closed behind her as she spoke. I galloped on to
overtake the staff, et voil tout. Now, Charley, read my fate for me, and
tell me what this portends."
"I confess I only see one thing certain in the whole."
"And that is?" said Power.
"That Master Fred Power is more irretrievably in love than any gentleman on
full pay I ever met with."
"By Jove, I half fear as much! Is that orderly waiting for you, Charley?
Who do you want my man?"
"Captain O'Malley, sir. General Crawfurd desires to see you at headquarters
immediately."
"Come, Charley, I'm going towards Fuentes. Take your cap; we'll walk down
together."
So saying, we cantered towards the village, where we separated,--Power to
join some Fourteenth men stationed there on duty, and I to the general's
quarters to receive my orders.
CHAPTER XXX.
THE CANTONMENT.
Soon after this the army broke up from Caja, and went into cantonments
along the Tagus, the headquarters being at Portalegre. We were here joined
by four regiments of infantry lately arrived from England, and the 12th
Light Dragoons. I shall not readily forget the first impression created
among our reinforcements by the habits of our life at this period.
[Illustration: A HUNTING TURN-OUT IN THE PENINSULA.]
Brimful of expectation, they had landed at Lisbon, their minds filled with
all the glorious expectancy of a brilliant campaign; sieges, storming, and
battle-fields floated before their excited imagination. Scarcely,
however, had they reached the camp, when these illusions were dissipated.
Breakfasts, dinners, private theatricals, pigeon matches, formed our daily
occupation. Lord Wellington's hounds threw off regularly twice a week;
and here might be seen every imaginable species of equipment, from the
artillery officer mounted on his heavy troop horse, to the infantry
subaltern on a Spanish jennet. Never was anything more ludicrous than our
turn-out. Every quadruped in the army was put into requisition. And even
those who rolled not from their saddles from sheer necessity, were most
likely to do so from laughing at their neighbors. The pace may not have
equalled Melton, nor the fences have been as stubborn as in Leicestershire,
but I'll be sworn there was more laughter, more fun, and more merriment,
in one day with us, than in a whole season with the best organized pack in
England. With a lively trust that the country was open and the leaps easy,
every man took the field. Indeed, the only anxiety evinced at all, was to
appear at the meet in something like jockey fashion, and I must confess
that this feeling was particularly conspicuous among the infantry. Happy
the man whose kit boasted a pair of cords or buck skins; thrice happy he
who sported a pair of tops. I myself was in that enviable position, and
well remember with what pride of heart I cantered up to cover in all the
superior clat of my costume, though, if truth were to be spoken, I doubt
if I should have passed muster among my friends of the "Blazers." A round
cavalry jacket and a foraging cap with a hanging tassel were the strange
accompaniments of my more befitting nether garments. Whatever our costumes,
the scene was a most animated one. Here the shell-jacket of a heavy dragoon
was seen storming the fence of a vineyard; there the dark green of a
rifleman was going the pace over the plain. The unsportsmanlike figure of
a staff officer might be observed emerging from a drain, while some
neck-or-nothing Irishman, with light infantry wings, was flying at every
fence before him, and overturning all in his way. The rules and regulations
of the service prevailed not here; the starred and gartered general, the
plumed and aiguilletted colonel obtained but little deference and less
mercy from his more humble subaltern. In fact, I am half disposed to think
that many an old grudge of rigid discipline or severe duty met with its
retribution here. More than once have I heard the muttered sentences around
me which boded like this,--
"Go the pace, Harry, never flinch it! There's old Colquhoun--take him in
the haunches; roll him over!"
"See here, boys--watch how I'll scatter the staff--Beg your pardon,
General, hope I haven't hurt you. Turn about--fair play--I have taught
you to take up a position now."
I need scarcely say there was one whose person was sacred from all such
attacks. He was well mounted upon a strong, half-breed horse; rode always
foremost, following the hounds with the same steady pertinacity with which
he would have followed the enemy, his compressed lip rarely opening for a
laugh when even the most ludicrous misadventure was enacting before him;
and when by chance he would give way, the short ha! ha! was over in a
moment, and the cold, stern features were as fixed and impassive as before.
All the excitement, all the enthusiasm of a hunting-field, seemed powerless
to turn his mind from the pre-occupation which the mighty interests he
presided over, exacted. I remember once an incident which, however trivial
in itself, is worth recording as illustrative of what I mean. We were going
along at a topping pace, the hounds, a few fields in advance, were hidden
from our view by a small beech copse. The party consisted of not more than
six persons, one of whom was Lord Wellington himself. Our run had been a
splendid one, and as we were pursuing the fox to earth, every man of us
pushed his horse to his full stride in the hot enthusiasm of such a moment.
"This way, my lord, this way," said Colonel Conyers, an old Melton man, who
led the way. "The hounds are in the valley; keep to the left." As no reply
was made, after a few moments' pause Conyers repeated his admonition, "You
are wrong, my lord, the hounds are hunting yonder."
"I know it!" was the brief answer given, with a shortness that almost
savored of asperity; for a second or two not a word was spoken.
"How far is Niza, Gordon?" inquired Lord Wellington.
"About five leagues, my lord," replied the astonished aide-de-camp.
"That's the direction, is it not?"
"Yes, my lord."
"Let's go over and inspect the wounded."
No more was said, and before a second was given for consideration, away
went his lordship, followed by his aide-de-camp, his pace the same
stretching gallop, and apparently feeling as much excitement, as he dashed
onwards towards the hospital, as though following in all the headlong
enthusiasm of a fox chase.
Thus passed our summer; a life of happy ease and recreation succeeding to
the harassing fatigues and severe privations of the preceding campaign.
Such are the lights and shadows of a soldier's life; such the checkered
surface of his fortunes. Constituting, by their very change, that buoyant
temperament, that happy indifference, which enables him to derive its full
enjoyment from each passing incident of his career.
While thus we indulged in all the fascinations of a life of pleasure, the
rigid discipline of the army was never for a moment forgotten. Reviews,
parades, and inspections were of daily occurrence, and even a superficial
observer could not fail to detect that under this apparent devotion to
amusement and enjoyment, our commander-in-chief concealed a deep stroke of
his policy.
The spirits of both men and officers, broken, in spite of their successes,
by the incessant privations they had endured, imperatively demanded this
period of rest and repose. The infantry, many of whom had served in the
ill-fated campaign of Walcharen, wore still suffering from the effects of
the intermittent fever. The cavalry, from deficient forage, severe marches,
and unremitting service, were in great part unfit for duty. To take the
field under circumstances like these was therefore impossible; and with the
double object of restoring their wonted spirit to his troops, and checking
the ravages which sickness and the casualties of war had made within his
ranks, Lord Wellington embraced the opportunity of the enemy's inaction to
take up his present position on the Tagus.
But while we were enjoying all the pleasures of a country life, enhanced
tenfold by daily association with gay and cheerful companions, the
master-mind, whose reach extended from the profoundest calculations of
strategy to minutest details of military organization, was never idle.
Foreseeing that a period of inaction, like the present, must only be like
the solemn calm that preludes the storm, he prepared for the future by
those bold conceptions and unrivalled combinations which were to guide him
through many a field of battle and of danger to end his career of glory in
the liberation of the Peninsula.
The failure of the attack upon Badajos had neither damped his ardor nor
changed his views; and he proceeded to the investment of Ciudad Rodrigo
with the same intense determination of uprooting the French occupation in
Spain by destroying their strongholds and cutting off their resources.
Carrying aggressive war in one hand, he turned the other towards the
maintenance of those defences which, in the event of disaster or defeat,
must prove the refuge of the army.
To the lines of Torres Vedras he once more directed his attention. Engineer
officers were despatched thither; the fortresses were put into repair; the
bridges broken or injured during the French invasion were restored; the
batteries upon the Tagus were rendered more effective, and furnaces for
heating shot were added to them.
The inactivity and apathy of the Portuguese government but ill corresponded
with his unwearied exertions; and despite of continual remonstrances and
unceasing representations, the bridges over the Leira and Alva were left
unrepaired, and the roads leading to them, so broken as to be almost
impassable, might seriously have endangered the retreat of the army, should
such a movement be deemed necessary.
It was in the first week of September. I was sent with despatches for the
engineer officer in command at the lines, and during the fortnight of my
absence, was enabled for the first time to examine those extraordinary
defences which, for the space of thirty miles, extended over a country
undulating in hill and valley, and presenting, by a succession of natural
and artificial resources, the strongest and most impregnable barrier that
has ever been presented against the advance of a conquering army.
CHAPTER XXXI.
MICKEY FREE'S ADVENTURE.
When I returned to the camp, I found the greatest excitement prevailing on
all sides. Each day brought in fresh rumors that Marmont was advancing
in force; that sixty thousand Frenchmen were in full march upon Ciudad
Rodrigo, to raise the blockade, and renew the invasion of Portugal.
Intercepted letters corroborated these reports; and the Guerillas who
joined us spoke of large convoys which they had seen upon the roads from
Salamanca and Tamanes.
Except the light division, which, under the command of Crawfurd, were
posted upon the right of the Aguada, the whole of our army occupied the
country from El Bodon to Gallegos; the Fourth Division being stationed at
Fuente Guenaldo, where some intrenchments had been hastily thrown up.
To this position Lord Wellington resolved upon retreating, as affording
points of greater strength and more capability of defence than the other
line of road, which led by Almeida upon the Coa. Of the enemy's intentions
we were not long to remain in doubt; for on the morning of the 24th, a
strong body were seen descending from the pass above Ciudad Rodrigo, and
cautiously reconnoitring the banks of the Aguada. Far in the distance a
countless train of wagons, bullock-cars, and loaded mules were seen winding
their slow length along, accompanied by several squadrons of dragoons.
Their progress was slow, but as evening fell they entered the gates of
the fortress; and the cheering of the garrison mixing with the strains
of martial music, faint from distance, reached us where we lay upon the
far-off heights of El Bodon. So long as the light lasted, we could perceive
fresh troops arriving; and even when the darkness came on, we could detect
the position of the reinforcing columns by the bright watch-fires which
gleamed along the plain.
By daybreak we were under arms, anxiously watching for the intentions of
our enemy, which soon became no longer dubious. Twenty-five squadrons of
cavalry, supported by a whole division of infantry, were seen to defile
along the great road from Ciudad Rodrigo to Guenaldo. Another column,
equally numerous, marched straight upon Espeja; nothing could be more
beautiful, nothing more martial, than their appearance: emerging from a
close mountain gorge, they wound along the narrow road and appeared upon
the bridge of the Aguada just as the morning sun was bursting forth,
its bright beams tipping the polished cuirassiers and their glittering
equipments, they shone in their panoply like the gay troop of some ancient
tournament. The lancers of Berg, distinguished by their scarlet dolmans
and gorgeous trappings, were followed by the Cuirassiers of the Guard,
who again were succeeded by the chasseurs  cheval, their bright steel
helmets and light-blue uniforms, their floating plumes and dappled
chargers, looking the very beau idal of light horsemen; behind, the dark
masses of the infantry pressed forward and deployed into the plain; while,
bringing up the rear, the rolling din, like distant thunder, announced the
"dread artillery."
On they came, the seemingly interminable line converging on to that one
spot upon whose summit now we assembled a force of scarcely ten thousand
bayonets.
While this brilliant panorama was passing before our eyes, we ourselves
were not idle. Orders had been sent to Picton to come up from the left with
his division. Alten's cavalry and a brigade of artillery were sent to the
front, and every preparation which the nature of the ground admitted was
made to resist the advance of the enemy. While these movements on either
side occupied some hours, the scene was every moment increasing in
interest. The large body of cavalry was now seen forming into columns of
attack. Nine battalions of infantry moved up to their support, and forming
into columns, echelons, and squares, performed before us all the manoeuvres
of a review with the most admirable precision and rapidity; but from these
our attention was soon taken by a brilliant display upon our left. Here,
emerging from the wood which flanked the Aguada, were now to be seen the
gorgeous staff of Marmont himself. Advancing at a walk, they came forward
amidst the vivas of the assembled thousands, burning with ardor and
thirsting for victory. For a moment, as I looked, I could detect the
marshal himself, as, holding his plumed hat above his head, he returned the
salute of a lancer regiment, who proudly waved their banners as he passed;
but, hark, what are those clanging sounds which, rising high above the
rest, seem like the war-cry of a warrior?
"I can't mistake those tones," said a bronzed old veteran beside me; "those
are the brass bands of the Imperial Guard. Can Napoleon be there? See,
there they come!" As he spoke, the head of a column emerged from the wood,
and deploying as they came, poured into the plain. For above an hour that
mighty tide flowed on, and before noon a force of sixty thousand men was
collected in the space beneath us.
I was not long to remain an unoccupied spectator of this brilliant display,
for I soon received orders to move down with my squadron to the support of
the Eleventh Light Dragoons, who were posted at the base of the hill. The
order at the moment was anything but agreeable, for I was mounted upon a
hack pony, on which I had ridden over from Crawfurd's Division early in the
morning, and suspecting that there might be some hot work during the day,
had ordered Mike to follow with my horse. There was no time, however, for
hesitation, and I moved my men down the slope in the direction of the
skirmishers.
The position we occupied was singularly favorable,--our flanks defended on
either side by brushwood, we could only be assailed in front; and here,
notwithstanding our vast inferiority of force, we steadily awaited the
attack. As I rode from out the thick wood, I could not help feeling
surprised at the sounds which greeted me. Instead of the usual low and
murmuring tones, the muttered sentences which precede a cavalry advance,--a
roar of laughter shook the entire division, while exclamations burst from
every side around me: "Look at him now!" "They have him, by heavens, they
have him!" "Well done, well done!" "How the fellow rides!" "He's hit, he's
hit!" "No, no!" "Is he down?" "He's down!"
A loud cheer rent the air at this moment, and I reached the front in time
to learn, the reason of all this excitement. In the wide plain before me a
horseman was seen, having passed the ford of the Aguada, to advance at
the top of his speed towards the British lines. As he came nearer, it was
perceived that he was accompanied by a led horse, and apparently with total
disregard of the presence of an enemy, rode boldly and carelessly forward.
Behind him rode three lancers, their lances couched, their horses at speed;
the pace was tremendous, and the excitement intense: for sometimes, as the
leading horseman of the pursuit neared the fugitive, he would bend suddenly
upon the saddle, and swerving to the right or the left, totally evade him,
while again at others, with a loud cry of bold defiance, rising in his
stirrups, he would press on, and with a shake of his bridle that bespoke
the jockey, almost distance the enemy.
"That must be your fellow, O'Malley; that must be your Irish groom!" cried
a brother officer. There could be no doubt of it. It was Mike himself.
"I'll be hanged, if he's not playing with them!" said Baker. "Look at the
villain! He's holding in; that's more than the Frenchmen are doing. Look!
look at the fellow on the gray horse! He has flung his trumpet to his back,
and drawn his sabre."
A loud cheer burst from the French lines; the trumpeter was gaining at
every stride. Mike had got into deep ground, and the horses would not keep
together. "Let the brown horse go! Let him go, man!" shouted the dragoons,
while I re-echoed the cry with my utmost might. But not so, Mike held
firmly on, and spurring madly, he lifted his horse at each stride, turning
from time to time a glance at his pursuer. A shout of triumph rose from the
French side; tin; trumpeter was beside him; his arm was uplifted; the sabre
above his head. A yell broke from the British, and with difficulty could
the squadron be restrained. For above a minute the horses went side by
side, but the Frenchman delayed his stroke until he could get a little in
the front. My excitement had rendered me speechless; if a word could have
saved my poor fellow, I could not have spoken. A mist seemed to gather
across my eyes, and the whole plain and its peopled thousands danced before
my vision.
"He's down!" "He's down, by heavens!" "No! no, no!" "Look there! Nobly
done!" "Gallant fellow!" "He has him! he has him, by ----!" A cheer that
rent the very air above us broke from the squadrons, and Mike galloped in
among us, holding the Frenchman by the throat with one hand; the bridle of
his horse he firmly grasped with his own in the other.
[Illustration: MIKE CAPTURING THE TRUMPETER.]
"How was it? How did he do it?"
"He broke his sword-arm with a blow, and the Frenchman's sabre fell to the
earth."
"Here he is, Mister Charles; and musha, but it's trouble he gave me to
catch him! And I hope your honor won't be displeased at me losing the brown
horse. I was obliged to let him go when the thief closed on me; but sure,
there he is! May I never, if he's not galloping into the lines by himself!"
As he spoke, my brown charger came cantering up to the squadrons, and took
his place in the line with the rest.
I had scarcely time to mount my horse, amidst a buzz of congratulations,
when our squadron was ordered to the front. Mixed up with detachments from
the Eleventh and Sixteenth, we continued to resist the enemy for about two
hours.
Our charges were quick, sharp, and successive, pouring in our numbers
wherever the enemy appeared for a moment to be broken, and then retreating
under cover of our infantry when the opposing cavalry came down upon us in
overwhelming numbers.
Nothing could be more perfect than the manner in which the different troops
relieved each other during this part of the day. When the French squadrons
advanced, ours met them as boldly. When the ground became no longer
tenable, we broke and fell back, and the bayonets of the infantry arrested
their progress. If the cavalry pressed heavily upon the squares, ours came
up to the relief, and as they were beaten back, the artillery opened upon
them with an avalanche of grape-shot.
I have seen many battles of greater duration and more important in result;
many there have been in which more tactic was displayed, and greater
combinations called forth,--but never did I witness a more desperate
hand-to-hand conflict than on the heights of El Bodon.
Baffled by our resistance, Montbrun advanced with the Cuirassiers of the
Guard. Riding down our advanced squadrons, they poured upon us like some
mighty river, overwhelming all before it, and charged, cheering, up the
heights. Our brave troopers were thrown back upon the artillery, and many
of them cut down beside the guns. The artillerymen and the drivers shared
the same fate, and the cannon were captured. A cheer of exultation burst
from the French, and their vivas rent the air. Their exultation was
short-lived, and that cheer their death-cry; for the Fifth Foot, who had
hitherto lain concealed in the grass, sprang madly to their feet, their
gallant Major Ridge at their head. With a yell of vengeance they rushed
upon the foe; the glistening bayonets glanced amidst the cavalry of the
French; the troops pressed hotly home; and while the cuirassiers were
driven down the hill, the guns were recaptured, limbered up, and brought
away. This brilliant charge was the first recorded instance of cavalry
being assailed by infantry in line.
But the hill could no longer be held; the French were advancing on either
flank; overwhelming numbers pressed upon the front, and retreat was
unavoidable. The cavalry were ordered to the rear, and Picton's Division,
throwing themselves into squares, covered the retreating movement.
The French dragoons bore down upon every face of those devoted battalions;
the shouts of triumph cheered them as the earth trembled beneath their
charge,--but the British infantry, reserving their fire until the sabres
clanked with the bayonet, poured in a shattering volley, and the cry of the
wounded and the groans of the dying rose from the smoke around them.
Again and again the French came on; and the same fate ever awaited then.
The only movement in the British squares was closing up the spaces as their
comrades fell or sank wounded to the earth.
At last reinforcements came up from the left; the whole retreated across
the plain, until as they approached Guenaldo, our cavalry, having
re-formed, came to their aid with one crushing charge, which closed the
day.
That same night Lord Wellington fell back, and concentrating his troops
within a narrow loop of land bounded on either flank by the Coa, awaited
the arrival of the light division, which joined us at three in the morning.
The following day Marmont again made a demonstration of his force, but no
attack followed. The position was too formidable to be easily assailed, and
the experience of the preceding day had taught him that, however inferior
in numbers, the troops he was opposed to were as valiant as they were ably
commanded.
Soon after this, Marmont retired on the valley of the Tagus. Dorsenne also
fell back, and for the present at least, no further effort was made to
prosecute the invasion of Portugal.
CHAPTER XXXII.
THE SAN PETRO.
"Not badly wounded, O'Malley, I hope?" said General Crawfurd, as I waited
upon him soon after the action.
I could not help starting at the question, while he repeated it, pointing
at the same time to my left shoulder, from which a stream of blood was now
flowing down my coat-sleeve.
"I never noticed it, sir, till this moment. It can't be of much
consequence, for I have been on horseback the entire day, and never felt
it."
"Look to it at once, boy; a man wants all his blood for this campaign. Go
to your quarters. I shall not need you for the present; so pray see the
doctor at once."
As I left the general's quarters, I began to feel sensible of pain, and
before a quarter of an hour had elapsed, had quite convinced myself that my
wound was a severe one. The hand and arm were swollen, heavy, and distended
with hemorrhage beneath the skin, my thirst became great, and a cold,
shuddering sensation passed over me from time to time.
I sat down for a moment upon the grass, and was just reflecting within
myself what course I should pursue, when I heard the tramp of feet
approaching. I looked up, and perceived some soldiers in fatigue dresses,
followed by a few others who, from their noiseless gestures and sad
countenances, I guessed were carrying some wounded comrade to the rear.
"Who is it, boys?" cried I.
"It's the major, sir, the Lord be good to him!" said a hardy-looking
Eighty-eighth man, wiping his eye with the cuff of his coat as he spoke.
"Not your major? Not Major O'Shaughnessy?" said I, jumping up and rushing
forward towards the litter. Alas, too true, it was the gallant fellow
himself! There he lay, pale and cold; his bloodless cheek and parted lips
looking like death itself. A thin blue rivulet trickled from his forehead,
but his most serious wound appeared to be in the side; his coat was open,
and showed a mass of congealed and clotted blood, from the midst of which,
with every motion of the way, a fresh stream kept welling upward. Whether
from the shock or my loss of blood or from both together, I know not, but I
sank fainting to the ground.
It would have needed a clearer brain and a cooler judgment than I possessed
to have conjectured where I was, and what had occurred to me, when next
I recovered my senses. Weak, fevered, and with a burning thirst, I lay,
unable to move, and could merely perceive the objects which lay within the
immediate reach of my vision. The place was cold, calm, and still as the
grave. A lamp, which hung high above my head, threw a faint light around,
and showed me, within a niche of the opposite wall, the figure of a
gorgeously dressed female; she appeared to be standing motionless, but as
the pale light flickered upon her features, I thought I could detect the
semblance of a smile. The splendor of her costume and the glittering gems
which shone upon her spotless robe gleamed through the darkness with an
almost supernatural brilliancy, and so beautiful did she look, so calm her
pale features, that as I opened and shut my eyes and rubbed my lids, I
scarcely dared to trust to my erring senses, and believe it could be
real. What could it mean? Whence this silence; this cold sense of awe
and reverence? Was it a dream; was it the fitful vision of a disordered
intellect? Could it be death? My eyes were riveted upon that beautiful
figure. I essayed to speak, but could not; I would have beckoned her
towards me, but my hands refused their office. I felt I know not what charm
she possessed to calm my throbbing brain and burning heart; but as I turned
from the gloom and darkness around to gaze upon her fair brow and unmoved
features, I felt like the prisoner who turns from the cheerless desolation
of his cell, and looks upon the fair world and the smiling valleys lying
sunlit and shadowed before him.
Sleep at length came over me; and when I awoke, the day seemed breaking,
for a faint gray tint stole through a stained-glass window, and fell in
many colored patches upon the pavement. A low muttering sound attracted me;
I listened, it was Mike's voice. With difficulty raising myself upon one
arm, I endeavored to see more around me. Scarcely had I assumed this
position, when my eyes once more fell upon the white-clad figure of the
preceding night. At her feet knelt Mike, his hands clasped, and his head
bowed upon his bosom. Shall I confess my surprise, my disappointment! It
was no other than an image of the blessed Virgin, decked out in all the
gorgeous splendor which Catholic piety bestows upon her saints. The
features, which the imperfect light and my more imperfect faculties had
endowed with an expression of calm, angelic beauty, were, to my waking
senses, but the cold and barren mockery of loveliness; the eyes, which my
excited brain gifted with looks of tenderness and pity, stared with no
speculation in them; yet contrasting my feelings of the night before, full
as they were of, their deceptions, with my now waking thoughts, I longed
once more for that delusion which threw a dreamy pleasure over me, and
subdued the stormy passions of my soul into rest and repose.
"Who knows," thought I, "but he who kneels yonder feels now as I did then?
Who can tell how little the cold, unmeaning reality before him resembles
the spiritualized creation the fervor of his love and the ardor of his
devotion may have placed upon that altar? Who can limit or bound the depth
of that adoration for an object whose attributes appeal not only to every
sentiment of the heart, but also to every sense of the brain? I fancy
that I can picture to myself how these tinselled relics, these tasteless
waxworks, changed by the magic of devotion and of dread, become to the
humble worshipper images of loveliness and beauty. The dim religious light;
the reverberating footsteps echoed along those solemn aisles; the vaulted
arches, into whose misty heights the sacred incense floats upward, while
the deep organ is pealing its notes of praise or prayer,--these are no
slight accessories to all the pomp and grandeur of a church whose forms and
ceremonial, unchanged for ages and hallowed by a thousand associations,
appeal to the mind of the humblest peasant or the proudest noble by all the
weaknesses as by all the more favored features of our nature."
How long I might have continued to meditate in this strain I know not, when
a muttered observation from Mike turned the whole current of my thoughts.
His devotion over, he had seated himself upon the steps of the altar, and
appeared to be resolving some doubts within himself concerning his late
pious duties.
"Masses is dearer here than in Galway. Father Rush would be well pleased
at two-and-sixpence for what I paid three doubloons for, this morning.
And sure it's droll enough. How expensive an amusement it is to kill the
French! Here's half a dollar I gave for the soul of a cuirassier that I
kilt yesterday, and nearly twice as much for an artilleryman I cut down at
the guns; and because the villain swore like a heythen, Father Pedro told
me he'd cost more nor if he died like a decent man."
At these words he turned suddenly round towards the Virgin, and crossing
himself devoutly, added,--
And sure it's yourself knows if it's fair to make me pay for devils that
don't know their duties; and after all, if you don't understand English nor
Irish, I've been wasting my time here this two hours."
"I say, Mike, how's my friend the major! How's Major O'Shaughnessy?"
"Charmingly, sir. It was only loss of blood that ailed him. A thief with
a pike--one of the chaps they call Poles, bekase of the long sticks they
carry with them--stuck the major in the ribs; but Doctor Quill--God reward
him! he's a great doctor and a funny divil too--he cured him in no time."
"And where is he now, Mike?"
"Just convanient, in a small chapel off the sacristy; and throuble enough
we have to keep him quiet. He gave up the confusion of roses, and took
to punch; and faith, it isn't hymns nor paslams [psalms] he's singing all
night. And they had me there, mixing materials and singing songs, till I
heard the bell for matins; and what between the punch and the prayers, I
never closed my eyes."
"What do they call this convent?"
"It is a hard word, I misremember. It's something like saltpetre. But how's
your honor? It's time to ask."
"Much better, Mike, much better. But as I see that either your drink or
your devotion seems to have affected your nerves, you'd better lie down for
an hour or two. I shall not want you."
"That's just what I can't; for you see I'm making a song for this evening.
The Rangers has a little supper, and I'm to be there; and though I've made
one, I'm not sure it'll do. May be your honor would give me your opinion
about it?"
"With all my heart, Mike; let's hear it."
"Arrah, is it here, before the Virgin and the two blessed saints that's
up there in the glass cases? But sure, when they make an hospital of the
place, and after the major's songs last night--"
"Exactly so, Mike; out with it."
"Well, Ma'am," said he, turning towards the Virgin, "as I suspect you don't
know English, may be you'll think it's my offices I'm singing. So, saving
your favor, here it is."
MR. FREE'S SONG.
AIR,--"Arrah, Catty, now can't you be asy?"
Oh, what stories I'll tell when my sodgering's o'er,
And the gallant Fourteenth is disbanded;
Not a drill nor parade will I hear of no more,
When safely in Ireland landed.
With the blood that I spilt, the Frenchmen I kilt,
I'll drive the young girls half crazy;
And some cute one will cry, with a wink of her eye,
"Mister Free, now why can't you be asy?"
I'll tell how we routed the squadrons in fight,
And destroyed them all at "Talavera,"
And then I'll just add how we finished the night,
In learning to dance the "bolera;"
How by the moonshine we drank raal wine,
And rose next day fresh as a daisy;
Then some one will cry, with a look mighty sly,
"Arrah, Mickey, now can't you lie asy?"
I'll tell how the nights with Sir Arthur we spent,
Around a big fire in the air too,
Or may be enjoying ourselves in a tent,
Exactly like Donnybrook fair too.
How he'd call out to me: "Pass the wine, Mr. Free,
For you're a man never is lazy!"
Then some one will cry, with a wink of her eye,
"Arrah, Mickey, dear, can't you be asy?"
I'll tell, too, the long years in fighting we passed,
Till Mounseer asked Bony to lead him;
And Sir Arthur, grown tired of glory at last,
Begged of one Mickey Free to succeed him.
"But, acushla," says I, "the truth is I'm shy!
There's a lady in Ballymacrazy!
And I swore on the book--" He gave me a look,
And cried: "Mickey, now can't you be asy?"
"Arrah, Mickey, now can't you be asy?" sang out a voice in chorus, and
the next moment Dr. Quill himself made his appearance.
"Well, O'Malley, is it a penitential psalm you're singing, or is my friend
Mike endeavoring to raise your spirits with a Galway sonata?"
"A little bit of his own muse, Doctor, nothing more; but tell me, how goes
it with the major,--is the poor fellow out of danger?"
"Except from the excess of his appetite, I know of no risk he runs. His
servant is making gruel for him all day in a thing like the grog-tub of a
frigate. But you've heard the news,--Sparks has been exchanged. He came
here last night; but the moment he caught sight of me, he took his
departure. Begad, I'm sure he'd rather pass a month in Verdun than a week
in my company!"
"By-the-bye, Doctor, you never told me how this same antipathy of Sparks
for you had its origin."
"Sure I drove him out of the Tenth before he was three weeks with the
regiment."
"Ay, I remember; you began the story for me one night on the retreat from
the Coa, but something broke it off in the middle."
"Just so, I was sent for to the rear to take off some gentleman's legs that
weren't in dancing condition; but as there's no fear of interruption now,
I'll finish the story. But first, let us have a peep at the wounded. What
beautiful anatomists they are in the French artillery! Do you feel the
thing I have now in my forceps? There,--don't jump,--that's a bit of the
brachial nerve most beautifully displayed. Faith, I think I'll give Mike a
demonstration."
"Oh, Mister Quill, dear! Oh, Doctor, darling!"
"Arrah, Mickey, now can't ye be asy?" sang out Maurice, with a perfect
imitation of Mike's voice and manner.
"A little lint here! Bend your arm,--that's it--Don't move your fingers.
Now, Mickey, make me a cup of coffee with a glass of brandy in it. And now,
Charley, for Sparks. I believe I told you what kind of fellows the Tenth
were,--regular out-and-outers. We hadn't three men in the regiment that
were not from the south of Ireland,--the bocca Corkana on their lips, fun
and devilment in their eyes, and more drollery and humbug in their hearts
than in all the messes in the service put together. No man had any chance
among them if he wasn't a real droll one; every man wrote his own songs and
sang them too. It was no small promotion could tempt a fellow to exchange
out of the corps. You may think, then, what a prize your friend Sparks
proved to us; we held a court-martial upon him the week after he joined. It
was proved in evidence that he had never said a good thing in his life,
and had about as much notion of a joke as a Cherokee has of the Court of
Chancery; and as to singing, Lord bless you, he had a tune with wooden
turns to it,--it was most cruel to hear; and then the look of him, those
eyes, like dropsical oysters, and the hair standing every way, like a field
of insane flax, and the mouth with a curl in it like the slit in the side
of a fiddle. A pleasant fellow that for a mess that always boasted the
best-looking chaps in the service.
"'What's to be done with him?' said the major; 'shall we tell him we are
ordered to India, and terrify him about his liver?'
"'Or drill him into a hectic fever?'
"'Or drink him dry?'
"'Or get him into a fight and wing him?'
"'Oh, no,' said I, 'leave him to me; we'll laugh him out of the corps.'
"'Yes, we'll leave him to you, Maurice,' said the rest.
"And that day week you might read in the 'Gazette,' 'Pierce Flynn
O'Haygerty, to be Ensign, 10th Foot, vice Sparks, exchanged.'"
"But how was it done, Maurice; you haven't told me that."
"Nothing easier. I affected great intimacy with Sparks, bemoaned our hard
fate, mutually, in being attached to such a regiment: 'A damnable corps
this,--low, vulgar fellows, practical jokes; not the kind of thing one
expects in the army. But as for me, I've joined it partly from necessity.
You, however, who might be in a crack regiment, I can't conceive your
remaining in it.'
"'But why did you join, Doctor?' said he; 'what necessity could have
induced you?'
"'Ah, my friend,' said I, 'that is the secret,--that is the hidden
grief that must lie buried in my own bosom.'
"I saw that his curiosity was excited, and took every means to increase it
farther. At length, as if yielding to a sudden impulse of friendship, and
having sworn him to secrecy, I took him aside, and began thus,--
"'I may trust you, Sparks, I feel I may; and when I tell you that my
honor, my reputation, my whole fortune is at stake, you will judge of the
importance of the trust.'
"The goggle eyes rolled fearfully, and his features exhibited the most
craving anxiety to hear my story.
"'You wish to know why I left the Fifty-sixth. Now I'll tell you; but mind,
you're pledged, you're sworn, never to divulge it.'
"'Honor bright.'
"'There, that's enough; I'm satisfied. It was a slight infraction of the
articles of war; a little breach of the rules and regulations of the
service; a trifling misconception of the mess code,--they caught me one
evening leaving the mess with--What do you think in my pocket? But
you'll never tell! No, no, I know you'll not; eight forks and a
gravy-spoon,--silver forks every one of them. There now,' said I, grasping
his hand, 'you have my secret; my fame and character are in your hands, for
you see they made me quit the regiment,--a man can't stay in a corps where
he is laughed at.'
"Covering my face with my handkerchief, as if to conceal my shame, I turned
away, and left Sparks to his meditations. That same evening we happened to
have some strangers at mess; the bottle was passing freely round, and as
usual the good spirits of the party at the top of their bent, when suddenly
from the lower end of the table, a voice was heard demanding, in tones of
the most pompous importance, permission to address the president upon a
topic where the honor of the whole regiment was concerned.
"'I rise, gentlemen,' said Mr. Sparks, 'with feelings the most painful;
whatever may have been the laxity of habit and freedom of conversation
habitual in this regiment, I never believed that so flagrant an instance as
this morning came to my ears--'
"'Oh, murder!' said I. 'Oh, Sparks, darling, sure you're not going to
tell?'
"'Doctor Quill,' replied he, in an austere tone, 'it is impossible for me
to conceal it.'
"'Oh, Sparks, dear, will you betray me?'
"I gave him here a look of the most imploring entreaty, to which he replied
by one of unflinching sternness.
"'I have made up my mind, sir,' continued he; 'it is possible the officers
of this corps may look more leniently than I do upon this transaction; but
know it they shall.'
"'Out with it, Sparks; tell it by all means!' cried a number of voices; for
it was clear to every one, by this time, that he was involved in a hoax.
"Amidst, therefore, a confused volley of entreaty on one side, and my
reiterated prayers for his silence, on the other, Sparks thus began:--
"'Are you aware, gentlemen, why Dr. Quill left the Fifty-sixth?'
"'No, no, no!' rang from all sides; 'let's have it!'
"'No, sir,' said he, turning towards me, 'concealment is impossible; an
officer detected with the mess-plate in his pocket--'
"They never let him finish, for a roar of laughter shook the table from one
end to the other; while Sparks, horror-struck at the lack of feeling and
propriety that could make men treat such a matter with ridicule, glared
around him on every side.
"'Oh, Maurice, Maurice!' cried the major, wiping his eyes, 'this is too
bad; this is too bad!'
"'Gracious Heaven!' screamed Sparks, 'can you laugh at it?'
"'Laugh at it!' re-echoed the paymaster, 'God grant I only don't burst a
blood-vessel!' And once more the sounds of merriment rang out anew, and
lasted for several minutes.
"'Oh, Maurice Quill,' cried an old captain, 'you've been too heavy on the
lad. Why, Sparks, man, he's been humbugging you.'
"Scarcely were the words spoken when he sprang from the room. The whole
truth flashed at once upon his mind; in an instant he saw that he had
exposed himself to the merciless ridicule of a mess-table and that all
peace for him, in that regiment at least, was over.
"We got a glorious fellow in exchange for him; and Sparks descended into
a cavalry regiment,--I ask your pardon, Charley,--where, as you are well
aware, sharp wit and quick intellect are by no means indispensable. There
now, don't be angry or you'll do yourself harm. So good-by, for an hour or
two."
CHAPTER XXXIII.
THE COUNT'S LETTER.
O'Shaughnessy's wound, like my own, was happily only formidable from the
loss of blood. The sabre or the lance are rarely, indeed, so death-dealing
as the musket or the bayonet; and the murderous fire from a square of
infantry is far more terrific in its consequences than the heaviest charge
of a cavalry column. In a few weeks, therefore, we were once more about and
fit for duty; but for the present the campaign was ended. The rainy season
with its attendant train of sickness and sorrow set in. The troops were
cantoned along the line of the frontier,--the infantry occupying the
villages, and the cavalry being stationed wherever forage could be
obtained.
The Fourteenth were posted at Avintas, but I saw little of them. I was
continually employed upon the staff; and as General Crawfurd's activity
suffered no diminution from the interruption of the campaign, rarely passed
a day without eight or nine hours on horseback.
The preparations for the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo occupied our undivided
attention. To the reduction of this fortress and of Badajos, Lord
Wellington looked as the most important objects, and prosecuted his plans
with unremitting zeal. To my staff appointment I owed the opportunity of
witnessing that stupendous feature of war, a siege; and as many of my
friends formed part of the blockading force, I spent more than one night in
the trenches. Indeed, except for this, the tiresome monotony of life was
most irksome at this period. Day after day the incessant rain poured down.
The supplies were bad, scanty, and irregular; the hospitals crowded with
sick; field-sports impracticable; books there were none; and a dulness and
spiritless depression prevailed on every side. Those who were actively
engaged around Ciudad Rodrigo had, of course, the excitement and interest
which the enterprise involved: but even there the works made slow progress.
The breaching artillery was defective in every way: the rain undermined the
faces of the bastions; the clayey soil sank beneath the weight of the heavy
guns; and the storms of one night frequently destroyed more than a whole
week's labor had effected.
Thus passed the dreary months along; the cheeriest and gayest among us
broken in spirit, and subdued in heart by the tedium of our life. The very
news which reached us partook of the gloomy features of our prospects. We
heard only of strong reinforcements marching to the support of the French
in Estramadura. We were told that the Emperor, whose successes in Germany
enabled him to turn his entire attention to the Spanish campaign, would
himself be present in the coming spring, with overwhelming odds and a firm
determination to drive us from the Peninsula.
In that frame of mind which such gloomy and depressing prospects are well
calculated to suggest, I was returning one night to my quarters at Mucia,
when suddenly I beheld Mike galloping towards me with a large packet in his
hand, which he held aloft to catch my attention. "Letters from England,
sir," said he, "just arrived with the general's despatches." I broke the
envelope at once, which bore the war-office seal, and as I did so, a
perfect avalanche of letters fell at my feet. The first which caught my eye
was an official intimation from the Horse Guards that the Prince Regent had
been graciously pleased to confirm my promotion to the troop, my commission
to bear date from the appointment, etc., etc. I could not help feeling
struck, as my eye ran rapidly across the lines, that although the letter
came from Sir George Dashwood's office, it contained not a word of
congratulation nor remembrance on his part, but was couched in the usual
cold and formal language of an official document. Impatient, however, to
look over my other letters, I thought but little of this; so, throwing them
hurriedly into my sabretasche, I cantered on to my quarters without delay.
Once more alone in silence, I sat down to commune with my far-off friends,
and yet with all my anxiety to hear of home, passed several minutes in
turning over the letters, guessing from whom they might have come, and
picturing to myself their probable contents. "Ah, Frank Webber, I recognize
your slap-dash, bold hand without the aid of the initials in the corner;
and this--what can this be?--this queer, misshapen thing, representing
nothing save the forty-seventh proposition of Euclid, and the address
seemingly put on with a cat's-tail dipped in lampblack? Yes, true enough,
it is from Mister Free himself. And what have we here? This queer, quaint
hand is no new acquaintance; how many a time have I looked upon it as the
ne plus ultra of caligraphy! But here is one I'm not so sure of. Who
could have written this bolt-upright, old-fashioned superscription, not
a letter of which seems on speaking terms with its neighbor? The very O
absolutely turns its back upon the M in O'Malley, and the final Y wags his
tail with a kind of independent shake, as if he did not care a curse for
his predecessors! And the seal, too,--surely I know that griffin's head,
and that stern motto, Non rogo sed capio. To be sure, it is Billy
Considine's, the count himself. The very paper, yellow and time-stained,
looks coeval with his youth; and I could even venture to wager that his
sturdy pen was nibbed half a century since. I'll not look farther among
this confused mass of three-cornered billets, and long, treacherous-looking
epistles, the very folding of which denote the dun. Here goes for the
count!" So saying to myself, I drew closer to the fire, and began the
following epistle:--
O'MALLEY CASTLE, November 3.
Dear Charley,--Here we sit in the little parlor with your last
letter, the "Times," and a big map before us, drinking your health,
and wishing you a long career of the same glorious success you have
hitherto enjoyed. Old as I am--eighty-two or eighty-three (I forget
which) in June--I envy you with all my heart. Luck has stood
to you, my boy; and if a French sabre or a bayonet finish you now,
you've at least had a splendid burst of it. I was right in my opinion
of you, and Godfrey himself owns it now,--a lawyer, indeed! Bad
luck to them! we've had enough of lawyers. There's old Hennesy,--honest
Jack, as they used to call him,--that your uncle trusted
for the last forty years, has raised eighteen thousand pounds on the
title-deeds, and gone off to America. The old scoundrel! But it's
no use talking; the blow is a sore one to Godfrey, and the gout
more troublesome than ever. Drumgold is making a motion in
Chancery about it, to break the sale, and the tenants are in open
rebellion and swear they'll murther a receiver, if one is sent down
among them. Indeed, they came in such force into Galway during
the assizes, and did so much mischief, that the cases for trial were
adjourned, and the judges left with a military escort to protect them.
This, of course, is gratifying to our feelings; for, thank Providence,
there is some good in the world yet. Kilmurry was sold last week
for twelve thousand. Andy Blake would foreclose the mortgage,
although we offered him every kind of satisfaction. This has done
Godfrey a deal of harm; and some pitiful economy--taking only
two bottles of claret after his dinner--has driven the gout to his
head. They've been telling him he'd lengthen his days by this, and
I tried it myself, and, faith, it was the longest day I ever spent in
my life. I hope and trust you take your liquor like a gentleman and
an Irish gentleman.
Kinshela, we hear, has issued an execution against the house and
furniture; but the attempt to sell the demesne nearly killed your
uncle. It was advertised in a London paper, and an offer made for it
by an old general whom you may remember when down here. Indeed,
if I mistake not, he was rather kind to you in the beginning. It
would appear he did not wish to have his name known, but we found
him out, and such a letter as we sent him! It's little liking he'll
have to buy a Galway gentleman's estate over his head, that same Sir
George Dashwood! Godfrey offered to meet him anywhere he
pleased, and if the doctor thought he could bear the sea voyage,
he'd even go over to Holyhead; but the sneaking fellow sent an
apologetic kind of a letter, with some humbug excuse about very
different motives, etc. But we've done with him, and I think he
with us.
When I had read thus far, I laid down the letter, unable to go on; the
accumulated misfortunes of one I loved best in the world, following so fast
one upon another, the insult--unprovoked, gratuitous insult--to him upon
whom my hopes of future happiness so much depended, completely overwhelmed
me. I tried to continue. Alas, the catalogue of evils went on; each line
bore testimony to some farther wreck of fortune, some clearer evidence of a
ruined house.
All that my gloomiest and darkest forebodings had pictured was come to
pass; sickness, poverty, harassing unfeeling creditors, treachery, and
ingratitude were goading to madness and despair a spirit whose kindliness
of nature was unequalled. The shock of blasted fortunes was falling upon
the dying heart; the convictions which a long life had never brought
home--that men were false and their words a lie--were stealing over the
man upon the brink of the grave; and he who had loved his neighbor like a
brother was to be taught, at the eleventh hour, that the beings he trusted
were perjured and forsworn.
A more unsuitable adviser than Considine, in difficulties like these, there
could not be; his very contempt for all the forms of law and justice was
sufficient to embroil my poor uncle still farther; so that I resolved at
once to apply for leave, and if refused, and no other alternative offered,
to leave the service. It was not without a sense of sorrow bordering on
despair, that I came to this determination. My soldier's life had become
a passion with me. I loved it for its bold and chivalrous enthusiasm, its
hour of battle and strife, its days of endurance and hardship, its trials,
its triumphs; its very reverses were endeared by those they were shared
with; and the spirit of adventure and the love of danger--that most
exciting of all gambling--had now entwined themselves in my very nature. To
surrender all these at once, and to exchange the daily, hourly enthusiasm
of a campaign for the prospects now before me, was almost maddening. But
still a sustaining sense of duty of what I owed to him, who, in his love,
had sacrificed all for me, overpowered every other consideration. My mind
was made up.
Father Rush's letter was little more than a recapitulation of the count's.
Debt, distress, sickness, and the heart-burnings of altered fortunes filled
it; and when I closed it, I felt like one over all whose views in life a
dark and ill-omened cloud was closing forever. Webber's I could not read;
the light and cheerful raillery of a friend would have seemed, at such a
time, like the cold, unfeeling sarcasm of an enemy. I sat down at last to
write to the general, enclosing my application for leave, and begging of
him to forward it, with a favorable recommendation, to headquarters.
This done, I lay down upon my bed, and overcome by fatigue and fretting,
fell asleep to dream of my home and those I had left there; which,
strangely too, were presented to my mind with all the happy features that
made them so dear to my infancy.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
THE TRENCHES.
"I have not had time, O'Malley, to think of your application," said
Crawfurd, "nor is it likely I can for a day or two. Read that." So saying,
he pushed towards me a note, written, in pencil, which ran thus:--
CIUDAD RODRIGO, December 18.
Dear C.,--Fletcher tells me that the breaches will be practicable
by to-morrow evening, and I think so myself. Come over, then, at
once, for we shall not lose any time.
Yours,           W.
"I have some despatches for your regiment, but if you prefer coming along
with me--"
"My dear General, dare I ask for such a favor?"
"Well, come along; only remember that, although my division will be
engaged, I cannot promise you anything to do. So now, get your horses
ready; let's away."
It was in the afternoon of the following day that we rode into the large
plain before Ciudad Rodrigo, and in which the allied armies were now
assembled to the number of twelve thousand men. The loud booming of
the siege artillery had been heard by me for some hours before; but
notwithstanding this prelude and my own high-wrought expectations, I
was far from anticipating the magnificent spectacle which burst upon my
astonished view. The air was calm and still; a clear, blue, wintry sky
stretched overhead, but below, the dense blue smoke of the deafening guns
rolled in mighty volumes along the earth, and entirely concealed the lower
part of the fortress; above this the tall towers and battlemented parapets
rose into the thin, transparent sky like fairy palaces. A bright flash of
flame would now and then burst forth from the walls, and a clanging crash
of the brass metal be heard; but the unceasing roll of our artillery nearly
drowned all other sounds, save when a loud cheer would burst from the
trenches, while the clattering fall of masonry, and the crumbling stones
as they rolled down, bespoke the reason of the cry. The utmost activity
prevailed on all sides; troops pressed forward to the reliefs in the
parallels; ammunition wagons moved to the front; general and staff officers
rode furiously about the plain; and all betokened that the hour of attack
was no longer far distant.
While all parties were anxiously awaiting the decision of our chief, the
general order was made known, which, after briefly detailing the necessary
arrangements, concluded with the emphatic words, "Ciudad Rodrigo must be
stormed to-night." All speculation as to the troops to be engaged in this
daring enterprise was soon at an end; for with his characteristic sense of
duty, Lord Wellington made no invidious selection, but merely commanded
that the attack should be made by whatever divisions might chance to be
that day in the trenches. Upon the Third and Light Divisions, therefore,
this glorious task devolved. The former was to attack the main breach;
to Crawfurd's Division was assigned the, if possible, more difficult
enterprise of carrying the lesser one; while Pack's Portuguese Brigade were
to menace the convent of La Caridad by a feint attack, to be converted into
a real one, if circumstances should permit.
The decision, however matured and comprehensive in all its details, was
finally adopted so suddenly that every staff officer upon the ground was
actively engaged during the entire evening in conveying the orders to the
different regiments. As the day drew to a close, the cannonade slackened on
either side, a solitary gun would be heard at intervals, and in the calm
stillness around, its booming thunder re-echoed along the valleys of the
Sierra; but as the moon rose and night set in, these were no longer heard,
and a perfect stillness and tranquillity prevailed around. Even in the
trenches, crowded with armed and anxious soldiers, not a whisper was heard;
and amidst that mighty host which filled the plain, the tramp of a patrol
could be distinctly noted, and the hoarse voice of the French sentry upon
the walls, telling that all was well in Ciudad Rodrigo.
The massive fortress, looming larger as its dark shadow stood out from the
sky, was still as the grave; while in the greater breach a faint light was
seen to twinkle for a moment, and then suddenly to disappear, leaving all
gloomy and dark as before.
Having been sent with orders to the Third Division, of which the
Eighty-eighth formed a part, I took the opportunity of finding out
O'Shaughnessy, who was himself to lead an escalade party in M'Kinnon's
Brigade. He sprang towards me as I came forward, and grasping my hand with
a more than usual earnestness, called out, "The very man I wanted! Charley,
my boy, do us a service now!"
Before I could reply, he continued in a lower tone, "A young fellow of
ours, Harry Beauclerc, has been badly wounded in the trenches; but by some
blunder, his injury is reported as a slight one, and although the poor
fellow can scarcely stand, he insists upon going with the stormers."
"Come here, Major, come here!" cried a voice at a little distance.
"Follow me, O'Malley," cried O'Shaughnessy, moving in the direction of the
speaker.
By the light of a lantern we could descry two officers kneeling upon the
ground; between them on the grass lay the figure of a third, upon whose
features, as the pale light fell, the hand of death seemed rapidly
stealing. A slight froth, tinged with blood, rested on his lip, and the
florid blood which stained the buff facing of his uniform indicated that
his wound was through the lungs.
"He has fainted," said one of the officers, in a low tone.
"Are you certain it is fainting?" said the other, in a still lower.
"You see how it is, Charley," said O'Shaughnessy; "this poor boy must be
carried to the rear. Will you then, like a kind fellow, hasten back to
Colonel Campbell and mention the fact. It will kill Beauclerc should any
doubt rest upon his conduct, if he ever recover this."
While he spoke, four soldiers of the regiment placed the wounded officer in
a blanket. A long sigh escaped him, and he muttered a few broken words.
"Poor fellow, it's his mother he's talking of! He only joined a month
since, and is a mere boy. Come, O'Malley, lose no time. By Jove! it is too
late; there goes the first rocket for the columns to form. In ten minutes
more the stormers must fall in."
"What's the matter, Giles?" said he to one of the officers, who had stopped
the soldiers as they were moving off with their burden,--"what is it?"
"I have been cutting the white tape off his arm; for if he sees it on
waking, he'll remember all about the storming."
"Quite right--thoughtfully done!" said the other; "but who is to lead his
fellows? He was in the forlorn hope."
"I'll do it," cried I, with eagerness. "Come, O'Shaughnessy, you'll not
refuse me."
"Refuse you, boy!" said he, grasping my hand within both of his, "never!
But you must change your coat. The gallant Eighty-eighth will never mistake
their countryman's voice. But your uniform would be devilish likely to get
you a bayonet through it; so come back with me, and we'll make you a Ranger
in no time."
"I can give your friend a cap."
"And I," said the other, "a brandy flask, which, after all, is not the
worst part of a storming equipage."
"I hope," said O'Shaughnessy, "they may find Maurice in the rear.
Beauclerc's all safe in his hands."
"That they'll not," said Giles, "you may swear. Quill is this moment in the
trenches, and will not be the last man at the breach."
"Follow me now, lads," said O'Shaughnessy, in a low voice. "Our fellows are
at the angle of this trench. Who the deuce can that be, talking so loud?"
"It must be Maurice," said Giles.
The question was soon decided by the doctor himself, who appeared giving
directions to his hospital-sergeant.
"Yes, Peter, take the tools up to a convenient spot near the breach.
There's many a snug corner there in the ruins; and although we mayn't have
as good an operation-room as in old 'Steevens's,' yet we'll beat them
hollow in cases."
"Listen to the fellow," said Giles, with a shudder. "The thought of his
confounded thumbscrews and tourniquets is worse to me than a French
howitzer."
"The devil a kinder-hearted fellow than Maurice," said O'Shaughnessy, "for
all that; and if his heart was to be known this moment, he'd rather handle
a sword than a saw."
"True for you, Dennis," said Quill, overhearing him, "but we are both
useful in our way, as the hangman said to Lord Clare."
"But should you not be in the rear, Maurice?" said I.
"You are right, O'Malley," said he, in a whisper; "but, you see, I owe the
Cork Insurance Company a spite for making me pay a gout premium, and that's
the reason I'm here. I warned them at the time that their stinginess would
come to no good."
"I say, Captain O'Malley," said Giles, "I find I can't be as good as my
word with you; my servant has moved to the rear with all my traps."
"What is to be done?" said I.
"Is it shaving utensils you want?" said Maurice. "Would a scalpel serve
your turn?"
"No, Doctor, I'm going to take a turn of duty with your fellows to-night."
"In the breach, with the stormers?"
"With the forlorn hope," said O'Shaughnessy. "Beauclerc is so badly wounded
that we've sent him back; and Charley, like a good fellow, has taken his
place."
"Martin told me," said Maurice, "that Beauclerc was only stunned; but,
upon my conscience, the hospital-mates, now-a-days, are no better than the
watchmakers; they can't tell what's wrong with the instrument till they
pick it to pieces. Whiz! there goes a blue light."
"Move on, move on," whispered O'Shaughnessy; "they're telling off the
stormers. That rocket is the order to fall in."
"But what am I to do for a coat?"
"Take mine, my boy," said Maurice, throwing off an upper garment of coarse
gray frieze as he spoke.
"There's a neat bit of uniform," continued he, turning himself round for
our admiration; "don't I look mighty like the pictures of George the First
at the battle of Dettingen!"
A burst of approving laughter was our only answer to this speech, while
Maurice proceeded to denude himself of his most extraordinary garment.
"What, in the name of Heaven, is it?" said I.
"Don't despise it, Charley; it knows the smell of gunpowder as well as any
bit of scarlet in the service;" while he added, in a whisper, "it's the
ould Roscommon Yeomanry. My uncle commanded them in the year '42, and this
was his coat. I don't mean to say that it was new then; for you see it's a
kind of heirloom in the Quill family, and it's not every one I'd be giving
it to."
"A thousand thanks, Maurice," said I, as I buttoned it on, amidst an
ill-suppressed titter of laughter.
"It fits you like a sentry-box," said Maurice, as he surveyed me with a
lantern. "The skirts separate behind in the most picturesque manner; and
when you button the collar, it will keep your head up so high that the
devil a bit you'll see except the blessed moon. It's a thousand pities you
haven't the three-cocked hat with the feather trimming. If you wouldn't
frighten the French, my name's not Maurice. Turn about here till I admire
you. If you only saw yourself in a glass, you'd never join the dragoons
again. And look now, don't be exposing yourself, for I wouldn't have those
blue facings destroyed for a week's pay."
"Ah, then, it's yourself is the darling, Doctor, dear!" said a voice behind
me. I turned round; it was Mickey Free, who was standing with a most
profound admiration of Maurice beaming in every feature of his face. "It's
yourself has a joke for every hour o' the day."
"Get to the rear, Mike, get to the rear with the cattle; this is no place
for you or them."
"Good-night, Mickey," said Maurice.
"Good-night, your honor," muttered Mike to himself; "may I never die till
you set a leg for me."
"Are you dressed for the ball?" said Maurice, fastening the white tape upon
my arm. "There now, my boy, move on, for I think I hear Picton's voice; not
that it signifies now, for he's always in a heavenly temper when any one's
going to be killed. I'm sure he'd behave like an angel, if he only knew the
ground was mined under his feet."
"Charley, Charley!" called out O'Shaughnessy, in a suppressed voice, "come
up quickly!"
"No. 24, John Forbes--here! Edward Gillespie--here!"
"Who leads this party, Major O'Shaughnessy?"
"Mr. Beauclerc, sir," replied O'Shaughnessy, pushing me forward by the arm
while he spoke.
"Keep your people together, sir; spare the powder, and trust to your cold
iron." He grasped my hand within his iron grip, and rode on.
"Who was it, Dennis?" said I.
"Don't you know him, Charley? That was Picton."
CHAPTER XXXV.
THE STORMING OF CIUDAD RODRIGO.
Whatever the levity of the previous moment, the scene before us now
repressed it effectually. The deep-toned bell of the cathedral tolled
seven, and scarcely were its notes dying away in the distance, when the
march of the columns was heard stealing along the ground. A low murmuring
whisper ran along the advanced files of the forlorn hope; stocks were
loosened; packs and knapsacks thrown to the ground; each man pressed his
cap more firmly down upon his brow, and with lip compressed and steadfast
eye, waited for the word to move.
It came at last: the word "March!" passed in whispers from rank to rank,
and the dark mass moved on. What a moment was that as we advanced to the
foot of the breach! The consciousness that at the same instant, from
different points of that vast plain, similar parties were moving on; the
feeling that at a word the flame of the artillery and the flash of steel
would spring from that dense cloud, and death and carnage, in every shape
our imagination can conceive, be dealt on all sides; the hurried, fitful
thought of home; the years long past compressed into one minute's space;
the last adieu of all we've loved, mingling with the muttered prayer to
Heaven, while, high above all, the deep pervading sense that earth has no
temptation strong enough to turn us from that path whose ending must be a
sepulchre!
Each heart was too full for words. We followed noiselessly along the turf,
the dark figure of our leader guiding us through the gloom. On arriving
at the ditch, the party with the ladders moved to the front. Already some
hay-packs were thrown in, and the forlorn hope sprang forward.
All was still and silent as the grave. "Quietly, my men, quietly!" said
M'Kinnon; "don't press." Scarcely had he spoken when a musket whose charge,
contrary to orders, had not been drawn, went off. The whizzing bullet could
not have struck the wall, when suddenly a bright flame burst forth from the
ramparts, and shot upward towards the sky. For an instant the whole scene
before us was bright as noonday. On one side, the dark ranks and glistening
bayonets of the enemy; on the other, the red uniform of the British
columns: compressed like some solid wall, they stretched along the plain.
A deafening roll of musketry from the extreme right announced that the
Third Division was already in action, while the loud cry of our leader, as
he sprang into the trench, summoned us to the charge. The leading sections,
not waiting for the ladders, jumped down, others pressing rapidly behind
them, when a loud rumbling thunder crept along the earth, a hissing,
crackling noise followed, and from the dark ditch a forked and livid
lightning burst like the flame from a volcano, and a mine exploded.
Hundreds of shells and grenades scattered along the ground were ignited at
the same moment; the air sparkled with the whizzing fuses, the musketry
plied incessantly from the walls, and every man of the leading company
of the stormers was blown to pieces. While this dreadful catastrophe was
enacting before our eyes, the different assaults were made on all sides;
the whole fortress seemed girt around with fire. From every part arose the
yells of triumph and the shouts of the assailants. As for us, we stood upon
the verge of the ditch, breathless, hesitating, and horror-struck. A sudden
darkness succeeded to the bright glare, but from the midst of the gloom the
agonizing cries of the wounded and the dying rent our very hearts.
"Make way there! make way! here comes Mackie's party," cried an officer
in the front, and as he spoke the forlorn hope of the Eighty-eighth came
forward at a run; jumping recklessly into the ditch, they made towards the
breach; the supporting division of the stormers gave one inspiring cheer,
and sprang after them. The rush was tremendous; for scarcely had we reached
the crumbling ruins of the rampart, when the vast column, pressing on like
some mighty torrent, bore down upon our rear. Now commenced a scene to
which nothing I ever before conceived of war could in any degree compare:
the whole ground, covered with combustibles of every deadly and destructive
contrivance, was rent open with a crash; the huge masses of masonry bounded
into the air like things of no weight; the ringing clangor of the iron
howitzers, the crackling of the fuses, the blazing splinters, the shouts of
defiance, the more than savage yell of those in whose ranks alone the dead
and the dying were numbered, made up a mass of sights and sounds almost
maddening with their excitement. On we struggled; the mutilated bodies of
the leading files almost filling the way.
By this time the Third Division had joined us, and the crush of our
thickening ranks was dreadful; every moment some well-known leader fell
dead or mortally wounded, and his place was supplied by some gallant fellow
who, springing from the leading files, would scarcely have uttered his
cheer of encouragement, ere he himself was laid low. Many a voice with
whose notes I was familiar, would break upon my ear in tones of heroic
daring, and the next moment burst forth in a death-cry. For above an hour
the frightful carnage continued, fresh troops continually advancing, but
scarcely a foot of ground was made; the earth belched forth its volcanic
fires, and that terrible barrier did no man pass. In turn the bravest and
the boldest would leap into the whizzing flame, and the taunting cheers of
the enemy triumphed in derision at the effort.
"Stormers to the front! Only the bayonet! trust to nothing but the
bayonet!" cried a voice whose almost cheerful accents contrasted strangely
with the dead-notes around, and Gurwood, who led the forlorn hope of
the Fifty-second, bounded into the chasm; all the officers sprang
simultaneously after him; the men pressed madly on; a roll of withering
musketry crashed upon them; a furious shout replied to it. The British,
springing over the dead and dying, bounded like blood-hounds on their prey.
Meanwhile the ramparts trembled beneath the tramp of the light division,
who, having forced the lesser breach, came down upon the flank of the
French. The garrison, however, thickened their numbers, and bravely held
their ground. Man to man now was the combat. No cry for quarter, no
supplicating look for mercy; it was the death struggle of vengeance and
despair. At this instant an explosion louder than the loudest thunder shook
the air; the rent and torn up ramparts sprang into the sky; the conquering
and the conquered were alike the victims; for one of the greatest magazines
had been ignited by a shell; the black smoke, streaked with a lurid flame,
hung above the dead and the dying. The artillery and the murderous musketry
were stilled, paralyzed, as it were, by the ruin and devastation before
them. Both sides stood leaning upon their arms; the pause was but
momentary; the cries of wounded comrades called upon their hearts. A fierce
burst of vengeance rent the air; the British closed upon the foe; for one
instant they were met; the next, the bayonets gleamed upon the ramparts,
and Ciudad Rodrigo was won.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
THE RAMPART.
While such were the scenes passing around me, of my own part in them, I
absolutely knew nothing; for until the moment that the glancing bayonets
of the light division came rushing on the foe, and the loud, long cheer of
victory burst above us, I felt like one in a trance. Then I leaned against
an angle of the rampart, overpowered and exhausted; a bayonet wound, which
some soldier of our own ranks had given me when mounting the breach, pained
me somewhat; my uniform was actually torn to rags; my head bare; of my
sword, the hilt and four inches of the blade alone remained, while my left
hand firmly grasped the rammer of a cannon, but why or wherefore I could
not even guess. As thus I stood, the unceasing tide of soldiery pressed on;
fresh divisions came pouring in, eager for plunder, and thirsting for the
spoil. The dead and the dying were alike trampled beneath the feet of that
remorseless mass, who, actuated by vengeance and by rapine, sprang fiercely
up the breach.
Weak and exhausted, faint from my wound, and overcome by my exertions, I
sank among the crumbling ruin. The loud shouts which rose from the town,
mingled with cries and screams, told the work of pillage was begun; while
still a dropping musketry could be heard on the distant rampart, where even
yet the French made resistance. At last even this was hushed, but to it
succeeded the far more horrifying sounds of rapine and of murder; the
forked flames of burning houses rose here and there amidst the black
darkness of the night; and through the crackling of the timbers, and the
falling crash of roofs, the heart-rending shriek of women rent the very
air. Officers pressed forward, but in vain were their efforts to restrain
their men; the savage cruelty of the moment knew no bounds of restraint.
More than one gallant fellow perished in his fruitless endeavor to enforce
obedience; and the most awful denunciations were now uttered against those
before whom, at any other time, they dared not mutter.
Thus passed the long night, far more terrible to me than all the dangers of
the storm itself, with all its death and destruction dealing around it. I
know not if I slept: if so, the horrors on every side were pictured in my
dreams; and when the gray dawn was breaking, the cries from the doomed city
were still ringing in my ears. Close around me the scene was still
and silent; the wounded had been removed during the night, but the
thickly-packed dead lay side by side where they fell. It was a fearful
sight to see them as, blood-stained and naked (for already the
camp-followers had stripped the bodies), they covered the entire breach.
From the rampart to the ditch, the ranks lay where they had stood in life.
A faint phosphoric flame flickered above their ghastly corpses, making even
death still more horrible. I was gazing steadfastly, with all that stupid
intensity which imperfect senses and exhausted faculties possess, when the
sound of voices near aroused me.
"Bring him along,--this way, Bob. Over the breach with the scoundrel, into
the fosse."
"He shall die no soldier's death, by Heaven!" cried another and a deeper
voice, "if I lay his skull open with my axe."
"Oh, mercy, mercy! as you hope for--"
"Traitor! don't dare to mutter here!" As the last words were spoken, four
infantry soldiers, reeling from drunkenness, dragged forward a pale and
haggard wretch, whose limbs trailed behind him like those of palsy, his
uniform was that of a French chasseur, but his voice bespoke him English.
"Kneel down there, and die like a man! You were one once!"
"Not so, Bill, never. Fix bayonets, boys! That's right! Now take the word
from me."
"Oh, forgive me! for the love of Heaven, forgive me!" screamed the voice of
the victim; but his last accents ended in a death-cry, for as he spoke, the
bayonets flashed for an instant in the air, and the next were plunged into
his body. Twice I had essayed to speak, but my voice, hoarse from shouting,
came not; and I could but look upon this terrible murder with staring eyes
and burning brain. At last speech came, as if wrested by the very excess of
my agony, and I muttered aloud, "O God!" The words were not well-spoken,
when the muskets were brought to the shoulders, and reeking with the blood
of the murdered man, their savage faces scowled at me as I lay.
A short and heart-felt prayer burst from my lips, and I was still. The
leader of the party called out, "Be steady, and together. One, two! Ground
arms, boys! Ground arms!" roared he, in a voice of thunder; "it's the
captain himself!" Down went the muskets with a crash; while, springing
towards me, the fellows caught me in their arms, and with one jerk mounted
me upon their shoulders, the cheer that accompanied the sudden movement
seeming like the yell of maniacs. "Ha, ha, ha! we have him now!" sang their
wild voices, as, with blood-stained hands and infuriated features, they
bore me down the rampart. My sensations of disgust and repugnance to the
party seemed at once to have evidenced themselves, for the corporal,
turning abruptly round, called out,--
"Don't pity him, Captain; the scoundrel was a deserter; he escaped from
the picket two nights ago, and gave information of all our plans to the
enemy."
"Ay," cried another, "and what's worse, he fired through an embrasure near
the breach, for two hours, upon his own regiment. It was there we found
him. This way, lads."
So saying, they turned short from the walls, and dashed down a dark
and narrow lane into the town. My struggles to get free were perfectly
ineffectual, and to my entreaties they were totally indifferent.
In this way, therefore, we made our entrance into the Plaza, where some
hundred soldiers, of different regiments, were bivouacked. A shout of
recognition welcomed the fellows as they came; while suddenly a party of
Eighty-eighth men, springing from the ground, rushed forward with drawn
bayonets, calling out, "Give him up this minute, or, by the Father of
Moses, we'll make short work of ye!"
The order was made by men who seemed well disposed to execute it; and I was
accordingly grounded with a shock and a rapidity that savored much more
of ready compliance than any respect for my individual comfort. A roar of
laughter rang through the motley mass, and every powder-stained face around
me seemed convulsed with merriment. As I sat passively upon the ground,
looking ruefully about, whether my gestures or my words heightened the
absurdity of my appearance, it is hard to say; but certainly the laughter
increased at each moment, and the drunken wretches danced round me in
ecstasy.
"Where is your major? Major O'Shaughnessy, lads?" said I.
"He's in the church, with the general, your honor," said the sergeant of
the regiment, upon whom the mention of his officer's name seemed at once
to have a sobering influence. Assisting me to rise (for I was weak as a
child), he led me through the dense crowd, who, such is the influence of
example, now formed into line, and as well as their state permitted, gave
me a military salute as I passed. "Follow me, sir," said the sergeant;
"this little dark street to the left will take us to the private door of
the chapel."
"Wherefore are they there, Sergeant?"
"There's a general of division mortally wounded."
"You did not hear his name?"
"No, sir. All I know is, he was one of the storming party at the lesser
breach."
A cold, sickening shudder came over me; I durst not ask farther, but
pressed on with anxious steps towards the chapel.
"There, sir, yonder, where you see the light. That's the door."
So saying, the sergeant stopped suddenly, and placed his hand to his cap. I
saw at once that he was sufficiently aware of his condition not to desire
to appear before his officers; so, hurriedly thanking him, I walked
forward.
"Halt, there! and give the countersign," cried a sentinel, who with fixed
bayonet stood before the door.
"I am an officer," said I, endeavoring to pass in.
"Stand bock, stand bock!" said the harsh voice of the Highlander, for such
he was.
"Is Major O'Shaughnessy in the church?"
"I dinna ken," was the short, rough answer.
"Who is the officer so badly wounded?"
"I dinna ken," repeated he, as gruffly as before; while he added, in a
louder key, "Stand bock, I tell ye, man! Dinna ye see the staff coming?"
I turned round hastily, and at the same instant several officers, who
apparently from precaution had dismounted at the end of the street, were
seen approaching. They came hurriedly forward, but without speaking. He
who was in advance of the party wore a short, blue cape over an undress
uniform. The rest were in full regimentals. I had scarcely time to throw a
passing glance upon him, when the officer I have mentioned as coming first
called out in a stern voice,--
"Who are you, sir?"
I started at the sounds; it was not the first time those accents had been
heard by me.
"Captain O'Malley, Fourteenth Light Dragoons."
"What brings you here, sir? Your regiment is at Caya."
"I have been employed as acting aide-de-camp to General Crawfurd," said I,
hesitatingly.
"Is that your staff uniform?" said he, as with compressed brow and stern
look he fixed his eyes upon my coat. Before I had time to reply, or,
indeed, before I well knew how to do so, a gruff voice from behind called
out,--
"Damn me! if that ain't the fellow that led the stormers through a broken
embrasure! I say, my lord, that's the yeoman I was telling you of. Is it
not so, sir?" continued he, turning towards me.
"Yes, sir. I led a party of the Eighty-eight at the breach."
"And devilish well you did it, too!" added Picton, for it was he who
recognized me. "I saw him, my lord, spring down from the parapet upon a
French gunner, and break his sword as he cleft his helmet in two. Yes, yes;
I shall not forget in a hurry how you laid about you with the rammer of the
gun! By Jove! that's it he has in his hand!"
While Picton ran thus hurriedly on, Lord Wellington's calm but stern
features never changed their expression. The looks of those around were
bent upon me with interest and even admiration; but his evinced nothing of
either.
Reverting at once to my absence from my post, he asked me,--
"Did you obtain leave for a particular service, sir?"
"No, my lord. It was simply from an accidental circumstance that--"
"Then, report yourself at your quarters as under arrest."
"But, my lord--" said Picton. Lord Wellington waited not for the
explanation, but walked firmly forward, and strode into the church. The
staff followed in silence, Picton turning one look of kindness on me as he
went, as though to say, "I'll not forget you."
"The devil take it," cried I, as I found myself once more alone, "but
I'm unlucky! What would turn out with other men the very basis of their
fortune, is ever with me the source of ill-luck."
It was evident, from Picton's account, that I had distinguished myself
in the breach; and yet nothing was more clear than that my conduct had
displeased the commander-in-chief. Picturing him ever to my mind's eye as
the beau idal of a military leader, by some fatality of fortune I was
continually incurring his displeasure, for whose praise I would have
risked my life. "And this confounded costume--What, in the name of every
absurdity, could have ever persuaded me to put it on. What signifies it,
though a man should cover himself with glory, if in the end he is to be
laughed at? Well, well, it matters not much, now my soldiering's over! And
yet I could have wished that the last act of my campaigning had brought
with it pleasanter recollections."
As thus I ruminated, the click of the soldier's musket near aroused me:
Picton was passing out. A shade of gloom and depression was visible upon
his features, and his lip trembled as he muttered some sentences to
himself.
"Ha! Captain--I forget the name. Yes, Captain O'Malley; you are released
from arrest. General Crawfurd has spoken very well of you, and Lord
Wellington has heard the circumstances of your case."
"Is it General Crawfurd, then, that is wounded, sir?" said I, eagerly.
Picton paused for a moment, while, with an effort, he controlled his
features into their stern and impassive expression, then added hurriedly
and almost harshly:--
Yes, sir; badly wounded through the arm and in the lung. He mentioned you
to the notice of the commander-in-chief, and your application for leave is
granted. In fact, you are to have the distinguished honor of carrying back
despatches. There, now; you had better join your brigade."
"Could I not see my general once more? It may be for the last time."
"No, sir!" sternly replied Picton. "Lord Wellington believes you under
arrest. It is as well he should suppose you obeyed his orders."
There was a tone of sarcasm in these words that prevented my reply; and
muttering my gratitude for his well-timed and kindly interference in my
behalf, I bowed deeply and turned away.
"I say, sir!" said Picton, as he returned towards the church, "should
anything befall,--that is, if, unfortunately, circumstances should make you
in want and desirous of a staff appointment, remember that you are known to
General Picton."
Downcast and depressed by the news of my poor general, I wended my way with
slow and uncertain steps towards the rampart. A clear, cold, wintry sky and
a sharp, bracing air made my wound, slight as it was, more painful, and
I endeavored to reach the reserves, where I knew the hospital-staff had
established, for the present, their quarters. I had not gone far when, from
a marauding party, I learned that my man Mike was in search of me through
the plain. A report of my death had reached him, and the poor fellow was
half distracted.
Longing anxiously to allay his fears on my account, which I well knew
might lead him into any act of folly or insanity, I pressed forward;
besides--shall I confess it?--amidst the manifold thoughts of sorrow and
affliction which weighed me down, I could not divest myself of the feeling
that so long as I wore my present absurd costume, I could be nothing but an
object of laughter and ridicule to all who met me.
I had not long to look for my worthy follower, for I soon beheld him
cantering about the plain. A loud shout brought him beside me; and
truly the poor fellow's delight was great and sincere. With a thousand
protestations of his satisfaction, and reiterated assurances of what he
would not have done to the French prisoners if anything had happened me, we
took our way together towards the camp.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
THE DESPATCH.
I was preparing to visit the town on the following morning, when my
attention was attracted by a dialogue which took place beneath my window.
"I say, my good friend," cried a mounted orderly to Mike, who was busily
employed in brushing a jacket,--"I say, are you Captain O'Malley's man?"
"The least taste in life o' that same," replied he, with a half-jocular
expression.
"Well, then," said the other, "take up these letters to your master. Be
alive, my fine fellow, for they are despatches, and I must have a written
return for them."
"Won't ye get off and take a drop of somethin' refreshing; the air is cowld
this morning."
"I can't stay, my good friend, but thank you all the same; so be alive,
will you?"
"Arrah, there's no hurry in life. Sure, it's an invitation to dinner to
Lord Wellington or a tea-party at Sir Denny's; sure, my master's bothered
with them every day o' th' week: that's the misfortune of being an
agreeable creature; and I'd be led into dissipation myself, if I wasn't
rear'd prudent."
"Well, come along, take these letters, for I must be off; my time is
short."
"That's more nor your nose is, honey," said Mike, evidently piqued at the
little effect his advances had produced upon the Englishman. "Give them
here," continued he, while he turned the various papers in every direction,
affecting to read their addresses.
"There's nothing for me here, I see. Did none of the generals ask after
me?"
"You are a queer one!" said the dragoon, not a little puzzled what to
make of him.
Mike meanwhile thrust the papers carelessly into his pocket, and strode
into the house, whistling a quick-step as he went, with the air of a man
perfectly devoid of care or occupation. The next moment, however, he
appeared at my door, wiping his forehead with the back of his hand, and
apparently breathless with haste.
"Despatches, Mister Charles, despatches from Lord Wellington. The orderly
is waiting below for a return."
"Tell him he shall have it in one moment," replied I. "And now bring me a
light."
Before I had broken the seal of the envelope, Mike was once more at the
porch.
"My master is writing a few lines to say he'll do it. Don't be talking
of it," added he, dropping his voice, "but they want him to take another
fortress."
What turn the dialogue subsequently took, I cannot say, for I was entirely
occupied by a letter which accompanied the despatches. It ran as follows:--
QUARTER-GENERAL,
CIUDAD RODRIGO, Jan. 20, 1812.
Dear Sir,--The commander-in-chief has been kind enough to accord you
the leave of absence you applied for, and takes the opportunity
of your return to England to send you the accompanying letters
for his Royal Highness the Duke of York. To his approval of
your conduct in the assault last night you owe this distinguished
mark of Lord Wellington's favor, which, I hope, will be duly
appreciated by you, and serve to increase your zeal for that service
in which you have already distinguished yourself.
Believe me that I am most happy in being made the medium of
this communication, and have the honor to be,
Very truly yours,
T. PICTON.
I read and re-read this note again and again. Every line was conned over by
me, and every phrase weighed and balanced in my mind. Nothing could be more
gratifying, nothing more satisfactory to my feelings; and I would not have
exchanged its possession for the brevet of a lieutenant-colonel.
"Halloo, Orderly!" cried I, from the window, as I hurriedly sealed my few
words of acknowledgment, "take this note back to General Picton, and here's
a guinea for yourself." So saying, I pitched into his ready hand one of the
very few which remained to me in the world. "This is, indeed, good news!"
said I, to myself. "This is, indeed, a moment of unmixed happiness!"
As I closed the window, I could hear Mike pronouncing a glowing eulogium
upon my liberality, from which he could not, however, help in some degree
detracting, as he added:
"But the devil thank him, after all! Sure, it's himself has the illigant
fortune and the fine place of it!"
Scarcely were the last sounds of the retiring horseman dying away in the
distance, when Mike's meditations took another form, and he muttered
between his teeth, "Oh, holy Agatha! a guinea, a raal gold guinea to a
thief of a dragoon that come with the letter, and here am I wearing a
picture of the holy family for a back to my waistcoat, all out of economy;
and sure, God knows, but may be they'll take their dealing trick out of
me in purgatory for this hereafter; and faith, it's a beautiful pair of
breeches I'd have had, if I wasn't ashamed to put the twelve apostles on
my legs."
While Mike ran on at this rate, my eyes fell upon a few lines of postscript
in Picton's letter, which I had not previously noticed.
"The official despatches of the storming are, of course, intrusted to
senior officers, but I need scarcely remind you that it will be a
polite and proper attention to his Royal Highness to present your
letters with as little delay as possible. Not a moment is to be lost
on your landing in England."
"Mike!" cried I, "how look the cattle for a journey?"
"The chestnut is a little low in flesh, but in great wind, your honor; and
the black horse is jumping like a filly."
"And Badger?" said I.
"Howld him, if you can, that's all; but it's murthering work this, carrying
despatches day after day."
"This time, however, Mike, we must not grumble."
"May be it isn't far?"
"Why, as to that, I shall not promise much. I'm bound for England, Mickey."
"For England!"
"Yes, Mike, and for Ireland."
"For Ireland! whoop!" shouted he, as he shied his cap into one corner of
the room, the jacket he was brushing into the other, and began dancing
round the table with no bad imitation of an Indian war dance.
"How I'll dance like a fairy,
To see ould Dunleary,
And think twice ere I leave it to be a dragoon."
"Oh, blessed hour! Isn't it beautiful to think of the illuminations and
dinners and speeches and shaking of hands, huzzaing, and hip-hipping. May
be there won't be pictures of us in all the shops,--Mister Charles and his
man Mister Free. May be they won't make plays out of us; myself dressed in
the gray coat with the red cuffs, the cords, the tops, and the Caroline hat
a little cocked, with a phiz in the side of it." Here he made a sign with
his expanded fingers to represent a cockade, which he designated by this
word. "I think I see myself dining with the corporation, and the Lord Major
of Dublin getting up to propose the health of the hero of El Bodon, Mr.
Free; and three times three, hurra! hurra! hurra! Musha, but it's dry I am
gettin' with the thoughts of the punch and the poteen negus."
"If you go on at this rate, we're not likely to be soon at our journey's
end. So be alive now; pack up my kit; I shall start by twelve o'clock."
With one spring Mike cleared the stairs, and overthrowing everything and
everybody in his way, hurried towards the stable, chanting at the top of
his voice the very poetical strain he had indulged me with a few minutes
before.
My preparations were rapidly made; a few hurried lines of leave-taking to
the good fellows I had lived so much with and felt so strongly attached to,
with a firm assurance that I should join them again ere long, was all
that my time permitted. To Power I wrote more at length, detailing the
circumstances which my own letters informed me of, and also those which
invited me to return home. This done, I lost not another moment, but set
out upon my journey.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
THE LEAVE.
After an hour's sharp riding we reached the Aguada, where the river was yet
fordable; crossing this, we mounted the Sierra by a narrow and winding pass
which leads through the mountains towards Almeida. Here I turned once more
to cast a last and farewell look at the scene of our late encounter. It
was but a few hours that I had stood almost on the same spot, and yet how
altered was all around. The wide plain, then bustling with all the life and
animation of a large army, was now nearly deserted,--some dismounted guns,
some broken-up, dismantled batteries, around which a few sentinels seemed
to loiter rather than to keep guard; a strong detachment of infantry could
be seen wending their way towards the fortress, and a confused mass of
camp-followers, sutlers, and peasants following their steps for protection
against the pillagers and the still ruder assaults of their own Guerillas.
The fortress, too, was changed indeed. Those mighty walls before whose
steep sides the bravest fell back baffled and beaten, were now a mass of
ruin and decay; the muleteer could be seen driving his mule along through
the rugged ascent of that breach to win whose top the best blood of
Albion's chivalry was shed; and the peasant child looked timidly from those
dark enclosures in the deep fosse below, where perished hundreds of our
best and bravest. The air was calm, clear, and unclouded; no smoke obscured
the transparent atmosphere; the cannon had ceased; and the voices that rang
so late in accents of triumphant victory were stilled in death. Everything,
indeed, had undergone a mighty change; but nothing brought the altered
fortunes of the scene so vividly to my mind as when I remembered that when
last I had seen those walls, the dark shako of the French grenadiers
peered above their battlements, and now the gay tartan of the Highlanders
fluttered above them, and the red flag of England waved boldly in the
breeze.
Up to that moment my sensations were those of unmixed pleasure. The thought
of my home, my friends, my country, the feeling that I was returning with
the bronze of the battle upon my cheek, and the voice of praise still
ringing in my heart,--these were proud thoughts, and my bosom heaved short
and quickly as I revolved them; but as I turned my gaze for the last time
towards the gallant army I was leaving, a pang of sorrow, of self-reproach,
shot through me, and I could not help feeling how far less worthily was
I acting in yielding to the impulse of my wishes, than had I remained to
share the fortunes of the campaign.
So powerfully did these sensations possess me, that I sat motionless for
some time, uncertain whether to proceed; forgetting that I was the bearer
of important information, I only remembered that by my own desire I was
there; my reason but half convinced me that the part I had adopted was
right and honorable, and more than once my resolution to proceed hung in
the balance. It was just at this critical moment of my doubts that Mike,
who had been hitherto behind, came up.
"Is it the upper road, sir?" said he, pointing to a steep and rugged path
which led by a zigzag ascent towards the crest of the mountain.
I nodded in reply, when he added:--
"Doesn't this remind your honor of Sleibh More, above the Shannon, where we
used to be grouse shooting? And there's the keeper's house in the valley;
and that might be your uncle, the master himself, waving his hat to you."
Had he known the state of my conflicting feelings at the moment, he could
not more readily have decided this doubt. I turned abruptly away, put
spurs to my horse, and dashed up the steep pass at a pace which evidently
surprised, and as evidently displeased, my follower.
How natural it is ever to experience a reaction of depression and lowness
after the first burst of unexpected joy! The moment of happiness is
scarce experienced ere come the doubts of its reality, the fears for its
continuance; the higher the state of pleasurable excitement, the more
painful and the more pressing the anxieties that await on it; the tension
of delighted feelings cannot last, and our overwrought faculties seek
repose in regrets. Happy he who can so temper his enjoyments as to view
them in their shadows as in their sunshine; he may not, it is true, behold
the landscape in the blaze of its noonday brightness, but he need not fear
the thunder-cloud nor the hurricane. The calm autumn of his bliss, if it
dazzle not in its brilliancy, will not any more be shrouded in darkness and
in gloom.
My first burst of pleasure over, the thought of my uncle's changed fortunes
pressed deeply on my heart, and a hundred plans suggested themselves in
turn to my mind to relieve his present embarrassments; but I knew how
impracticable they would all prove when opposed by his prejudices. To
sell the old home of his forefathers, to wander from the roof which had
sheltered his name for generations, he would never consent to; the law
might by force expel him, and drive him a wanderer and an exile, but of
his own free will the thing was hopeless. Considine, too, would encourage
rather than repress such feelings; his feudalism would lead him to any
lengths; and in defence of what he would esteem a right, he would as soon
shoot a sheriff as a snipe, and, old as he was, ask for no better amusement
than to arm the whole tenantry and give battle to the king's troops on the
wide plain of Scariff. Amidst such conflicting thought, I travelled on
moodily and in silence, to the palpable astonishment of Mike, who could not
help regarding me as one from whom fortune met the most ungrateful returns.
At every new turn of the road he would endeavor to attract my attention by
the objects around,--no white-turreted chteau, no tapered spire in the
distance, escaped him; he kept up a constant ripple of half-muttered praise
and censure upon all he saw, and instituted unceasing comparisons between
the country and his own, in which, I am bound to say, Ireland rarely, if
ever, had to complain of his patriotism.
When we arrived at Almeida, I learned that the "Medea" sloop-of-war was
lying off Oporto, and expected to sail for England in a few days. The
opportunity was not to be neglected. The official despatches, I was aware,
would be sent through Lisbon, where the "Gorgon" frigate was in waiting to
convey them; but should I be fortunate enough to reach Oporto in time, I
had little doubt of arriving in England with the first intelligence of the
fall of Ciudad Rodrigo. Reducing my luggage, therefore, to the smallest
possible compass, and having provided myself with a juvenile guide for the
pass of La Reyna, I threw myself, without undressing, upon the bed, and
waited anxiously for the break of day to resume my journey.
As I ruminated over the prospect my return presented, I suddenly remembered
Frank Webber's letter, which I had hastily thrust into a portfolio without
reading, so occupied was I by Considine's epistle; with a little searching
I discovered it, and trimming my lamp, as I felt no inclination to sleep, I
proceeded to the examination of what seemed a more than usually voluminous
epistle. It contained four closely-written pages, accompanied by something
like a plan in an engineering sketch. My curiosity becoming further
stimulated by this, I sat down to peruse it. It began thus:--
Official Despatch of Lieutenant-General Francis Webber to Lord
Castlereagh, detailing the assault and capture of the old pump, in
Trinity College, Dublin, on the night of the second of December,
eighteen hundred and eleven, with returns of killed, wounded,
and missing, with other information from the seat of war.
HEADQUARTERS, No. 2, OLD SQUARE.
My Lord,--In compliance with the instructions contained in your
lordship's despatch of the twenty-first ultimo, I concentrated the
force under my command, and assembling the generals of division,
made known my intentions in the following general order:--
A. G. O.
The following troops will this evening assemble at headquarters, and
having partaken of a sufficient dinner for the next two days, with
punch for four, will hold themselves in readiness to march in the
following order:--
Harry Nesbitt's Brigade of Incorrigibles will form a blockading
force, in the line extending from the vice-provost's house to the
library. The light division, under Mark Waller, will skirmish from
the gate towards the middle of the square, obstructing the march of
the Cuirassiers of the Guard, which, under the command of old Duncan
the porter, are expected to move in that direction. Two columns of
attack will be formed by the senior sophisters of the Old Guard, and
a forlorn hope of the "cautioned" men at the last four examinations
will form, under the orders of Timothy O'Rourke, beneath the shadow
of the dining-hall.
At the signal of the dean's bell the stormers will move forward. A
cheer from the united corps will then announce the moment of attack.
The word for the night will be, "May the Devil admire me!"
The commander-of-the-forces desires that the different corps should
be as strong as possible, and expects that no man will rema
any pretence whatever, in the rear with the lush. During the main
assault, Cecil Cavendish will make a feint upon the provost's
windows, to be converted into a real attack if the ladies scream.
GENERAL ORDER.
The commissary-general, Foley, will supply the following articles for
the use of the troops: Two hams; eight pair of chickens, the same to
be roasted; a devilled turkey; sixteen lobsters; eight hundred of
oysters, with a proportionate quantity of cold sherry and hot punch.
The army will get drunk by ten o'clock to-night.
Having made these dispositions, my lord, I proceeded to mislead
the enemy as to our intentions, in suffering my servant to be taken
with an intercepted despatch. This, being a prescription by Doctor
Colles, would convey to the dean's mind the impression that I was
still upon the sick list. This being done, and four canisters of
Dartford gunpowder being procured on tick, our military chest being in
a most deplorable condition, I waited for the moment of attack.
A heavy rain, accompanied with a frightful hurricane, prevailed
during the entire day, rendering the march of the troops who came
from the neighborhood of Merrion Square and Fitzwilliam Street, a
service of considerable fatigue. The outlying pickets in College Green,
being induced probably by the inclemency of the season, were rather
tipsy on joining, and having engaged in a skirmish with old M'Calister,
tying his red uniform over his head, the moment of attack
was precipitated, and we moved to the trenches by half-past nine
o'clock.
Nothing could be more orderly, nothing more perfect, than the
march of the troops. As we approached the corner of the commons-hall,
a skirmish on the rear apprised us that our intentions had become
known; and I soon learned from my aide-de-camp, Bob Moore,
that the attack was made by a strong column of the enemy, under
the command of old Fitzgerald.
Perpendicular (as your lordship is aware he is styled by the army)
came on in a determined manner, and before many minutes had
elapsed had taken several prisoners, among others Tom Drummond,--Long
Tom,--who, having fallen on all fours, was mistaken for a
long eighteen. The success, however, was but momentary; Nesbitt's
Brigade attacked them in flank, rescued the prisoners, extinguished
the dean's lantern, and having beaten back the heavy porters, took
Perpendicular himself prisoner.
An express from the left informed me that the attack upon the
provost's house had proved equally successful; there wasn't a whole
pane of glass in the front, and from a footman who deserted, it was
learned that Mrs. Hutchinson was in hysterics.
While I was reading this despatch, a strong feeling of the line
towards the right announced that something was taking place in that
direction. Bob Moore, who rode by on Drummond's back, hurriedly
informed me that Williams had put the lighted end of his cigar to
one of the fuses, but the powder, being wet, did not explode
notwithstanding his efforts to effect it. Upon this, I hastened to the
front, where I found the individual in question kneeling upon the
ground, and endeavoring, as far as punch would permit him, to kindle a
flame at the portfire. Before I could interfere, the spark had caught;
a loud, hissing noise followed; the different magazines successively
became ignited, and at length the fire reached the great four-pound
charge.
I cannot convey to your lordship, by any words of mine, an idea of
this terrible explosion; the blazing splinters were hurled into the
air, and fell in fiery masses on every side from the park to King
William; Ivey the bell-ringer, was precipitated from the scaffold
beside the bell, and fell headlong into the mud beneath; the
surrounding buildings trembled at the shock; the windows were
shattered, and in fact a scene of perfect devastation ensued on all
sides.
When the smoke cleared away, I rose from my recumbent position,
and perceived with delight that not a vestige of the pump remained.
The old iron handle was imbedded in the wall of the dining-hall, and
its round knob stood out like the end of a queue.
Our loss was, of course, considerable; and ordering the wounded
to the rear, I proceeded to make an orderly and regular retreat. At
this time, however, the enemy had assembled in force. Two battalions
of porters, led on by Dr. Dobbin, charged us on the flank; a
heavy brigade poured down upon us from the battery, and but for
the exertions of Harry Nesbitt, our communication with our reserves
must have been cut off. Cecil Cavendish also came up; for although
beaten in his great attack, the forces under his command had penetrated
by the kitchen windows, and carried oil a considerable quantity
of cold meat.
Concentrating the different corps, I made an echelon movement
upon the chapel, to admit of the light division coming up. This they
did in a few moments, informing me that they had left Perpendicular
in the haha, which, as your lordship is aware, is a fosse of the
very greenest and most stagnant nature. We now made good our retreat
upon number "2," carrying our wounded with us. The plunder
we also secured; but we kicked the prisoners, and suffered them to
escape.
Thus terminated, my lord, one of the brightest achievements of the
undergraduate career. I enclose a list of the wounded, as also an
account of the various articles returned in the commissary-general's
list.
Harry Nesbitt: severely wounded; no coat nor hat; a black-eye;
left shoe missing.
Cecil Cavendish: face severely scratched; supposed to have received
his wound in the attack upon the kitchen.
Tom Drummond: not recognizable by his friends; his features
resembling a transparency disfigured by the smoke of the preceding
night's illumination.
Bob Moore: slightly wounded.
I would beg particularly to recommend all these officers to your
lordship's notice; indeed, the conduct of Moore, in kicking the dean's
lantern out of the porter's hand, was marked by great promptitude
and decision. This officer will present to H. R. H. the following
trophies, taken from the enemy: The dean's cap and tassel; the key
of his chambers; Dr. Dobbin's wig and bands; four porters' helmets,
and a book on the cellar.
I have the honor to remain, my lord, etc.,
FRANCIS WEBBER.
G. O.
The commander-of-the-forces returns his thanks to the various
officers and soldiers employed in the late assault, for their
persevering gallantry and courage. The splendor of the achievement
can only be equalled by the humanity and good conduct of the troops.
It only remains for him to add, that the less they say about the
transaction, and the sooner they are severally confined to their beds
with symptoms of contagious fever, the better.
Meanwhile, to concert upon the future measures of the campaign, the
army will sup to-night at Morrison's.
Here ended this precious epistle, rendering one fact sufficiently
evident,--that, however my worthy friend advanced in years, he had not
grown in wisdom.
While ruminating upon the strange infatuation which could persuade a gifted
and an able man to lavish upon dissipation and reckless absurdity the
talents that must, if well directed, raise him to eminence and distinction,
a few lines of a newspaper paragraph fell from the paper I was reading. It
ran thus:--
LATE OUTRAGE IN TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN.
We have great pleasure in stating that the serious disturbance which
took place within the walls of our University a few evenings since,
was in no wise attributable to the conduct of the students. A party
of ill-disposed townspeople were, it would appear, the instigators
and perpetrators of the outrage. That their object was the total
destruction of our venerated University there can be but little
doubt. Fortunately, however, they did not calculate upon the esprit
de corps of the students, a body of whom, under the direction of Mr.
Webber, successfully opposed the assailants, and finally drove them
from the walls.
It is, we understand, the intention of the board to confer some mark
of approbation upon Mr. Webber, who, independently of this, has
strong claims upon their notice, his collegiate success pointing him
out as the most extraordinary man of his day.
This, my dear Charley, will give you some faint conception of one
of the most brilliant exploits of modern days. The bulletin, believe
me, is not Napoleonized into any bombastic extravagance of success.
The tiling was splendid; from the brilliant firework of the old pump
itself, to the figure of Perpendicular dripping with duckweed, like
an insane river-god, it was unequalled. Our fellows behaved like
trumps; and to do them justice, so did the enemy. But unfortunately,
notwithstanding this, and the plausible paragraphs of the
morning papers, I have been summoned before the board for Tuesday
next.
Meanwhile I employ myself in throwing off a shower of small
squibs for the journals, so that if the board deal not mercifully with
me, I may meet with sympathy from the public. I have just despatched
a little editorial bit for the "Times," calling, in terms of
parental tenderness, upon the University to say--
"How long will the extraordinary excesses of a learned funct
be suffered to disgrace college? Is Doctor ---- to be permitted to
exhibit an example of more riotous insubordination than would be
endured in an undergraduate? More on this subject hereafter."
"'Saunders' News-letter.'--Dr. Barret appeared at the head
police-office, before Alderman Darley, to make oath that neither he
nor Catty were concerned in the late outrage upon the pump." etc.,
etc.
Paragraphs like these are flying about in every provincial paper of
the empire. People shake their heads when they speak of the University,
and respectable females rather cross over by King William and
the Bank than pass near its precincts.
Tuesday Evening.
Would you believe it, they've expelled me! Address your next
letter as usual, for they haven't got rid of me yet.
Yours,                   F. W.
"So I shall find him in his old quarters," thought I, "and evidently not
much altered since we parted." It was not without a feeling of (I trust
pardonable) pride that I thought over my own career in the interval. My
three years of campaigning life had given me some insight into the world,
and some knowledge of myself, and conferred upon me a boon, of which I know
not the equal,--that, while yet young, and upon the very threshold of life,
I should have tasted the enthusiastic pleasures of a soldier's fortune, and
braved the dangers and difficulties of a campaign at a time when, under
other auspices, I might have wasted my years in unprofitable idleness or
careless dissipation.
CHAPTER XXXIX.
LONDON.
Twelve hours after my arrival in England I entered London. I cannot attempt
to record the sensations which thronged my mind as the din and tumult of
that mighty city awoke me from a sound sleep I had fallen into in the
corner of the chaise. The seemingly interminable lines of lamplight, the
crash of carriages, the glare of the shops, the buzz of voices, made up a
chaotic mass of sights and sounds, leaving my efforts at thought vain and
fruitless.
Obedient to my instructions, I lost not a moment in my preparations to
deliver my despatches. Having dressed myself in the full uniform of my
corps, I drove to the Horse Guards. It was now nine o'clock, and I learned
that his Royal Highness had gone to dinner at Carlton House. In a few words
which I spoke with the aide-de-camp, I discovered that no information of
the fall of Ciudad Rodrigo had yet reached England. The greatest anxiety
prevailed as to the events of the Peninsula, from which no despatches had
been received for several weeks past.
To Carlton House I accordingly bent my steps, without any precise
determination how I should proceed when there, nor knowing how far
etiquette might be an obstacle to the accomplishment of my mission. The
news of which I was the bearer was, however, of too important a character
to permit me to hesitate, and I presented myself to the aide-de-camp in
waiting, simply stating that I was intrusted with important letters to his
Royal Highness, the purport of which did not admit of delay.
"They have not gone to dinner yet," lisped out the aide-de-camp, "and if
you would permit me to deliver the letters--"
"Mine are despatches," said I, somewhat proudly, and in no way disposed to
cede to another the honor of personally delivering them into the hands of
the duke.
"Then you had better present yourself at the levee to-morrow morning,"
replied he, carelessly, while he turned into one of the window recesses,
and resumed the conversation with one of the gentlemen-in-waiting.
I stood for some moments uncertain and undecided; reluctant on the one
part to relinquish my claim as the bearer of the despatches, and equally
unwilling to defer their delivery till the following day.
Adopting the former alternative, I took my papers from my sabretasche,
and was about to place them in the hands of the aide-de-camp, when the
folding-doors at the end of the apartment suddenly flew open, and a large
and handsome man with a high bald forehead entered hastily.
The different persons in waiting sprang from their lounging attitudes upon
the sofas, and bowed respectfully as he passed on towards another door.
His dress was a plain blue coat, buttoned to the collar, and his only
decoration a brilliant star upon the breast. There was that air, however,
of high birth and bearing about him that left no doubt upon my mind he was
of the blood royal.
As the aide-de-camp to whom I had been speaking opened the door for him to
pass out, I could hear some words in a low voice, in which the phrases,
"letters of importance" and "your Royal Highness" occurred. The individual
addressed turned suddenly about, and casting a rapid glance around the
room, without deigning a word in reply, walked straight up to where I was
standing.
"Despatches for me, sir?" said he, shortly, taking, as he spoke, the packet
from my hand.
"For his Royal Highness the commander-in-chief," said I, bowing
respectfully, and still uncertain in whose presence I was standing. He
broke the seal without answering, and as his eye caught the first lines of
the despatch, broke out into an exclamation of--
Ha, Peninsular news! When did you arrive, sir?"
"An hour since, sir."
"And these letters are from--"
"General Picton, your Royal Highness."
"How glorious! How splendidly done!" muttered he to himself, as he ran his
eyes rapidly over the letter. "Are you Captain O'Malley, whose name is
mentioned here so favorably?"
I bowed deeply in reply.
"You are most highly spoken of, and it will give me sincere pleasure to
recommend you to the notice of the Prince Regent. But stay a moment," so
saying, he hurriedly passed from the room, leaving me overwhelmed at the
suddenness of the incident, and a mark of no small astonishment to the
different persons in waiting, who had hitherto no other idea but that my
despatches were from Hounslow or Knightsbridge.
"Captain O'Malley," said an officer covered with decorations, and whose
slightly foreign accent bespoke the Hanoverian, "his Royal Highness
requests you will accompany me." The door opened as he spoke, and I found
myself in a most splendidly lit-up apartment,--the walls covered with
pictures, and the ceiling divided, into panels resplendent with the richest
gilding. A group of persons in court dresses were conversing in a low tone
as we entered, but suddenly ceased, and saluting my conductor respectfully,
made way for us to pass on. The folding-doors again opened as we
approached, and we found ourselves in a long gallery, whose sumptuous
furniture and costly decorations shone beneath the rich tints of a massive
lustre of ruby glass, diffusing a glow resembling the most gorgeous sunset.
Here also some persons in handsome uniform were conversing, one of whom
accosted my companion by the title of "Baron;" nodding familiarly as he
muttered a few words in German, he passed forward, and the next moment the
doors were thrown suddenly wide, and we entered the drawing-room.
The buzz of voices and the sound of laughter reassured me as I came
forward, and before I had well time to think where and why I was there, the
Duke of York advanced towards me, with a smile of peculiar sweetness in its
expression, and said, as he turned towards one side:--
"Your Royal Highness--Captain O'Malley!"
As he spoke the Prince moved forward, and bowed slightly.
"You've brought us capital news, Mr. O'Malley. May I beg, if you're not
too much tired, you'll join us at dinner. I am most anxious to learn the
particulars of the assault."
As I bowed my acknowledgments to the gracious invitation, he continued:--
"Are you acquainted with my friend here?--but of course you can scarcely
be; you began too early as a soldier. So let me present you to my friend,
Mr. Tierney," a middle-aged man, whose broad, white forehead and deep-set
eyes gave a character to features that were otherwise not remarkable in
expression, and who bowed rather stiffly.
Before he had concluded a somewhat labored compliment to me, we were joined
by a third person, whose strikingly-handsome features were lit up with an
expression of the most animated kind. He accosted the Prince with an air
of easy familiarity, and while he led him from the group, appeared to be
relating some anecdote which actually convulsed his Royal Highness with
laughter.
Before I had time or opportunity to inquire who the individual could
be, dinner was announced, and the wide folding-doors being thrown open,
displayed the magnificent dining-room of Carlton House in all the blaze and
splendor of its magnificence.
The sudden change from the rough vicissitudes of campaigning life to all
the luxury and voluptuous elegance of a brilliant court, created too much
confusion in my mind to permit of my impressions being the most accurate
or most collected. The splendor of the scene, the rank, but even more the
talent of the individuals by whom I was surrounded, had all their full
effect upon me. And although I found, from the tone of the conversation
about, how immeasurably I was their inferior, yet by a delicate and
courteous interest in the scene of which I had lately partaken, they took
away the awkwardness which in some degree was inseparable from the novelty
of my position among them.
Conversing about the Peninsula with a degree of knowledge which I could
in no wise comprehend from those not engaged in the war, they appeared
perfectly acquainted with all the details of the campaign; and I heard on
every side of me anecdotes and stories which I scarcely believed known
beyond the precincts of a regiment. The Prince himself--the grace and charm
of whose narrative talents have seldom been excelled--was particularly
conspicuous, and I could not help feeling struck with his admirable
imitations of voice and manner. The most accomplished actor could not have
personated the canny, calculating spirit of the Scot, or the rollicking
recklessness of the Irishman, with more tact and finesse. But far above
all this, shone the person I have already alluded to as speaking to his
Royal Highness in the drawing-room. Combining the happiest conversational
eloquence with a quick, ready, and brilliant fancy, he threw from him in
all the careless profusion of boundless resource a shower of pointed and
epigrammatic witticisms. Now illustrating a really difficult subject by one
happy touch, as the blaze of the lightning will light up the whole surface
of the dark landscape beneath it; now turning the force of an adversary's
argument by some fallacious but unanswerable jest, accompanying the whole
by those fascinations of voice, look, gesture, and manner which have made
those who once have seen, never able to forget Brinsley Sheridan.
I am not able, were I even disposed, to record more particularly the
details of that most brilliant evening of my life. On every side of me I
heard the names of those whose fame as statesmen or whose repute as men of
letters was ringing throughout Europe. They were then, too, not in the easy
indolence of ordinary life, but displaying with their utmost effort those
powers of wit, fancy, imagination, and eloquence which had won for them
elsewhere their high and exalted position. The masculine understanding
and powerful intellect of Tierney vied with the brilliant and dazzling
conceptions of Sheridan. The easy bonhomie and English heartiness of Fox
contrasted with the cutting sarcasm and sharp raillery of O'Kelly. While
contesting the palm with each himself, the Prince evinced powers of mind
and eloquent facilities of expression that, in any walk of life, must
have made their possessor a most distinguished man. Politics, war, women,
literature, the turf, the navy, the opposition, architecture, and the
drama, were all discussed with a degree of information and knowledge that
proved to me how much of real acquirements can be obtained by those whose
exalted station surrounds them with the collective intellect of a nation.
As for myself, the time flew past unconsciously. So brilliant a display of
all that was courtly and fascinating in manner, and all that was brightest
in genius, was so novel to me, that I really felt like one entranced. To
this hour, my impression, however confused in details, is as vivid as
though that evening were but yesternight; and although since that period
I have enjoyed numerous opportunities of meeting with the great and the
gifted, yet I treasure the memory of that evening as by far the most
exciting of my whole life.
While I abstain from any mention of the many incidents of the evening,
I cannot pass over one which, occurring to myself, is valuable but as
showing, by one slight and passing trait, the amiable and kind feeling of
one whose memory is hallowed in the service.
A little lower than myself, on the opposite side of the table, I perceived
an old military acquaintance whom I had first met in Lisbon. He was then on
Sir Charles Stewart's staff, and we met almost daily. Wishing to commend
myself to his recollection, I endeavored for some time to catch his eye,
but in vain; but at last when I thought I had succeeded, I called to him,--
"I say, Fred, a glass of wine with you."
When suddenly the Duke of York, who was speaking to Lord Hertford, turned
quickly round, and taking the decanter in his hand, replied,--
"With pleasure, O'Malley. What shall it be, my boy?"
I shall never forget the manly good-humor of his look as he sat waiting for
my answer. He had taken my speech as addressed to himself, and concluding
that from fatigue, the novelty of the scene, my youth, etc., I was not over
collected, vouchsafed in this kind way to receive it.
"So," said he, as I stammered out my explanation, "I was deceived. However,
don't cheat me out of my glass of wine. Let us have it now."
With this little anecdote, whose truth I vouch for, I shall conclude. More
than one now living was a witness to it, and my only regret in the mention
of it is my inability to convey the readiness with which he seized the
moment of apparent difficulty to throw the protection of his kind and
warm-hearted nature over the apparent folly of a boy.
It was late when the party broke up, and as I took my leave of the Prince,
he once more expressed himself in gracious terms towards me, and gave
me personally an invitation to a breakfast at Hounslow on the following
Saturday.
CHAPTER XL.
THE BELL AT BRISTOL.
On the morning after my dinner at Carlton House, I found my breakfast-table
covered with cards and invitations. The news of the storming of Ciudad
Rodrigo was published in all the morning papers, and my own humble name, in
letters of three feet long, was exhibited in placards throughout the city.
Less to this circumstance, however, than to the kind and gracious notice of
the Prince, was I indebted for the attentions which were shown me by
every one; and indeed, so flattering was the reception I met with, and so
overwhelming the civility showered on me from all sides, that it required
no small effort on my part not to believe myself as much a hero as they
would make me. An eternal round of dinners, balls, breakfasts, and
entertainments filled up the entire week. I was included in every
invitation to Carlton House, and never appeared without receiving from his
Royal Highness the most striking marks of attention. Captivating as all
this undoubtedly was, and fascinated as I felt in being the lion of London,
the courted and sought after by the high, the titled, and the talented of
the great city of the universe, yet amidst all the splendor and seduction
of that new world, my heart instinctively turned from the glare and
brilliancy of gorgeous saloons, from the soft looks and softer voice of
beauty, from the words of praise as they fell from the lips of those whose
notice was fame itself,--to my humble home amidst the mountains of the
west. Delighted and charmed as I felt by that tribute of flattery which
associated my name with one of the most brilliant actions of my country,
yet hitherto I had experienced no touch of home or fatherland. England was
to me as the high and powerful head of my house, whose greatness and whose
glory shed a halo far and near, from the proudest to the humblest of those
that call themselves Britons; but Ireland was-the land of my birth,--the
land of my earliest ties, my dearest associations,--the kind mother whose
breath had fanned my brow in infancy, and for her in my manhood my heart
beat with every throb of filial affection. Need I say, then, how ardently
I longed to turn homeward; for independent of all else, I could not avoid
some self-reproach on thinking what might be the condition of those I
prized the most on earth, at that very moment I was engaging in all the
voluptuous abandonment, and all the fascinating excesses of a life of
pleasure. I wrote several letters home, but received no answer; nor did I,
in the whole round of London society, meet with a single person who could
give me information of my family or my friends. The Easter recess had sent
the different members of Parliament to their homes; and thus, within a
comparatively short distance of all I cared for, I could learn nothing of
their fate.
The invitations of the Prince Regent, which were, of course, to be regarded
as commands, still detained me in London; and I knew not in what manner
to escape from the fresh engagements which each day heaped upon me. In
my anxiety upon the subject, I communicated my wishes to a friend on the
duke's staff, and the following morning, as I presented myself at his
levee, he called me towards him and addressed me:--
"What leave have you got, Captain O'Malley?"
"Three months, your Royal Highness."
"Do you desire an unattached troop; for if so, an opportunity occurs just
at this moment."
"I thank you most sincerely, sir, for your condescension in thinking of me;
but my wish is to join my regiment at the expiration of my leave."
"Why, I thought they told me you wanted to spend some time in Ireland?"
"Only sufficient to see my friends, your Royal Highness. That done, I'd
rather join my regiment immediately."
"Ah, that alters the case! So then, probably, you'd like to leave us at
once. I see how it is; you've been staying here against your will all this
while. Then, don't say a word. I'll make your excuses at Carlton House; and
the better to cover your retreat, I'll employ you on service. Here, Gordon,
let Captain O'Malley have the despatches for Sir Henry Howard, at Cork." As
he said this, he turned towards me with an air of affected sternness in his
manner, and continued: "I expect, Captain O'Malley, that you will deliver
the despatches intrusted to your care without a moment's loss of time. You
will leave London within an hour. The instructions for your journey will
be sent to your hotel. And now," said he, again changing his voice to its
natural tone of kindliness and courtesy,--"and now, my boy, good-by, and a
safe journey to you. These letters will pay your expenses, and the occasion
save you all the worry of leave-taking."
I stood confused and speechless, unable to utter a single word of gratitude
for such unexpected kindness. The duke saw at once my difficulty, and as he
shook me warmly by the hand, added, in a laughing tone,--
"Don't wait, now; you mustn't forget that your despatches are pressing."
I bowed deeply, attempted a few words of acknowledgment, hesitated,
blundered, broke down, and at last got out of the room, Heaven knows how,
and found myself running towards Long's at the top of my speed. Within that
same hour I was rattling along towards Bristol as fast as four posters
could burn the pavement, thinking with ecstasy over the pleasures of my
reception in England; but far more than all, of the kindness evinced
towards me by him who, in every feeling of his nature, and in every feature
of his deportment was "every inch a prince."
However astonished I had been at the warmth, by which I was treated in
London, I was still less prepared for the enthusiasm which greeted me in
every town through which I passed. There was not a village where we stopped
to change horses whose inhabitants did not simultaneously pour forth to
welcome me with every demonstration of delight. That the fact of four
horses and a yellow chaise should have elicited such testimonies of
satisfaction, was somewhat difficult to conceive; and even had the
important news that I was the bearer of despatches been telegraphed from
London by successive postboys, still the extraordinary excitement was
unaccountable. It was only on reaching Bristol that I learned to what
circumstance my popularity was owing. My friend Mike, in humble imitation
of election practices, had posted a large placard on the back of the
chaise, announcing, in letters of portentous length, something like the
following:--
"Bloody news! Fall of Ciudad Rodrigo! Five thousand prisoners
and two hundred pieces of cannon taken!"
This veracious and satisfactory statement, aided by Mike's personal
exertions, and an unwearied performance on the trumpet he had taken from
the French dragoon, had roused the population of every hamlet, and made our
journey from London to Bristol one scene of uproar, noise, and confusion.
All my attempts to suppress Mike's oratory or music were perfectly
unavailing. In fact, he had pledged my health so many times during the day;
he had drunk so many toasts to the success of the British arms, so many to
the English nation, so many in honor of Ireland, and so many in honor of
Mickey Free himself,--that all respect for my authority was lost in his
enthusiasm for my greatness, and his shouts became wilder, and the blasts
from the trumpet more fearful and incoherent; and finally, on the last
stage of our journey, having exhausted as it were every tribute of his
lungs, he seemed (if I were to judge by the evidence of my ears) to be
performing something very like a hornpipe on the roof of the chaise.
Happily for me there is a limit to all human efforts, and even his powers
at length succumbed; so that, when we arrived at Bristol, I persuaded him
to go to bed, and I once more was left to the enjoyment of some quiet. To
fill up the few hours which intervened before bedtime, I strolled into the
coffee room. The English look of every one, and everything around, had
still its charm for me; and I contemplated, with no small admiration, that
air of neatness and propriety so observant from the bright-faced clock that
ticked unwearily upon the mantelpiece, to the trim waiter himself, with
noiseless step and a mixed look of vigilance and vacancy. The perfect
stillness struck me, save when a deep voice called for "another
brandy-and-water," and some more modestly-toned request would utter a
desire for "more cream." The attention of each man, absorbed in the folds
of his voluminous newspaper, scarcely deigning a glance at the new-comer
who entered, was in keeping with the general surroundings,--giving, in
their solemnity and gravity, a character of almost religious seriousness,
to what, in any other land, would be a scene of riotous and discordant
tumult. I was watching all this with a more than common interest, when the
door opened, and the waiter entered with a large placard. He was followed
by another with a ladder, by whose assistance he succeeded in attaching the
large square of paper to the wall above the fireplace. Every one about rose
up, curious to ascertain what was going forward; and I myself joined in the
crowd around the fire. The first glance of the announcement showed me
what it meant; and it was with a strange mixture of shame and confusion I
read:--
"Fall of Ciudad Rodrigo: with a full and detailed account of the
storming of the great breach, capture of the enemy's cannon, etc., by
Michael Free, 14th Light Dragoons."
Leaving the many around me busied in conjecturing who the aforesaid Mr.
Free might be, and what peculiar opportunities he might have enjoyed for
his report, I hurried from the room and called the waiter.
"What's the meaning of the announcement you've just put up in the
coffee-room? Where did it come from?"
"Most important news, sir; exclusively in the columns of the 'Bristol
Telegraph,'--the gentleman has just arrived--"
"Who, pray? What gentleman?"
"Mr. Free, sir, No. 13--large bed-room--blue damask--supper for
two--oysters--a devil--brandy-and-water-mulled port."
"What the devil do you mean? Is the fellow at supper?"
Somewhat shocked by the tone I ventured to assume towards the illustrious
narrator, the waiter merely bowed his reply.
"Show me to his room," said I; "I should like to see him."
"Follow me, if you please, sir,--this way. What name shall I say, sir?"
"You need not mind announcing me,--I'm an old acquaintance,--just show me
the room."
"I beg pardon, sir, but Mr. Meekins, the editor of the 'Telegraph,' is
engaged with him at present; and positive orders are given not to suffer
any interruption."
"No matter; do as I bid you. Is that it? Oh, I hear his voice. There, that
will do. You may go down-stairs, I'll introduce myself."
[Illustration: CAPTAIN MICKEY FREE RELATING HIS HEROIC DEEDS.]
So saying, and slipping a crown into the waiter's hand, I proceeded
cautiously towards the door, and opened it stealthily. My caution was,
however, needless; for a large screen was drawn across this part of the
room, completely concealing the door, closing which behind me, I took my
place beneath the shelter of this ambuscade, determined on no account to be
perceived by the parties.
Seated in a large arm-chair, a smoking tumbler of mulled port before him,
sat my friend Mike, dressed in my full regimentals, even to the helmet,
which, unfortunately however for the effect, he had put on back foremost; a
short "dudeen" graced his lip, and the trumpet so frequently alluded to lay
near him.
Opposite him sat a short, puny, round-faced little gentleman with rolling
eyes and a turned up nose. Numerous sheets of paper, pens, etc., lay
scattered about; and he evinced, by his air and gesture, the most marked
and eager attention to Mr. Free's narrative, whose frequent interruptions,
caused by the drink and the oysters, were viewed with no small impatience
by the anxious editor.
"You must remember, Captain, time's passing; the placards are all out. Must
be at press before one o'clock to-night,--the morning edition is everything
with us. You were at the first parallel, I think."
"Devil a one o' me knows. Just ring that bell near you. Them's elegant
oysters; and you're not taking your drop of liquor. Here's a toast for you:
'May--' Whoop! raal Carlingford's, upon my conscience! See now, if I won't
hit the little black chap up there the first shot."
Scarcely were the words spoken, when a little painted bust of Shakespeare
fell in fragments on the floor, as an oyster-shell laid him low.
A faint effort at a laugh at the eccentricities of his friend was all the
poor editor could accomplish, while Mike's triumph knew no bounds.
"Didn't I tell you? But come now, are you ready? Give the pen a drink, if
you won't take one yourself."
"I am ready, quite ready," responded the editor.
"Faith, and it's more nor I am. See now, here it is: The night was
murthering dark; you could not see a stim."
"Not see a--a what?"
"A stim, bad luck to you; don't you know English? Hand me the hot water.
Have you that down yet?"
"Yes. Pray proceed."
"The Fifth Division was orthered up, bekase they were fighting chaps; the
Eighty-eighth was among them; the Rangers--Oh, upon my soul, we must drink
the Rangers! Here, devil a one o' me will go on till we give them all the
honors--Hip!--begin."
"Hip!" sighed the luckless editor, as he rose from his chair, obedient to
the command.
"Hurra! hurra! hurra! Well done! There's stuff in you yet, ould foolscap!
The little bottle's empty; ring again, if ye plaze.
'Oh, Father Magan
Was a beautiful man,
But a bit of a rogue, a bit of a rogue!
He was just six feet high,
Had a cast in his eye,
And an illigint brogue, an illigint brogue!
'He was born in Killarney,
And reared up in blarney--'
"Arrah, don't be looking miserable and dissolute that way. Sure, I'm only
screwing myself up for you; besides, you can print the song av you like.
It's a sweet tune, 'Teddy, you Gander,'"
"Really, Mr. Free, I see no prospect of our ever getting done."
"The saints in Heaven forbid!" interrupted Mike, piously; "the evening's
young, and drink plenty. Here now, make ready!"
The editor once more made a gesture of preparation.
"Well, as I was saying," resumed Mike, "it was pitch dark when the columns
moved up, and a cold, raw night, with a little thin rain falling. Have you
that down?"
"Yes. Pray go on."
"Well, just as it might be here, at the corner of the trench, I met Dr.
Quill. 'They're waiting for you, Mr. Free,' says he, 'down there. Picton's
asking for you.' 'Faith, and he must wait,' says I, 'for I'm terrible
dry.' With that, he pulled out his canteen and mixed me a little
brandy-and-water. 'Are you taking it without a toast?' says Doctor Maurice.
'Never fear,' says I; 'here's Mary Brady--'"
"But, my dear sir," interposed Mr. Meekins, "pray do remember this is
somewhat irrelevant. In fifteen minutes it will be twelve o'clock."
"I know it, ould boy, I know it. I see what you're at. You were going to
observe how much better we'd be for a broiled bone."
"Nothing of the kind, I assure you. For Heaven's sake, no more eating and
drinking!"
"No more eating nor drinking! Why not? You've a nice notion of a convivial
evening. Faith, we'll have the broiled bone sure enough, and, what's more,
a half gallon of the strongest punch they can make us; an' I hope that,
grave as you are, you'll favor the company with a song."
"Really, Mr. Free--"
"Arrah, none of your blarney! Don't be misthering me! Call me Mickey, or
Mickey Free, if you like better."
"I protest," said the editor, with dismay, "that here we are two hours at
work, and we haven't got to the foot of the great breach."
"And wasn't the army three months and a half in just getting that far, with
a battering train and mortars and the finest troops ever were seen? And
there you sit, a little fat creature, with your pen in your hand, grumbling
that you can't do more than the whole British army. Take care you don't
provoke me to beat you; for I am quiet till I'm roused. But, by the Rock o'
Cashel--"
Here he grasped the brass trumpet with an energy that made the editor
spring from his chair.
"For mercy's sake, Mr. Free--"
"Well, I won't; but sit down there, and don't be bothering me about sieges
and battles and things you know nothing about."
"I protest," rejoined Mr. Meekins, "that, had you not sent to my office
intimating your wish to communicate an account of the siege, I never should
have thought of intruding myself upon you. And now, since you appear
indisposed to afford the information in question, if you will permit me,
I'll wish you a very good-night."
"Faith, and so you shall, and help me to pass one too; for not a step out
o' that chair shall you take till morning. Do ye think I am going to be
left here by myself all alone?"
"I must observe--" said Mr. Meekins.
"To be sure, to be sure," said Mickey; "I see what you mean. You're not the
best of company, it's true; but at a pinch like this--There now, take, your
liquor."
"Once for all, sir," said the editor, "I would beg you to recollect that,
on the faith of your message to me, I have announced an account of the
storming of Ciudad Rodrigo for our morning edition. Are you prepared, may I
ask, for the consequences of my disappointing ten thousand readers?"
"It's little I care for one of them. I never knew much of reading myself."
"If you think to make a jest of me--" interposed Mr. Meekins, reddening
with passion.
"A jest of you! Troth, it's little fun I can get out of you; you're as
tiresome a creature as ever I spent an evening with. See now, I told you
before not to provoke me; we'll have a little more drink; ring the bell.
Who knows but you'll turn out better by-and-by?"
As Mike rose at these words to summon the waiter, Mr. Meekins seized the
opportunity to make his escape. Scarcely had he reached the door, however,
when he was perceived by Mickey, who hurled the trumpet at him with all his
force, while he uttered a shout that nearly left the poor editor lifeless
with terror. This time, happily, Mr. Free's aim failed him, and before he
could arrest the progress of his victim, he had gained the corridor,
and with one bound, cleared the first flight of the staircase, his pace
increasing every moment as Mike's denunciations grew louder and louder,
till at last, as he reached the street, Mr. Free's delight overcame his
indignation, and he threw himself upon a chair and laughed immoderately.
"Oh, may I never! if I didn't frighten the editor. The little spalpeen
couldn't eat his oysters and take his punch like a man. But sure if he
didn't, there's more left for his betters." So saying, he filled himself
a goblet and drank it off. "Mr. Free, we won't say much for your
inclinations, for maybe they are not the best; but here's bad luck to the
fellow that doesn't think you good company; and here," added he, again
filling his glass,--"and here's may the devil take editors and authors and
compositors, that won't let us alone, but must be taking our lives and our
songs and our little devilments, that belongs to one's own family, and tell
them all over the world. A lazy set of thieves you are, every one of you;
spending your time inventing lies, devil a more nor less; and here," this
time he filled again,--"and here's a hot corner and Kilkenny coals, that's
half sulphur, to the villain--"
For what particular class of offenders Mike's penal code was now devised, I
was not destined to learn; for overcome by punch and indignation, he gave
one loud whoop, and measured his length upon the floor. Having committed
him to the care of the waiters, from whom I learned more fully the
particulars of his acquaintance with Mr. Meekins, I enjoined them,
strictly, not to mention that I knew anything of the matter; and betook
myself to my bed sincerely rejoicing that in a few hours more Mike would
be again in that laud where even his eccentricities and excesses would be
viewed with a favorable and forgiving eye.
CHAPTER XLI.
IRELAND.
"You'd better call your master up," said the skipper to Mickey Free, on the
second evening after our departure from Bristol; "he said he'd like to have
a look at the coast."
The words were overheard by me, as I lay between sleeping and waking in the
cabin of the packet, and without waiting for a second invitation, I rushed
upon deck. The sun was setting, and one vast surface of yellow golden light
played upon the water, as it rippled beneath a gentle gale. The white foam
curled at our prow, and the rushing sound told the speed we were going at.
The little craft was staggering under every sheet of her canvas, and her
spars creaked as her white sails bent before the breeze. Before us, but to
my landsman's eyes scarcely perceptible, were the ill-defined outlines of
cloudy darkness they called land, and which I continued to gaze at with a
strange sense of interest, while I heard the names of certain well-known
headlands assigned to apparently mere masses of fog-bank and vapor.
He who has never been separated in early years, while yet the budding
affections of his heart are tender shoots, from the land of his birth and
of his home, knows nothing of the throng of sensations that crowd upon him
as he nears the shore of his country. The names, familiar as household
words, come with a train of long-buried thoughts; the feeling of attachment
to all we call our own--that patriotism of the heart--stirs strongly within
him, as the mingled thrills of hope and fear alternately move him to joy or
sadness.
Hard as are the worldly struggles between the daily cares of him who carves
out his own career and fortune, yet he has never experienced the darkest
poverty of fate who has not felt what it is to be a wanderer, without a
country to lay claim to. Of all the desolations that visit us, this is the
gloomiest and the worst. The outcast from the land of his fathers, whose
voice must never be heard within the walls where his infancy was nurtured,
nor his step be free upon the mountains where he gambolled in his youth,
this is indeed wretchedness. The instinct of country grows and strengthens
with our years; the joys of early life are linked with it; the hopes of
age point towards it; and he who knows not the thrill of ecstasy some
well-remembered, long-lost-sight-of place can bring to his heart when
returning after years of absence, is ignorant of one of the purest sources
of happiness of our nature.
With what a yearning of the heart, then, did I look upon the dim and misty
cliffs, that mighty framework of my island home, their stern sides lashed
by the blue waters of the ocean, and their summits lost within the clouds!
With what an easy and natural transition did my mind turn from the wild
mountains and the green valleys to their hardy sons, who toiled beneath
the burning sun of the Peninsula; and how, as some twinkling light of the
distant shore would catch my eye, did I wonder within myself whether
beside that hearth and board there might not sit some whose thoughts
were wandering over the sea beside the bold steeps of El Bodon, or the
death-strewn plain of Talavera,--their memories calling up some trait of
him who was the idol of his home; whose closing lids some fond mother had
watched over; above whose peaceful slumber her prayers had fallen; but
whose narrow bed was now beneath the breach of Badajos, and his sleep the
sleep that knows not waking!
I know not if in my sad and sorrowing spirit I did not envy him who thus
had met a soldier's fate,--for what of promise had my own! My hopes of
being in any way instrumental to my poor uncle's happiness grew hourly
less. His prejudices were deeply rooted and of long standing; to have asked
him to surrender any of what he looked upon as the prerogatives of his
house and name, would be to risk the loss of his esteem. What then remained
for me? Was I to watch, day by day and hour by hour, the falling ruin of
our fortunes? Was I to involve myself in the petty warfare of unavailing
resistance to the law? And could I stand aloof from my best, my truest, my
earliest friend, and see him, alone and unaided, oppose his weak and final
struggle to the unrelenting career of persecution. Between these two
alternatives the former could be my only choice; and what a choice!
Oh, how I thought over the wild heroism of the battle-field, the reckless
fury of the charge, the crash, the death-cry, and the sad picture of the
morrow, when all was past, and a soldier's glory alone remained to shed its
high halo over the faults and the follies of the dead.
As night fell, the twinkling of the distant lighthouses--some throwing
a column of light from the very verge of the horizon, others shining
brightly, like stars, from some lofty promontory--marked the different
outlines of the coast, and conveyed to me the memory of that broken and
wild mountain tract that forms the bulwark of the Green Isle against the
waves of the Atlantic. Alone and silently I trod the deck, now turning to
look towards the shore, where I thought I could detect the position of some
well-known headland, now straining my eyes seaward to watch some bright
and flitting star, as it rose from or merged beneath the foaming water,
denoting the track of the swift pilot-boat, or the hardy lugger of the
fisherman; while the shrill whistle of the floating sea-gull was the only
sound save the rushing waves that broke in spray upon our quarter.
What is it that so inevitably inspires sad and depressing thoughts as we
walk the deck of some little craft in the silence of the night's dark
hours? No sense of danger near, we hold on our course swiftly and steadily,
cleaving the dark waves and bending gracefully beneath the freshening
breeze. Yet still the motion, which, in the bright sunshine of the noonday
tells of joy and gladness, brings now no touch of pleasure to our hearts.
The dark and frowning sky, the boundless expanse of gloomy water, spread
like some gigantic pall around us, and our thoughts either turn back upon
the saddest features of the past or look forward to the future with a
sickly hope that all may not be as we fear it.
Mine were, indeed, of the gloomiest; and the selfishness alone of the
thought prevented me from wishing that, like many another, I had fallen by
a soldier's death on the plains of the Peninsula!
As the night wore on, I wrapped myself in my cloak and lay down beneath the
bulwark. The whole of my past life came in review before me, and I thought
over my first meeting with Lucy Dashwood; the thrill of boyish admiration
gliding into love; the hopes, the fears, that stirred my heart; the firm
resolve to merit her affection, which made me a soldier. Alas, how little
thought she of him to whose whole life she had been a guide-star and a
beacon! And as I thought over the hard-fought fields, the long, fatiguing
marches, the nights around the watch-fires, and felt how, in the whirl
and enthusiasm of a soldier's life, the cares and sorrows of every day
existence are forgotten, I shuddered to reflect upon the career that might
now open before me. To abandon, perhaps forever, the glorious path I had
been pursuing for a life of indolence and weariness, while my name, that
had already, by the chance of some fortunate circumstances, begun to be
mentioned with a testimony of approval, should be lost in oblivion or
remembered but as that of one whose early promise was not borne out by the
deeds of his manhood.
As day broke, overcome by watching, I slept, but was soon awoke by the stir
and bustle around me. The breeze had freshened, and we were running under
a reefed mainsail and foresail; and as the little craft bounded above the
blue water, the white foam crested above her prow, and ran in boiling
rivulets along towards the after-deck. The tramp of the seamen, the hoarse
voice of the captain, the shrill cry of the sea-birds, betokened, however,
nothing of dread or danger; and listlessly I leaned upon my elbow and asked
what was going forward.
"Nothing, sir; only making ready to drop our anchor."
"Are we so near shore, then?" said I.
"You've only to round that point to windward, and have a clear run into
Cork harbor."
I sprang at once to my legs. The land-fog prevented my seeing anything
whatever, but I thought that in the breeze, fresh and balmy as it blew, I
could feel the wind off shore. "At last," said I,--"at last!" as I stepped
into the little wherry which shot alongside of us, and we glided into the
still basin of Cove. How I remember every white-walled cottage, and the
beetling cliffs, and that bold headland beside which the valley opens, with
its dark-green woods, and then Spike Island. And what a stir is yonder,
early as it is; the men-of-war tenders seem alive with people, while still
the little village is sunk in slumber, not a smoke-wreath rising from its
silent hearths. Every plash of the oars in the calm water as I neared the
land, every chance word of the bronzed and hardy fisherman, told upon my
heart. I felt it was my home.
"Isn't it beautiful, sir? Isn't it illigant?" said a voice behind me, which
there could be little doubt in my detecting, although I had not seen the
individual since I left England.
"Is not what beautiful?" replied I, rather harshly, at the interruption of
my own thoughts.
"Ireland, to be sure; and long life to her!" cried he, with a cheer that
soon found its responsive echoes in the hearts of our sailors, who seconded
the sentiment with all their energy.
"How am I to get up to Cork, lads?" said I. "I am pressed for time, and
must get forward."
"We'll row your honor the whole way, av it's plazing to you."
"Why, thank you, I'd rather find some quicker mode of proceeding."
"Maybe you'd have a chaise? There's an elegant one at M'Cassidy's."
"Sure, the blind mare's in foal," said the bow oar. "The devil a step she
can go out of a walk; so, your honor, take Tim Riley's car, and you'll get
up cheap. Not that you care for money; but he's going up at eight o'clock
with two young ladies."
"Oh, be-gorra!" said the other, "and so he is. And faix, ye might do worse;
they're nice craytures."
"Well," said I, "your advice seems good; but perhaps they might object to
my company."
"I've no fear; they're always with the officers. Sure, the Miss
Dalrymples--"
"The Miss Dalrymples! Push ahead, boys; it must be later than I thought. We
must get the chaise; I can't wait."
Ten minutes more brought us to land.
My arrangements were soon made, and as my impatience to press forward
became greater the nearer I drew to my destination, I lost not a moment.
The yellow chaise--sole glory of Cove--was brought forth at my request; and
by good fortune, four posters which had been down the preceding evening
from Cork to some gentleman's seat near were about to return. These were
also pressed into my service; and just as the first early riser of the
little village was drawing his curtain to take a half-closed eye-glance
upon the breaking morning, I rattled forth upon my journey at a pace which,
could I only have secured its continuance, must soon have terminated my
weary way.
Beautiful as the whole line of country is, I was totally unconscious of it;
and even Mike's conversational powers, divided as they were between myself
and the two postilions, were fruitless in arousing me from the deep
pre-occupation of my mind by thoughts of home.
It was, then, with some astonishment I heard the boy upon the wheeler ask
whither he should drive me to.
"Tell his honor to wake up; we're in Cork now."
"In Cork! Impossible, already!"
"Faith, may be so; but it's Cork, sure enough."
"Drive to the 'George.' It's not far from the commander-in-chief's
quarters."
"'Tis five minutes' walk, sir. You'll be there before they're put to
again."
"Horses for Fermoy!" shouted out the postilions, as we tore up to the door
in a gallop. I sprang out, and by the assistance of the waiter, discovered
Sir Henry Howard's quarters, to whom my despatches were addressed. Having
delivered them into the hands of an aide-de-camp, who sat bolt upright in
his bed, rubbing his eyes to appear awake, I again hurried down-stairs, and
throwing myself into the chaise, continued my journey.
"Them's beautiful streets, any how!" said Mike, "av they wasn't kept so
dirty, and the houses so dark, and the pavement bad. That's Mr. Beamish's,
that fine house there with the brass rapper and the green lamp beside it;
and there's the hospital. Faix, and there's the place we beat the police
when I was here before; and the house with the sign of the Highlander is
thrown down; and what's the big building with the stone posts at the door?"
"The bank, sir," said the postilion, with a most deferential air as Mike
addressed him. "What bank, acushla?"
"Not a one of me knows, sir; but they call it the bank, though it's only an
empty house."
"Cary and Moore's bank, perhaps?" said I, having heard that in days long
past some such names had failed in Cork for a large amount.
"So it is; your honor's right," cried the postilion; while Mike, standing
up on the box, and menacing the house with his clinched fist, shouted out
at the very top of his voice:
"Oh, bad luck to your cobwebbed windows and iron railings! Sure, it's my
father's son ought to hate the sight of you."
"I hope, Mike, your father never trusted his property in such hands?"
"I don't suspect he did, your honor. He never put much belief in the banks;
but the house cost him dear enough without that."
As I could not help feeling some curiosity in this matter, I pressed Mickey
for an explanation.
"But maybe it's not Cary and Moore's, after all; and I may be cursing
dacent people."
Having reassured his mind by telling him that the reservation he made by
the doubt would tell in their favor should he prove mistaken, he afforded
me the following information:--
"When my father--the heavens be his bed!--was in the 'Cork,' they put him
one night on guard at that same big house you just passed, av it was the
same; but if it wasn't that, it was another. And it was a beautiful fine
night in August and the moon up, and plenty of people walking about,
and all kinds of fun and devilment going on,--drinking and dancing and
everything.
"Well, my father was stuck up there with his musket, to walk up and down,
and not say, 'God save you kindly,' or the time of day or anything, but
just march as if he was in the barrack-yard; and by reason of his being the
man he was he didn't like it half, but kept cursing and swearing to himself
like mad when he saw pleasant fellows and pretty girls going by, laughing
and joking.
"'Good-evening, Mickey,' says one. 'Fine sport ye have all to yourself,
with your long feather in your cap.'
"'Arrah, look how proud he is,' says another, 'with his head up as if he
didn't see a body.'
"'Shoulder, hoo!' cried a drunken chap, with a shovel in his hand. Then
they all began laughing away at my father.
"'Let the dacent man alone,' said an ould fellow in a wig. 'Isn't he
guarding the bank, wid all the money in it?'
"'Faix, he isn't,' says another; 'for there's none left.'
"'What's that you're saying?' says my father.
"'Just that the bank's broke; devil a more!' says he.
"'And there's no goold in it?' says my father.
'"Divil a guinea.'
"'Nor silver?'
"'No, nor silver; nor as much as sixpence, either.'
"'Didn't ye hear that all day yesterday when the people was coming in with
their notes, the chaps there were heating the guineas in a frying-pan,
pretending that they were making them as fast as they could; and sure, when
they had a batch red-hot they spread them out to cool; and what betune the
hating and the cooling, and the burning the fingers counting them, they
kept the bank open to three o'clock, and then they ran away.'
"'Is it truth yer telling?' says my father.
"'Sorra word o' lie in it! Myself had two-and-fourpence of their notes.'
"'And so they're broke,' says my father, 'and nothing left?'
"'Not a brass farden.'
"'And what am I staying here for, I wonder, if there's nothing to guard?'
"'Faix, if it isn't for the pride of the thing--'
"'Oh, sorra taste!'
"'Well, may be for divarsion.'
"'Nor that either.'
"'Faix, then you're a droll man, to spend the evening that way,' says he;
and all the crowd--for there was a crowd--said the same. So with that my
father unscrewed his bayonet, and put his piece on his shoulder, and walked
off to his bed in the barrack as peaceable as need be. But well, when they
came to relieve him, wasn't there a raal commotion? And faith, you see, it
went mighty hard with my father the next morning; for the bank was open
just as usual, and my father was sintinced to fifty lashes, but got
off with a week in prison, and three more rowling a big stone in the
barrack-yard."
Thus chatting away, the time passed over, until we arrived at Fermoy.
Here there was some little delay in procuring horses; and during the
negotiation, Mike, who usually made himself master of the circumstances of
every place through which he passed, discovered that the grocer's shop of
the village was kept by a namesake, and possibly a relation of his own.
"I always had a notion, Mister Charles, that I came from a good stock; and
sure enough, here's 'Mary Free' over the door there, and a beautiful place
inside; full of tay and sugar and gingerbread and glue and coffee and bran,
pickled herrings, soap, and many other commodities."
"Perhaps you'd like to claim kindred, Mike," said I, interrupting; "I'm
sure she'd feel flattered to discover a relative in a Peninsular hero."
"It's just what I'm thinking; av we were going to pass the evening here,
I'd try if I couldn't make her out a second cousin at least."
Fortune, upon this occasion, seconded Mike's wishes, for when the horses
made their appearance, I learned, to my surprise, that the near side one
would not bear a saddle, and the off-sider could only run on his own
side. In this conjuncture, the postilion was obliged to drive from what,
Hibernic speaking, is called the perch,--no ill-applied denomination to
a piece of wood which, about the thickness of one's arm, is hung between
the two fore-springs, and serves as a resting-place in which the luckless
wight, weary of the saddle, is not sorry to repose himself.
"What's to be done?" cried I. "There's no room within; my traps barely
leave space for myself among them."
"Sure, sir," said the postilion, "the other gentleman can follow in the
morning coach; and if any accident happens to yourself on the road, by
reason of a break-down, he'll be there as soon as yourself."
This, at least, was an agreeable suggestion, and as I saw it chimed with
Mike's notions, I acceded at once; he came running up at the moment.
"I had a peep at her through the window, Mister Charles, and, faix, she has
a great look of the family."
"Well, Mickey, I'll leave you twenty-four hours to cultivate the
acquaintance; and to a man like you the time, I know, is ample. Follow me
by the morning's coach. Till then, good-by."
Away we rattled once more, and soon left the town behind us. The wild
mountain tract which stretched on either side of the road presented one
bleak and brown surface, unrelieved by any trace of tillage or habitation;
an apparently endless succession of fern-clad hills lay on every side;
above, the gloomy sky of leaden, lowering aspect, frowned darkly; the sad
and wailing cry of the pewet or the plover was the only sound that broke
the stillness, and far as the eye could reach, a dreary waste extended.
The air, too, was cold and chilly; it was one of those days which, in our
springs, seemed to cast a retrospective glance towards the winter they have
left behind them. The prospect was no cheering one; from heaven above or
earth below there came no sight nor sound of gladness. The rich glow of the
Peninsular landscape was still fresh in my memory,--the luxurious verdure;
the olive, the citron, and the vine; the fair valleys teeming with
abundance; the mountains terraced with their vineyards; the blue
transparent sky spreading o'er all; while the very air was rife with the
cheering song of birds that peopled every grove. What a contrast was here!
We travelled on for miles, but no village nor one human face did we see.
Far in the distance a thin wreath of smoke curled upward; but it came from
no hearth; it arose from one of those field-fires by which spendthrift
husbandry cultivates the ground. It was, indeed, sad; and yet, I know not
how, it spoke more home to my heart than all the brilliant display and all
the voluptuous splendor I had witnessed in London. By degrees some traces
of wood made their appearance, and as we descended the mountain towards
Cahir, the country assumed a more cultivated and cheerful look,--patches of
corn or of meadow-land stretched on either side, and the voice of children
and the lowing of oxen mingled with the cawing of the rooks, as in dense
clouds they followed the ploughman's track. The changed features of the
prospect resembled the alternate phases of temperament of the dweller on
the soil,--the gloomy determination; the smiling carelessness; the dark
spirit of boding; the reckless jollity; the almost savage ferocity of
purpose, followed by a child-like docility and a womanly softness; the
grave, the gay, the resolute, the fickle; the firm, the yielding, the
unsparing, and the tender-hearted,--blending their contrarieties into one
nature, of whose capabilities one cannot predicate the bounds, but to whom,
by some luckless fatality of fortune, the great rewards of life have been
generally withheld until one begins to feel that the curse of Swift was
less the sarcasm wrung from indignant failures than the cold and stern
prophecy of the moralist.
But how have I fallen into this strain! Let me rather turn my eyes forward
towards my home. How shall I find all there? Have his altered fortunes
damped the warm ardor of my poor uncle's heart? Is his smile sicklied over
by sorrow; or shall I hear his merry laugh and his cheerful voice as in
days of yore? How I longed to take my place beside that hearth, and in the
same oak-chair where I have sat telling the bold adventures of a fox-chase
or some long day upon the moors, speak of the scenes of my campaigning
life, and make known to him those gallant fellows by whose side I have
charged in battle, or sat in the bivouac! How will he glory in the
soldier-like spirit and daring energy of Fred Power! How will he chuckle
over the blundering earnestness and Irish warmth of O'Shaughnessy! How will
he laugh at the quaint stories and quainter jests of Maurice Quill! And how
often will he wish once more to be young in hand as in heart to mingle with
such gay fellows, with no other care, no other sorrow, to depress him, save
the passing fortune of a soldier's life!
CHAPTER XLII.
THE RETURN.
A rude shock awoke me as I lay asleep in the corner of the chaise; a shout
followed, and the next moment the door was torn open, and I heard the
postilion's voice crying to me:--
"Spring out! Jump out quickly, sir!"
A whole battery of kicks upon the front panel drowned the rest of his
speech; but before I could obey his injunction, he was pitched upon the
road, the chaise rolled over and the pole snapped short in the middle,
while the two horses belabored the carriage and each other with all their
might. Managing, as well as I was able, to extricate myself, I leaped out
upon the road, and by the aid of a knife, and at the cost of some bruises,
succeeded in freeing the horses from their tackle. The postboy, who had
escaped without any serious injury, labored manfully to aid me, blubbering
the whole time upon the consequences his misfortune would bring down upon
his head.
"Bad luck to ye!" cried he, apostrophizing the off-horse, a tall, raw-boned
beast, with a Roman nose, a dipped back, and a tail ragged and jagged like
a hand-saw,--"bad luck to ye! there never was a good one of your color!"
This, for the information of the "unjockeyed," I may add, was a species of
brindled gray.
"How did it happen, Patsey; how did it happen, my lad?"
"It was the heap o' stones they left in the road since last autumn; and
though I riz him at it fairly, he dragged the ould mare over it and broke
the pole. Oh, wirra, wirra!" cried he, wringing his hands in an agony of
grief, "sure there's neither luck nor grace to be had with ye since the day
ye drew the judge down to the last assizes!"
"Well, what's to be done?"
"Sorra a bit o' me knows; the shay's ruined intirely, and the ould divil
there knows he's conquered us. Look at him there, listening to every word
we're saying! You eternal thief, may be its ploughing you'd like better!"
"Come, come," said I, "this will never get us forward. What part of the
country are we in?"
"We left Banagher about four miles behind us; that's Killimur you see with
the smoke there in the hollow."
Now, although I did not see Killimur (for the gray mist of the morning
prevented me recognizing any object a few hundred yards distant), yet from
the direction in which he pointed, and from the course of the Shannon,
which I could trace indistinctly, I obtained a pretty accurate notion of
where we were.
"Then we are not very far from Portumna?"
"Just a pleasant walk before your breakfast."
"And is there not a short cut to O'Malley Castle over that mountain?"
"Faix, and so there is; and ye can be no stranger to these parts if ye know
that."
"I have travelled it before now. Just tell me, is the wooden bridge
standing over the little stream? It used to be carried away every winter in
my time."
"It's just the same now. You'll have to pass by the upper ford; but it
comes to the same, for that will bring you to the back gate of the demesne,
and one way is just as short as the other."
"I know it, I know it; so now, do you follow me with my luggage to the
castle, and I'll set out on foot."
So saying, I threw off my cloak, and prepared myself for a sharp walk of
some eight miles over the mountain. As I reached the little knoll of land
which, overlooking the Shannon, affords a view of several miles in every
direction, I stopped to gaze upon the scene where every object around was
familiar to me from infancy: the broad, majestic river, sweeping in bold
curves between the wild mountains of Connaught and the wooded hills and
cultivated slopes of the more fertile Munster, the tall chimneys of many a
house rose above the dense woods where in my boyhood I had spent hours and
days of happiness. One last look I turned towards the scene of my late
catastrophe ere I began to descend the mountain. The postboy, with the
happy fatalism of his country, and a firm trust in the future, had
established himself in the interior of the chaise, from which a blue curl
of smoke wreathed upward from his pipe; the horses grazed contentedly by
the roadside; and were I to judge from the evidence before me, I should say
that I was the only member of the party inconvenienced by the accident. A
thin sleeting of rain began to fall; the wind blew sharply in my face, and
the dark clouds, collecting in masses above, seemed to threaten a storm.
Without stopping for even a passing look at the many well-known spots
about, I pressed rapidly on. My old experience upon the moors had taught
me that sling trot in which jumping from hillock to hillock over the
boggy surface, you succeed in accomplishing your journey not only with
considerable speed, but perfectly dryshod.
By the lonely path which I travelled, it was unlikely I should meet any
one. It was rarely traversed except by the foot of the sportsman, or some
stray messenger from the castle to the town of Banagher. Its solitude,
however, was in no wise distasteful to me; my heart was full to bursting.
Each moment as I walked some new feature of my home presented itself
before me. Now it was all happiness and comfort; the scene of its ancient
hospitable board, its warm hearth, its happy faces, and its ready welcome
were all before me, and I increased my speed to the utmost, when suddenly a
sense of sad and sorrowing foreboding would draw around me, and the image
of my uncle's sick-bed, his worn features, his pallid look, his broken
voice would strike upon my heart, and all the changes that poverty,
desertion, and decay can bring to pass would fall upon my heart, and weak
and trembling I would stand for some moments unable to proceed.
Oh, how many a reproachful thought came home to me at what I scrupled
not to call to myself the desertion of my home! Oh, how many a prayer I
uttered, in all the fervor of devotion, that my selfish waywardness and
my yearning for ambition might not bring upon me, in after-life, years
of unavailing regret! As I thought thus, I reached the brow of a little
mountain ridge, beneath which, at a distance of scarcely more than a mile,
the dark woods of O'Malley Castle stretched, before me. The house itself
was not visible, for it was situated in a valley beside the river. But
there lay the whole scene of my boyhood: there the little creek where my
boat was kept, and where I landed on the morning after my duel with Bodkin;
there stretched for many a mile the large, callow meadows, where I trained
my horses, and schooled them for the coming season; and far in the
distance, the brown and rugged peak of old Scariff was lost in the clouds.
The rain by this time had ceased, the wind had fallen, and an almost
unnatural stillness prevailed around; but yet the heavy masses of vapor
frowned ominously, and the leaden hue of land and water wore a gloomy and
depressing aspect. My impatience to get on increased every moment, and
descending the mountain at the top of my speed, I at length reached the
little oak paling that skirted the wood, opened the little wicket, and
entered the path. It was the self-same one I had trod in revery and
meditation the night before I left my home. I remember, too, sitting down
beside the little well which, enclosed in a frame of rock, ran trickling
across the path to be lost among the gnarled roots and fallen leaves
around. Yes, this was the very spot.
Overcome for the instant by my exertion and by my emotion, I sat down upon
the stone, and taking off my cap, bathed my heated and throbbing temples in
the cold spring, Refreshed at once, I was about to rise and press onward,
when suddenly my attention was caught by a sound which, faint from
distance, scarce struck upon my ear. I listened again; but all was still
and silent, the dull splash of the river as it broke upon the reedy shore
was the only sound I heard. Thinking it probably some mere delusion of my
heated imagination, I rose to push forward; but at the moment a slight
breeze stirred in the leaves around me, the light branches rustled and bent
beneath it, and a low moaning sound swelled upward, increasing each instant
as it came; like the distant roar of some mighty torrent it grew louder as
the wind bore it towards me, and now falling, now swelling, it burst
forth into one loud, prolonged cry of agony and grief. O God! it was the
death-wail! I fell upon my knees, my hands clasped in agony; the sweat
of misery dropped off my brow, and with a heart bleeding and breaking I
prayed--I know not what. Again the terrible cry smote upon my ear, and I
could mark the horrible cadences of the death-song, as the voices of the
mourners joined in chorus.
My suspense became too great to bear. I dashed madly forward, one sound
still ringing in my ears, one horrid image before my eyes. I reached the
garden wall; I cleared the little rivulet beside the flower-garden; I
traversed its beds (neglected and decayed); I gained the avenue, taking
no heed of the crowds before me,--some on foot, some on horseback, others
mounted upon the low country car, many seated in groups upon the grass,
their heads bowed upon their bosoms, silent and speechless. As I neared the
house the whole approach was crowded with carriages and horsemen. At the
foot of the large flight of steps stood the black and mournful hearse,
its plumes nodding in the breeze. With the speed of madness and the
recklessness of despair I tore my way through the thickly standing groups
upon the steps; I could not speak, I could not utter. Once more the
frightful cry swelled upward, and in its wild notes seemed to paralyze me;
for with my hands upon my temples, I stood motionless and still. A heavy
footfall as of persons marching in procession came nearer and nearer, and
as the sounds without sank into sobs of bitterness and woe, the black pall
of a coffin, borne on men's shoulders, appeared at the door, and an old man
whose gray hair floated in the breeze, and across whose stern features a
struggle for self-mastery--a kind of spasmodic effort--was playing, held
out his hand to enforce silence. His eye, lack-lustre and dimmed with age,
roved over the assembled multitude, but there was no recognition in his
look until at last he turned it on me. A slight hectic flush colored his
pale cheek, his lip trembled, he essayed to speak, but could not. I sprang
towards him, but choked by agony, I could not utter; my look, however,
spoke what my tongue could not. He threw his arms around me, and muttering
the words, "Poor Godfrey!" pointed to the coffin.
CHAPTER XLIII.
HOME.
Many, many years have passed away since the time I am now about to speak
of, and yet I cannot revert, even for a moment, to the period without a sad
and depressing feeling at my heart. The wreck of fortune, the thwarting of
ambition, the failure in enterprise, great though they be, are endurable
evils. The never-dying hope that youth is blessed with will find its
resting-place still within the breast, and the baffled and beaten will
struggle on unconquered; but for the death of friends, for the loss of
those in whom our dearest affections were centred, there is no solace,--the
terrible "never" of the grave knows no remorse, and even memory, that in
our saddest hours can bring bright images and smiling faces before us,
calls up here only the departed shade of happiness, a passing look at that
Eden of our joys from which we are separated forever. And the desolation of
the heart is never perfect till it has felt the echoes of a last farewell
on earth reverberating within it.
Oh, with what tortures of self-reproach we think of all former intercourse
with him that is gone! How would we wish to live our lives once more,
correcting each passage of unkindness or neglect! How deeply do we blame
ourselves for occasions of benefit lost, and opportunities unprofited by;
and how unceasingly, through after-life, the memory of the departed recurs
to us! In all the ties which affection and kindred weave around us, one
vacant spot is there, unseen and unknown by others, which no blandishments
of love, no caresses of friendship can fill up; although the rank grass
and the tall weeds of the churchyard may close around the humble tomb,
the cemetery of the heart is holy and sacred, pure from all the troubled
thoughts and daily cares of the busy world. To that hallowed spot do we
retire as into our chamber, and when unrewarded efforts bring discomfiture
and misery to our minds, when friends are false, and cherished hopes are
blasted, we think on those who never ceased to love till they had ceased to
live; and in the lonely solitude of our affliction we call upon those who
hear not, and may never return.
Mine was a desolate hearth. I sat moodily down in the old oak parlor, my
heart bowed down with grief. The noiseless steps, the mourning garments of
the old servants; the unnatural silence of those walls within which from
my infancy the sounds of merriment and mirth had been familiar; the large
old-fashioned chair where he was wont to sit, now placed against the
wall,--all spoke of the sad past. Yet, when some footsteps would draw near,
and the door would open, I could not repress a thrill of hope that he was
coming; more than once I rushed to the window and looked out; I could have
sworn I heard his voice.
The old cob pony he used to ride was grazing peacefully before the door;
poor Carlo, his favorite spaniel, lay stretched upon the terrace, turning
ever and anon a look towards the window, and then, as if wearied of
watching for him who came not, he would utter a long, low, wailing cry, and
lie down again to sleep. The rich lawn, decked with field flowers of many
a hue, stretched away towards the river, upon whose calm surface the
white-sailed lugger scarce seemed to move; the sounds of a well-known Irish
air came, softened by distance, as some poor fisherman sat mending his net
upon the bank, and the laugh of children floated on the breeze. Yes, they
were happy.
Two months had elapsed since my return home; how passed by me I know not; a
lethargic stupor had settled upon me. Whole days long I sat at the window,
looking listlessly at the tranquil river, and watching the white foam as,
borne down from the rapids, it floated lazily along. The count had left me
soon, being called up to Dublin by some business, and I was utterly alone.
The different families about called frequently to ask after me, and would,
doubtless, have done all in their power to alleviate my sorrow, and lighten
the load of my affliction; but with a morbid fear, I avoided every one, and
rarely left the house except at night-fall, and then only to stroll by some
lonely and deserted path.
Life had lost its charm for me; my gratified ambition had ended in the
blackest disappointment, and all for which I had labored and longed was
only attained that I might feel it valueless.
Of my circumstances as to fortune I knew nothing, and cared not more;
poverty and riches could matter little now; all my day dreams were
dissipated now, and I only waited for Considine's return to leave Ireland
forever. I had made up my mind, if by any unexpected turn of fate the war
should cease in the Peninsula, to exchange into an Indian regiment. The
daily association with objects which recalled but one image to my brain,
and that ever accompanied by remorse of conscience, gave me not a moment's
peace. My every thought of happiness was mixed up with scenes which now
presented nothing but the evidences of blighted hope; to remain, then,
where I was, would be to sink into the heartless misanthropist, and I
resolved that with my sword I would carve out a soldier's fortune and a
soldier's grave.
Considine came at last. I was sitting alone, at my usual post beside the
window, when the chaise rattled up to the door; for an instant I started to
my legs; a vague sense of something like hope shot through me, the whole
might be a dream, and he--The next moment I became cold and sick, a
faintish giddiness obscured my sight, and though I felt his grasp as he
took my hand, I saw him not. An indistinct impression still dwells upon my
mind of his chiding me for my weakness in thus giving way; of his calling
upon me to assert my position, and discharge the duties of him whose
successor I now was. I heard him in silence; and when he concluded, faintly
pledging myself to obey him, I hurried to my room, and throwing myself upon
my bed burst into an agony of tears. Hitherto my pent up sorrow had wasted
me day by day; but the rock was now smote, and in that gush of misery my
heart found relief.
When I appeared the following morning, the count was struck with my altered
looks; a settled sorrow could not conceal the changes which time and
manhood had made upon me; and as from a kind of fear of showing how deeply
I grieved, I endeavored to conceal it, by degrees I was enabled to converse
calmly and dispassionately upon my fortunes.
"Poor Godfrey," said he, "appointed me his sole executor a few days before
it happened; he knew the time was drawing near, and strange enough,
Charley, though he heard of your return to England, he would not let us
write. The papers spoke of you as being at Carlton House almost daily; your
name appeared at every great festival; and while his heart warmed at your
brilliant success, he absolutely dreaded your coming home. 'Poor
fellow,' he would say, 'what a change for him, to leave the splendor
and magnificence of his Prince's board for our meagre fare and altered
fortunes! And then,' he added, 'as for me--God forgive me!--I can go now;
but how should I bear to part with him if he comes back to me.' And now,"
said the count, when he had concluded a detailed history of my dear uncle's
last illness,--"and now, Charley, what are your plans?"
Briefly, and in a few words, I stated to him my intentions. Without placing
much stress upon the strongest of my reasons--my distaste to what had once
been home--I avowed my wish to join my regiment at once.
He heard me with evident impatience, and as I finished, seized my arm
in his strong grasp. "No, no, boy, none of this; your tone of assumed
composure cannot impose on Bill Considine. You must not return to the
Peninsula--at least not yet awhile; the disgust of life may be strong at
twenty, but it's not lasting; besides, Charley," here his voice faltered
slightly, "his wishes you'll not treat lightly. Read this."
As he spoke, he took a blotted and ill-written letter from his
breast-pocket, and handed it to me. It was in my poor uncle's hand, and
dated the very morning of his death. It ran thus:--
Dear Bill,--Charley must never part with the old house,
come what will; I leave too many ties behind for a stranger's heritage;
he must live among my old friends, and watch, protect
and comfort them. He has done enough for fame; let him now
do something for affection. We have none of us been over good
to these poor people; one of the name must try and save our
credit. God bless you both! It is, perhaps, the last time I shall
utter it.
G. O'M.
I read these few and, to me, affecting lines over and over, forgetful of
all save of him who penned them; when Considine, who supposed that my
silence was attributable to doubt and hesitation, called out:--
"Well, what now?"
"I remain," said I, briefly.
He seized me in his arms with transport, as he said:--
"I knew it, boy, I knew it. They told me you were spoiled by flattery, and
your head turned by fortune; they said that home and country would weigh
lightly in the balance against fame and glory; but I said no, I knew you
better. I told them indignantly that I had nursed you on my knee; that I
watched you from infancy to boyhood, from boy to man; that he of whose
stock you came had one feeling paramount to all, his love of his own
fatherland, and that you would not disgrace him. Besides, Charley, there's
not an humble hearth for many a long mile around us, where, amidst the
winter's blast, tempered not excluded, by frail walls and poverty,--there's
not one such but where poor Godfrey's name rises each night in prayer, and
blessings are invoked on him by those who never felt them themselves."
"I'll not desert them."
"I know you'll not, boy, I know you'll not. Now for the means."
Here he entered into a long and complicated exposure of my dear uncle's
many difficulties, by which it appeared that, in order to leave the estate
free of debt to me, he had for years past undergone severe privations.
These, however,--such is the misfortune of an unguided effort,--had but
ill succeeded, and there was scarcely a farm on the property without its
mortgage. Upon the house and demesne a bond for three thousand pounds still
remained; and to pay off this, Considine advised my selling a portion of
the property.
"It's old Blake lent the money; and only a week before your uncle died,
he served a notice for repayment. I never told Godfrey; it was no use. It
could only embitter his last few hours; and, besides, we had six months to
think of it. The half of that time has now elapsed, however; we must see to
this."
"And did Blake really make this demand, knowing my poor uncle's
difficulties?"
"Why, I half think he did not; for Godfrey was too fine a fellow ever to
acknowledge anything of the sort. He had twelve sheep killed for the poor
in Scariff, at a time when not a servant of the house tasted meat for
months; ay, and our own table, too, none of the most abundant, I assure
you."
What a picture was this, and how forcibly did it remind me of what I had
witnessed in times past. Thus meditating, we returned to the house; and
Considine, whose activity never slumbered, sat down to con over the
rent-roll with old Maguire the steward.
When I joined the count in the evening, I found him surrounded by maps,
rent-rolls, surveys, and leases. He had been poring over these various
documents, to ascertain from which portion of the property we could best
recruit our failing finances. To judge from the embarrassed look and manner
with which he met me, the matter was one of no small difficulty. The
encumbrances upon the estate had been incurred with an unsparing hand; and
except where some irreclaimable tract of bog or mountain rendered a loan
impracticable, each portion of the property had its share of debt.
"You can't sell Killantry, for Basset has above six thousand pounds on it
already. To be sure, there's the Priest's Meadows,--fine land and in good
heart; but Malony was an old tenant of the family, and I cannot recommend
your turning him over to a stranger. The widow M'Bride's farm is perhaps
the best, after all, and it would certainly bring the sum we want; still,
poor Mary was your nurse, Charley, and it would break her heart to do it."
Thus, wherever we turned, some obstacle presented itself, if not from
moneyed causes, at least from those ties and associations which, in an
attached and faithful tenantry, are sure to grow up between them and the
owner of the soil.
Feeling how all-important these things were--endeavoring as I was to fulfil
the will and work out the intentions of my uncle--I saw at once that to
sell any portion of the property must separate me, to a certain extent,
from those who long looked up to our house, and who, in the feudalism of
the west, could ill withdraw their allegiance from their own chief to swear
fealty to a stranger. The richer tenants were those whose industry and
habits rendered them objects of worth and attachment; to the poorer ones,
to whose improvidence and whose follies (if you will) their poverty was
owing, I was bound by those ties which the ancient habit of my house had
contracted for centuries. The bond of benefit conferred can be stronger
than the debt of gratitude itself. What was I then to do? My income would
certainly permit of my paying the interest upon my several mortgages, and
still retaining wherewithal to live; the payment of Blake's bond was my
only difficulty, and small as it was, it was still a difficulty.
"I have it, Charley!" said Considine; "I've found out the way of doing it.
Blake will have no objection, I'm sure, to take the widow's farm in payment
of his debt, giving you a power of redemption within five years. In that
time, what with economy, some management, perhaps," added he, smiling
slightly,--"perhaps a wife with money may relieve all your embarrassments
at once. Well, well, I know you are not thinking of that just now; but
come, what say you to my plan?"
"I know not well what to say. It seems to be the best; but still I have my
misgivings."
"Of course you have, my boy; nor could I love you if you'd part with an old
and faithful follower without them. But, after all, she is only a hostage
to the enemy; we'll win her back, Charley."
"If you think so--"
"I do. I know it."
"Well, then, be it so; only one thing I bargain,--she must herself consent
to this change of masters. It will seem to her a harsh measure that the
child she had nursed and fondled in her arms should live to disunite her
from those her oldest attachments upon earth. We must take care, sir, that
Blake cannot dispossess her; this would be too hard."
"No, no; that we'll guard against. And now, Charley, with prudence and
caution, we'll clear off every encumbrance, and O'Malley Castle shall yet
be what it was in days of yore. Ay, boy, with the descendant of the old
house for its master, and not that general--how do you call him?--that came
down here to contest the county, who with his offer of thirty thousand
pounds thought to uproot the oldest family of the west. Did I ever show you
the letter we wrote him?"
"No, sir," replied I, trembling with agitation as I spoke; "you merely
alluded to it in one of yours."
"Look here, lad!" said he, drawing it from the recesses of a black leather
pocket-book. "I took a copy of it; read that."
The document was dated, "O'Malley Castle, December 9th." It ran thus:--
Sir,--I have this moment learned from my agent, that you, or
some one empowered by you for the purpose, made an offer of several
thousand pounds to buy up the different mortgages upon my property,
with a subsequent intention of becoming its possessor. Now, sir, I
beg to tell you, that if your ungentlemanlike and underhand plot
had succeeded, you dared not darken with your shadow the door-sill
of the house you purchased. Neither your gold nor your flattery--and
I hear you are rich in both--could wipe out from the minds
and hearts of my poor tenantry the kindness of centuries. Be advised,
then, sir; withdraw your offer; let a Galway gentleman settle
his own difficulties his own way; his troubles and cares are quite
sufficient, without your adding to them. There can be but one
mode in which your interference with him could be deemed acceptable:
need I tell you, sir, who are a soldier, how that is? As I
know your official duties are important, and as my nephew--who
feels with me perfectly in this business--is abroad, I can only say
that failing health and a broken frame shall not prevent my undertaking
a journey to England, should my doing so meet your wishes
on this occasion. I am, sir,
Your obedient servant,              GODFREY O'MALLEY.
"This letter," continued Considine, "I enclosed in an envelope, with the
following few lines of my own:"--
"Count Considine presents his compliments to Lieutenant-General
Dashwood; and feeling that as the friend of Mr. Godfrey O'Malley,
the mild course pursued by that gentleman may possibly be attributed
to his suggestion, he begs to assure General Dashwood that the reverse
was the case, and that he strenuously counselled the propriety
of laying a horsewhip upon the general's shoulders, as a preliminary
step in the transaction.
"Count Considine's address is No. 16 Kildare Street."
"Great God!" said I, "is this possible?"
"Well may you say so, my boy: for--would you believe it?--after all that,
he writes a long blundering apology, protesting I know not what about
motives of former friendship, and terminating with a civil hint that we
have done with him forever. And of my paragraph he takes no notice; and
thus ends the whole affair."
"And with it my last hope also!" muttered I to myself.
That Sir George Dashwood's intentions had been misconstrued and mistaken I
knew perfectly well; that nothing but the accumulated evils of poverty and
sickness could have induced my poor uncle to write such a letter I was
well aware; but now the mischief was accomplished, the evil was done, and
nothing remained but to bear with patience and submission, and to endeavor
to forget what thus became irremediable.
"Sir George Dashwood made no allusion to me, sir, in his reply?" inquired
I, catching at anything like a hope.
"Your name never occurs in his letter. But you look pale, boy; all these
discussions come too early upon you; besides, you stay too much at home,
and take no exercise."
So saying, Considine bustled off towards the stables to look after some
young horses that had just been taken up; and I walked out alone to ponder
over what I had heard, and meditate on my plans for the future.
CHAPTER XLIV.
AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE.
As I wandered on, the irritation of my spirit gradually subsided. It was,
to be sure, distressing to think over the light in which my uncle's letter
had placed me before Sir George Dashwood, had even my reputation only with
him been at stake; but with my attachment to his daughter, it was
almost maddening. And yet there was nothing to be done; to disavow my
participation would be to throw discredit upon my uncle. Thus were my hopes
blighted; and thus, at that season when life was opening upon me, did I
feel careless and indifferent to everything. Had my military career still
remained to me, that at least would have suggested scenes sufficient to
distract me from the past; but now my days must be spent where every spot
teemed with memories of bygone happiness and joys never to come back again.
My mind was, however, made up; and without speaking a word to Considine, I
turned homeward, and sat down at my writing-table. In a few brief lines I
informed my army agent of my intention of leaving the service, and desired
that he would sell out for me at once. Fearing lest my resolution might not
be proof against the advice and solicitation of my friends, I cautioned him
against giving my address, or any clew by which letters might reach me.
This done, I addressed a short note to Mr. Blake, requesting to know the
name of his solicitor, in whose hands the bond was placed, and announcing
my intention of immediate repayment.
Trifling as these details were in themselves, I cannot help recording how
completely they changed the whole current of my thoughts. A new train of
interests began to spring up within me; and where so lately the clang of
the battle, the ardor of the march, the careless ease of the bivouac, had
engrossed every feeling, now more humble and homely thoughts succeeded; and
as my personal ambition had lost its stimulant, I turned with pleasure to
those of whose fate and fortunes I was in some sort the guardian. There may
be many a land where the verdure blooms more in fragrance and in richness,
where the clime breathes softer, and a brighter sky lights up the
landscape; but there is none--I have travelled through many a one--where
more touching and heart-bound associations are blended with the features
of the soil than in Ireland, and cold must be the spirit, and barren the
affections of him who can dwell amidst its mountains and its valleys, its
tranquil lakes, its wooded fens, without feeling their humanizing influence
upon him. Thus gradually new impressions and new duties succeeded; and ere
four months elapsed, the quiet monotony of my daily life healed up the
wounds of my suffering, and in the calm current of my present existence, a
sense of content, if not of happiness, crept gently over me, and I ceased
to long for the clash of arms and the loud blast of the trumpet.
Unlike all my former habits, I completely abandoned the sports of the
field. He who had participated in them with me was no longer there; and the
very sight of the tackle itself suggested sad and depressing thoughts.
My horses I took but little pleasure in. To gratify the good and kind
people about, I would walk through the stables, and make some passing
remark, as if to show some interest; but I felt it not. No; it was only by
the total change of all the ordinary channels of my ideas that I could bear
up; and now my days were passed in the fields, either listlessly strolling
along, or in watching the laborers as they worked. Of my neighbors I saw
nothing; returning their cards, when they called upon me, was the extent of
our intercourse; and I had no desire for any further. As Considine had left
me to visit some friends in the south, I was quite alone, and for the first
time in my life, felt how soothing can be such solitude. In each happy
face, in every grateful look around me, I felt that I was fulfilling my
uncle's last behest; and the sense of duty, so strong when it falls upon
the heart accompanied by the sense of power, made my days pass rapidly
away.
It was towards the close of autumn, when I one morning received a letter
from London, informing me that my troop had been sold, and the purchase
money--above four thousand pounds--lodged to my credit at my banker's.
As Mr. Blake had merely answered my former note by a civil message that the
matter in question was by no means pressing, I lost not a moment, when
this news reached me, to despatch Mike to Gurt-na-Morra with a few lines,
expressing my anxious desire to finish the transaction, and begging of Mr.
Blake to appoint a day for the purpose.
To this application Mr. Blake's reply was, that he would do himself the
honor of waiting upon me the following day, when the arrangements I desired
could be agreed upon. Now this was exactly what I wished, if possible,
to avoid. Of all my neighbors, he was the one I predetermined to have no
intercourse with; I had not forgotten my last evening at his house, nor had
I forgiven his conduct to my uncle. However, there was nothing for it but
submission; the interview need not be a long, and it should be a last one.
Thus resolving, I waited in patience for the morrow.
I was seated at my breakfast the next morning, conning between whiles the
columns of the last paper, and feeding my spaniel, who sat upon a large
chair beside me, when the door opened, and the servant announced, "Mr.
Blake;" and the instant after that gentleman bustled in holding out both
his hands with all evidences of most friendly warmth, and calling out,--
"Charley O'Malley, my lad! I'm delighted to see you at last!"
Now, although the distance from the door to the table at which I sat
was not many paces, yet it was quite sufficient to chill down all my
respectable relative's ardor before he approached: his rapid pace became
gradually a shuffle, a slide, and finally a dead stop; his extended arms
were reduced to one hand, barely advanced beyond his waistcoat; his voice,
losing the easy confidence of its former tone, got husky and dry, and broke
into a cough; and all these changes were indebted to the mere fact of
my reception of him consisting in a cold and distant bow, as I told the
servant to place a chair and leave the room.
Without any preliminary whatever, I opened the subject of our negotiation,
expressed my regret that it should have waited so long, and my desire to
complete it.
Whether it was that the firm and resolute tone I assumed had its effect at
once, or that disappointed at the mode in which I received his advances he
wished to conclude our interview as soon as need be, I know not; but he
speedily withdrew from a capacious pocket a document in parchment, which,
having spread at large upon the table, and having leisurely put on his
spectacles, he began to hum over its contents to himself in an undertone.
"Yes, sir, here it is," said he. "'Deed of conveyance between Godfrey
O'Malley, of O'Malley Castle, Esq., on the one part'--perhaps you'd like
your solicitor to examine it,--'and Blake, of Gurt'--because there is no
hurry, Captain O'Malley--'on the other.' In fact, after all, it is a mere
matter of form between relatives," said he, as I declined the intervention
of a lawyer. "I'm not in want of the money--'all the lands and tenements
adjoining, in trust, for the payment of the said three thousand'--thank
God, Captain, the sum is a trifle that does not inconvenience me! The boys
are provided for; and the girls--the pickpockets, as I call them, ha,
ha, ha!--not ill off neither;--'with rights of turbary on the said
premises'--who are most anxious to have the pleasure of seeing you. Indeed,
I could scarcely keep Jane from coming over to-day. 'Sure he's my cousin,'
says she; 'and what harm would it be if I went to see him?' Wild,
good-natured girls, Captain! And your old friend Matthew--you haven't
forgot Matthew?--has been keeping three coveys of partridge for you
this fortnight. 'Charley,' says he,--they call you Charley still,
Captain,--'shall have them, and no one else.' And poor Mary--she was
a child when you were here--Mary is working a sash for you. But I'm
forgetting--I know you have so much business on your hands--"
"Pray, Mr. Blake, be seated. I know nothing of any more importance than the
matter before us. If you will permit me to give you a check for this money.
The papers, I'm sure, are perfectly correct."
"If I only thought it did not inconvenience you--"
"Nothing of the kind, I assure you. Shall I say at sight, or in ten days
hence?"
"Whenever you please, Captain. But it's sorry I am to come troubling you
about such things, when I know you are thinking of other matters. And, as
I said before, the money does not signify to me; the times, thank God, are
good, and I've never been very improvident."
"I think you'll find that correct."
"Oh, to be sure it is! Well, well; I'm going away without saying half what
I intended."
"Pray do not hurry yourself. I have not asked have you breakfasted, for I
remember Galway habits too well for that. But if I might offer you a glass
of sherry and water after your ride?"
"Will you think me a beast if I say yes, Captain? Time was when I didn't
care for a canter of ten or fifteen miles in the morning no more than
yourself; and that's no small boast; God forgive me, but I never see that
clover-field where you pounded the Englishman, without swearing there never
was a leap made before or since. Is this Mickey, Captain? Faith, and it's
a fine, brown, hearty-looking chap you're grown, Mickey. That's mighty
pleasant sherry, but where would there be good wine if it wasn't here? Oh,
I remember now what it was I wanted. Peter,--my son Peter, a slip of a boy,
he's only sixteen,--well, d'you see, he's downright deranged about the
army: he used to see your name in the papers every day, and that terrible
business at--what's the name of the place?--where you rode on the chap's
back up the breach."
"Ciudad Rodrigo, perhaps," said I, scarcely able to repress a laugh.
"Well, sir, since that he'll hear of nothing but going into the army; ay,
and into the dragoons too. Now, Captain, isn't it mighty expensive in the
dragoons?"
"Why, no, not particularly so,--at least in the regiment I served with."
"I promised him I'd ask you; the boy's mad, that's the fact. I wish,
Captain, you'd just reason with him a little; he'll mind what you say,
there's no fear of that. And you see, though I'd like to do what's fair,
I'm not going to cut off the girls for the sake of the boys; with the
blessing of Providence, they'll never be able to reproach me for that. What
I say is this: treat me well, and I'll treat you the same. Marry the man
my choice would pick out for you, and it's not a matter of a thousand or
two I'll care for. There was Bodkin--you remember him?" said he, with a
grin; "he proposed for Mary, but since the quarrel with you, she could
never bear the sight of him, and Alley wouldn't come down to dinner if he
was in the house. Mary's greatly altered; I wish you heard her sing 'I'd
mourn the hopes that leave me.' Queer girl she is; she was little more
than a child when you were here, and she remembers you just as if it was
yesterday."
While Mr. Blake ran on at this rate, now dilating upon my own manifold
virtues and accomplishments, now expatiating upon the more congenial
theme,--the fascinations of his fair daughters, and the various merits of
his sons,--I could not help feeling how changed our relative position was
since our last meeting; the tone of cool and vulgar patronage he then
assumed towards the unformed country lad was now converted into an air of
fawning and deferential submission, still more distasteful.
Young as I was, however, I had already seen a good deal of the world; my
soldiering had at least taught me something of men, and I had far less
difficulty in deciphering the intentions and objects of my worthy relative,
than I should have had in the enigmatical mazes of the parchment bond of
which he was the bearer. After all, to how very narrow an extent in life
are we fashioned by our own estimate of ourselves! My changed condition
affected me but little until I saw how it affected others; that the
position I occupied should seem better now that life had lost the great
stimulus of ambition, was somewhat strange; and that flattery should pay
its homage to the mourning coat which it would have refused to my soldier's
garb, somewhat surprised me. Still my bettered fortunes shone only brightly
by reflected light; for in my own heart I was sad, spiritless, and
oppressed.
Feeling somewhat ashamed at the coldness with which I treated a man so much
my elder, I gradually assumed towards Mr. Blake a manner less reserved. He
quickly availed himself of the change, and launched out into an eloquent
expos of my advantages and capabilities; the only immediate effect of
which was to convince me that my property and my prospects must have been
very accurately conned over and considered by that worthy gentleman before
he could speak of the one or the other with such perfect knowledge.
"When you get rid of these little encumbrances, your rent-roll will be
close on four thousand a year. There's Bassett, sure, by only reducing his
interest from ten to five per cent, will give you a clear eight hundred per
annum; let him refuse, and I'll advance the money. And, besides, look at
Freney's farm; there's two hundred acres let for one third of the value,
and you must look to these tilings; for, you see, Captain, we'll want you
to go into Parliament; you can't help coming forward at the next election,
and by the great gun of Athlone, we'll return you."
Here Mr. Blake swallowed a full bumper of sherry, and getting up a little
false enthusiasm for the moment, grasped me by both hands and shook me
violently; this done, like a skilful general, who, having fired the last
shot of his artillery, takes care to secure his retreat, he retired towards
the door, where his hat and coat were lying.
"I've a hundred apologies to make for encroaching upon your time; but, upon
my soul, Captain, you are so agreeable, and the hours have passed away so
pleasantly--May I never, if it is not one o'clock!--but you must forgive
me."
My sense of justice, which showed me that the agreeability had all been on
Mr. Blake's side, prevented me from acknowledging this compliment as it
deserved; so I merely bowed stiffly, without speaking. By this time he had
succeeded in putting on his great-coat, but still, by some mischance or
other, the moment of his leaving-taking was deferred; one time he buttoned
it awry, and had to undo it all again; then, when it was properly adjusted,
he discovered that his pocket-handkerchief was not available, being left in
the inner coat-pocket; to this succeeded a doubt as to the safety of the
check, which instituted another search, and it was full ten minutes before
he was completely caparisoned and ready for the road.
"Good-by, Captain, good-by!" said he warmly, yet warily, not knowing at
what precise temperature the metal of my heart was fusible. At a mild heat
I had been evidently unsinged, and the white glow of his flattery seemed
only to harden me. The interview was now over, and as I thought sufficient
had been done to convince my friend that the terms of distant acquaintance
were to be the limits of our future intercourse, I assumed a little show of
friendliness, and shook his hand warmly.
"Good-by, Mr. Blake; pray present my respectful compliments to your
friends. Allow me to ring for your horse; you are not going to have a
shower, I hope."
"No, no, Captain, only a passing cloud," said he, warming up perceptibly
under the influence of my advances, "nothing more. Why, what is it I'm
forgetting now! Oh, I have it! May be I'm too bold; but sure an old friend
and relation may take a liberty sometimes. It was just a little request
of Mrs. Blake, as I was leaving the house." He stopped here as if to take
soundings, and perceiving no change in my countenance, continued: "It was
just to beg, that, in a kind and friendly way, you'd come over and eat your
dinner with us on Sunday; nobody but the family, not a soul--Mrs. Blake and
the girls; a boiled leg of mutton; Matthew; a fresh trout, if we can catch
one! Plain and homely, but a hearty welcome, and a bottle of old claret,
may be, too--ah! ah! ah!"
Before the cadence of Mr. Blake's laugh had died away, I politely but
resolutely declined the proffered invitation, and by way of setting the
question at rest forever, gave him to understand that, from impaired health
and other causes, I had resolved upon strictly confining myself to the
limits of my own house and grounds, at least for the present.
Mr. Blake then saluted me for the last time, and left the room. As he
mounted his hackney, I could not help overhearing an abortive effort he
made to draw Mike into something like conversation; but it proved an utter
failure, and it was evident he deemed the man as incorrigible as the
master.
"A very fine young man the captain is--remarkable!--and it's proud I am to
have him for a nephew!"
So saying, he cantered down the avenue, while Mickey, as he looked after
him, muttered between his teeth, "And faix, it's prouder you'd be av he was
your son-in-law!"
Mike's soliloquy seemed to show me, in a new light, the meaning of my
relative's manner. It was for the first time in my life that such a thought
had occurred to me, and it was not without a sense of shame that I now
admitted it.
If there be something which elevates and exalts us in our esteem, tinging
our hearts with heroism and our souls with pride, in the love and
attachment of some fair and beautiful girl, there is something equally
humiliating in being the object of cold and speculative calculation to a
match-making family: your character studied; your pursuits watched; your
tastes conned over; your very temperament inquired into; surrounded
by snares; environed by practised attentions; one eye fixed upon the
registered testament of your relative, the other riveted upon your own
caprices; and then those thousand little cares and kindnesses which come so
pleasurably upon the heart when the offspring of true affection, perverted
as they are by base views and sordid interest, are so many shocks to the
feeling and understanding. Like the Eastern sirocco, which seems to breathe
of freshness and of health, and yet bears but pestilence and death upon its
breezes,--so these calculated and well-considered traits of affection only
render callous and harden the heart which had responded warmly, openly, and
abundantly to the true outpourings of affection. At how many a previously
happy hearth has the seed of this fatal passion planted its discord! How
many a fair and lovely girl, with beauty and attractions sufficient to
win all that her heart could wish of fondness and devotion, has, by this
pernicious passion, become a cold, heartless, worldly coquette, weighing
men's characters by the adventitious circumstances of their birth and
fortune, and scrutinizing the eligibility of a match with the practised
acumen with which a notary investigates the solvency of a creditor. How do
the traits of beauty, gesture, voice, and manner become converted into the
common-place and distasteful trickery of the world! The very hospitality of
the house becomes suspect, their friendship is but fictitious; those rare
and goodly gifts of fondness and sisterly affection which grow up in
happier circumstances, are here but rivalry, envy, and ill-conceived
hatred. The very accomplishments which cultivate and adorn life, that light
but graceful frieze which girds the temple of homely happiness, are here
but the meditated and well-considered occasions of display. All the bright
features of womanhood, all the freshness of youth, and all its fascinations
are but like those richly-colored and beautiful fruits, seductive to the
eye and fair to look upon, but which within contain nothing but a core of
rottenness and decay.
No, no; unblessed by all which makes a hearth a home, I may travel on my
weary way through life; but such a one as this I will not make the partner
of my sorrows and my joys, come what will of it!
CHAPTER XLV.
A SURPRISE.
From the hour of Mr. Blake's departure, my life was no longer molested. My
declaration, which had evidently, under his auspices, been made the subject
of conversation through the country, was at least so far successful, as
it permitted me to spend my time in the way I liked best, and without the
necessity of maintaining the show of intercourse, when in reality I kept
up none, with the neighborhood. While thus, therefore, my life passed on
equably and tranquilly, many mouths glided over, and I found myself already
a year at home, without it appearing more than a few weeks. Nothing seems
so short in retrospect as monotony; the number, the variety, the interest
of the events which occupy us, making our hours pass glibly and flowingly,
will still suggest to the mind the impressions of a longer period than
when the daily routine of our occupations assumes a character of continued
uniformity. It seems to be the amende made by hours of weariness and
tedium, that, in looking back upon them, they appear to have passed rapidly
over. Not that my life, at the period I speak of, was devoid of interest;
on the contrary, devoting myself with zeal and earnestness to the new
duties of my station, I made myself thoroughly acquainted with the
condition of my property, the interest of my tenantry, their prospects,
their hopes, their objects. Investigating them as only he can who is
the owner of the soil, I endeavored to remedy the ancient vices of the
land,--the habits of careless, reckless waste, of indifference for the
morrow; and by instilling a feature of prudent foresight into that
boundless confidence in the future upon which every Irishman of every
rank lives and trusts, I succeeded at last in so far ameliorating their
situation, that a walk through my property, instead of presenting--as it
at first did--a crowd of eager and anxious supplicants, entreating for
abatements in rent, succor for their sick, and sometimes even food itself,
showed me now a happy and industrious people, confident in themselves, and
firmly relying on their own resources.
Another spring was now opening, and a feeling of calm and tranquil
happiness, the result of my successful management of my estate, made my
days pass pleasantly along. I was sitting at a late breakfast in my little
library; the open window afforded a far and wide prospect of the country,
blooming in all the promise of the season, while the drops of the passing
shower still lingered upon the grass, and were sparkling like jewels under
the bright sunshine. Masses of white and billowy cloud moved swiftly
through the air, coloring the broad river with many a shadow as they
passed. The birds sang merrily, the trees shook their leaves in concert,
and there was that sense of movement in everything on earth and sky which
gives to spring its character of lightness and exhilaration. The youth of
the year, like the youth of our own existence, is beautiful in the restless
activity which marks it. The tender flower that seems to open as we look;
the grass that springs before our eyes,--all speak of promise. The changing
phases of the sky, like the smiles and tears of infancy, excite without
weariness, and while they engage our sympathies, they fatigue not our
compassion.
Partly lost in thought as I looked upon the fair and varied scene before
me, now turning to the pages of the book upon the breakfast-table, the
hours of the morning passed quickly over, and it was already beyond noon. I
was startled from my revery by sounds which I could scarcely trust my
ears to believe real. I listened again, and thought I could detect them
distinctly. It seemed as though some one were rapidly running over the keys
of a pianoforte, essaying with the voice to follow the notes, and sometimes
striking two or three bold and successive chords; then a merry laugh would
follow, and drown all other sounds. "What can it be?" thought I. "There is,
to be sure, a pianoforte in the large drawing-room; but then, who would
venture upon such a liberty as this? Besides, who is capable of it? There,
it can be no inexperienced performer gave that shake; my worthy housekeeper
never accomplished that!" So saying, I jumped from the breakfast-table,
and set off in the direction of the sound. A small drawing-room and the
billiard-room lay between me and the large drawing-room; and as I traversed
them, the music grew gradually louder. Conjecturing that, whoever it might
be, the performance would cease on my entrance, I listened for a few
moments before opening the door. Nothing could be more singular, nothing
more strange, than the effect of those unaccustomed sounds in that silent
and deserted place. The character of the music, too, contributed not
a little to this; rapidly passing from grave to gay, from the melting
softness of some plaintive air to the reckless hurry and confusion of an
Irish jig, the player seemed, as it were, to run wild through all the
floating fancies of his memory; now breaking suddenly off in the saddest
cadence of a song, the notes would change into some quaint, old-fashioned
crone, in which the singer seemed so much at home, and gave the queer
drollery of the words that expression of archness so eminently the
character of certain Irish airs. "But what the deuce is this?" said I, as,
rattling over the keys with a flowing but brilliant finger, she,--for
it was unquestionably a woman,--with a clear and sweet voice, broken by
laughter, began to sing the words of Mr. Bodkin's song, "The Man for
Galway." When she had finished the last verse, her hand strayed, as it
were, carelessly across the instrument, while she herself gave way to a
free burst of merriment; and then, suddenly resuming the air, she chanted
forth the following words, with a spirit and effect I can convey no idea
of:--
"To live at home,
And never roam;
To pass his days in sighing;
To wear sad looks,
Read stupid books,
And look half dead or dying;
Not show his face,
Nor join the chase,
But dwell a hermit always:
Oh, Charley, dear!
To me 'tis clear,
You're not the man for Galway!"
"You're not the man for Galway!" repeated she once more, while she closed
the piano with a loud bang.
"And why not, my dear, why not the man for Galway?" said I, as, bursting
open the door, I sprang into the room.
"Oh, it's you, is it?--at last! So I've unearthed you, have I?"
With these words she burst into an immoderate fit of laughter; leaving me,
who intended to be the party giving the surprise, amazed, confused, and
speechless, in the middle of the floor.
[Illustration: BABY BLAKE.]
That my reader may sympathize a little in my distresses, let me present him
with the tableau before me. Seated upon the piano-stool was a young-lady
of at most eighteen years: her face, had it not been for its expression of
exuberant drollery and malicious fun, would have been downright beautiful;
her eyes, of the deepest blue, and shaded by long lashes, instead of
indulging the character of pensive and thoughtful beauty for which Nature
destined them, sparkled with a most animated brightness; her nose,
which, rather short, was still beautifully proportioned, gave, with
her well-curled upper lip, a look of sauciness to the features quite
bewitching; her hair--that brilliant auburn we see in a Carlo Dolci--fell
in wild and massive curls upon her shoulders. Her costume was a dark-green
riding-habit, not of the newest in its fashion, and displaying more than
one rent in its careless folds; her hat, whip, and gloves lay on the floor
beside her, and her whole attitude and bearing indicated the most perfect
ease and carelessness.
"So you are caught--taken alive!" said she, as she pressed her hands upon
her sides in a fresh burst of laughter.
"By Jove! this is a surprise indeed!" said I. "And, pray, into whose fair
hands have I fallen a captive?" recovering myself a little, and assuming a
half air of gallantry.
"So you don't know me, don't you?"
"Upon my life I do not!"
"How good! Why, I'm Baby Blake."
"Baby Blake?" said I, thinking that a rather strange appellation for one
whose well-developed proportions betokened nothing of infancy,--"Baby
Blake?"
"To be sure; your cousin Baby."
"Indeed!" said I, springing forward. "Let me embrace my relative."
Accepting my proffered salutation with the most exemplary coolness, she
said:--
"Get a chair, now, and let's have a talk together."
"Why the devil do they call you Baby?" said I, still puzzled by this
palpable misnomer.
"Because I am the youngest, and I was always the baby," replied she,
adjusting her ringlets with a most rural coquetry. "Now tell me something.
Why do you live shut up here like a madman, and not come near us at
Gurt-na-Morra?"
"Oh, that's a long story, Baby. But, since we are asking questions, how did
you get in here?"
"Just through the window, my dear; and I've torn my habit, as you see."
So saying, she exhibited a rent of about two feet long, thrusting through
it a very pretty foot and ankle at the same time.
"As my inhospitable customs have cost you a habit, you must let me make you
a present of one."
"No, will you though? That's a good fellow. Lord! I told them I knew you
weren't a miser; that you were only odd, that's all."
"And how did you come over, Baby?"
"Just cantered over with little Paddy Byrne. I made him take all the walls
and ditches we met, and they're scraping the mud off him ever since. I'm
glad I made you laugh, Charley; they say you are so sad. Dear me, how
thirsty I am! Have you any beer?"
"To be sure, Baby. But wouldn't you like some luncheon?"
"Of all things. Well, this is fun!" said she, as taking my arm, I led her
from the drawing-room. "They don't know where I'm gone,--not one of them;
and I've a great mind not to tell them, if you wouldn't blab."
"Would it be quite proper?"
"Proper!" cried she, imitating my voice. "I like that! as if I was going to
run away with you! Dear me, what a pretty house, and what nice pictures!
Who is the old fellow up there in the armor?"
"That's Sir Hildebrand O'Malley," said I, with some pride in recognizing an
ancestor of the thirteenth century.
"And the other old fright with the wig, and his hands stuck in his
pockets?"
"My grandfather, Baby."
"Lord, how ugly he is! Why, Charley, he hasn't the look of you. One would
think, too, he was angry at us. Ay, old gentleman, you don't like to see me
leaning on Cousin Charley's arm! That must be the luncheon; I'm sure I hear
knives and forks rattling there."
The old butler's astonishment was not inferior to my own a few minutes
before, when I entered the dining-room with my fair cousin upon my arm.
As I drew a chair towards the table, a thought struck me that possibly
it might only be a due attention to my fair guest if I invited the
housekeeper, Mrs. Magra, to favor us with her presence; and accordingly, in
an undertone, so as not to be overheard by old Simon, I said,--
"Perhaps, Baby, you'd like to have Mrs. Magra to keep us company?"
"Who's she?" was the brief answer.
"The housekeeper; a very respectable old matron."
"Is she funny?"
"Funny! not a bit."
"Oh, then, never mind her. What made you think of her?"
"Why, I thought, perhaps you'd think--That is people might say--In fact I
was doing a little bit proper on your account."
"Oh, that was it, was it? Thank you for nothing, my dear; Baby Blake can
take care of herself. And now just help me to that wing there. Do you know,
Cousin Charley, I think you're an old quiz, and not half as good a fellow
as you used to be?"
"Come, come, Baby, don't be in such a hurry to pronounce upon me. Let us
take a glass of wine. Fill Miss Blake's glass, Simon."
"Well, you may be better when one comes to know you. I detest sherry. No,
never mind, I'll take it, as it's here. Charley, I'll not compliment you
upon your ham; they don't know how to save them here. I'll give you such
a receipt when you come over to see us. But will you come? That's the
question."
"How can you ask me! Don't you think I'll return your visit?"
"Oh, hang your ceremony! Come and see us, like a good-natured fellow that
knew us since we played together and quarrelled over our toys on the grass.
Is that your sword up there? Did you hear that noise? That was thunder:
there it comes. Look at that!"
As she spoke, a darkness like night overspread the landscape; the waves of
the river became greatly agitated, and the rain, descending in torrents,
beat with tremendous force against the windows; clap after clap of thunder
followed; the lightning flashed fearfully through the gloom; and the wind,
growing every moment stronger, drove the rain with redoubled violence
against the glass. For a while we amused ourselves with watching the
effects of the storm without: the poor laborers flying from their work; the
dripping figures seeking shelter beneath the trees; the barques; the very
loaded carts themselves,--all interested Miss Baby, whose eye roved from
the shore to the Shannon, recognizing with a practised eye every house upon
its banks, and every barque that rocked and pitched beneath the gale.
"Well, this is pleasant to look out at," said she, at length, and after the
storm had lasted for above an hour, without evincing any show of abatement;
"but what's to become of me?"
Now that was the very question I had been asking myself for the last twenty
minutes without ever being able to find the answer.
"Eh, Charley, what's to become of me?"
"Oh, never fear; one thing's quite certain, you cannot leave this in such
weather. The river is certainly impassable by this time at the ford, and to
go by the road is out of the question; it is fully twelve miles. I have it,
Baby; you, as I've said before, can't leave this, but I can. Now, I'll go
over to Gurt-na-Morra, and return in the morning to bring you back; it will
be fine by that time."
"Well, I like your notion. You'll leave me all alone here to drink tea, I
suppose, with your friend Mrs. Magra. A pleasant evening I'd have of it;
not a bit--"
"Well, Baby, don't be cross; I only meant this arrangement really for your
sake. I needn't tell you how very much I'd prefer doing the honors of my
poor house in person."
"Oh, I see what you mean,--more propers. Well, well, I've a great deal to
learn; but look, I think its growing lighter."
"No, far from it; it's only that gray mass along the horizon that always
bodes continual rain."
As the prospect without had little cheering to look upon, we sat down
beside the fire and chatted away, forgetting very soon in a hundred mutual
recollections and inquiries, the rain and the wind, the thunder and the
hurricane. Now and then, as some louder crash would resound above our
heads, for a moment we would turn to the window, and comment upon the
dreadful weather; but the next, we had forgotten all about it, and were
deep in our confabulations.
As for my fair cousin, who at first was full of contrivances to pass
the time,--such as the piano, a game at backgammon, chicken hazard,
battledoor,--she at last became mightily interested in some of my
soldiering adventures, and it was six o'clock ere we again thought that
some final measure must be adopted for restoring Baby to her friends, or at
least, guarding against the consequences her simple and guileless nature
might have involved her in.
Mike was called into the conference, and at his suggestion, it was decided
that we should have out the phaeton, and that I should myself drive
Miss Blake home; a plan which offered no other difficulties than this
one,--namely, that of above thirty horses in my stables, I had not a single
pair which had ever been harnessed.
This, so far from proving the obstacle I deemed it, seemed, on the
contrary, to overwhelm Baby with delight.
"Let's have them. Come, Charley, this will be rare fun; we couldn't have a
team of four, could we?"
"Six, if you like it, my dear coz--only who's to hold them? They're young
thorough-breds,--most of them never backed; some not bitted. In fact, I
know nothing of my stable. I say, Mike, is there anything fit to take out?"
"Yes, sir; there's Miss Wildespin, she's in training, to be sure; but we
can't help that; and the brown colt they call, 'Billy the Bolter,'--they're
the likeliest we have; without your honor would take the two chestnuts we
took up last week; they're raal devils to go; and if the tackle will hold
them, they'll bring you to Mr. Blake's door in forty minutes."
"I vote for the chestnuts," said Baby, slapping her boot with her
horsewhip.
"I move an amendment in favor of Miss Wildespin," said I, doubtfully.
"He'll never do for Galway," sang Baby, laying her whip on my shoulder with
no tender hand; "yet you used to cross the country in good style when you
were here before."
"And might do so again, Baby."
"Ah, no; that vile dragoon seat, with your long stirrup, and your heel
dropped, and your elbow this way, and your head that! How could you ever
screw your horse up to his fence, lifting him along as you came up through
the heavy ground, and with a stroke of your hand sending him pop over, with
his hind-legs well under him?" Here she burst into a fit of laughter at my
look of amazement, as with voice, gesture, and look she actually dramatized
the scene she described.
By the time that I had costumed my fair friend in my dragoon cloak and a
foraging cap, with a gold band around it, which was the extent of muffling
my establishment could muster, a distant noise without apprised us that the
phaeton was approaching. Certainly, the mode in which that equipage came
up to the door might have inspired sentiments of fear in any heart less
steeled against danger than my fair cousin's. The two blood chestnuts (for
it was those Mike harnessed, having a groom's dislike to take a racer out
of training) were surrounded by about twenty people: some at their heads;
some patting them on the flanks; some spoking the wheels; and a few, the
more cautious of the party, standing at a respectable distance and offering
advice. The mode of progression was simply a spring, a plunge, a rear,
a lounge, and a kick; and considering it was the first time they ever
performed together, nothing could be more uniform than their display.
Sometimes the pole would be seen to point straight upward, like a lightning
conductor, while the infuriated animals appeared sparring with their
fore-legs at an imaginary enemy. Sometimes, like the pictures in a
school-book on mythology, they would seem in the act of diving, while
with their hind-legs they dashed the splash-board into fragments behind
them,--their eyes flashing fire, their nostrils distended, their flanks
heaving, and every limb trembling with passion and excitement.
"That's what I call a rare turn-out," said Baby, who enjoyed the proceeding
amazingly.
"Yes; but remember," said I, "we're not to have all these running footmen
the whole way."
"I like that near-sider with the white fetlock."
"You're right, Miss," said Mike, who entered at the moment, and felt quite
gratified at the criticism,--"you're right, Miss; it's himself can do it."
"Come, Baby, are you ready?"
"All right, sir," said she, touching her cap knowingly with her forefinger.
"Will the tackle hold, Mike?" said I.
"We'll take this with us, at any rate," pointing, as he spoke, to a
considerable coil of rope, a hammer, and a basket of nails, he carried on
his arm. "It's the break harness we have, and it ought to be strong enough;
but sure if the thunder comes on again, they'd smash a chain cable."
"Now, Charley," cried Baby, "keep their heads straight; for when they go
that way, they mean going."
"Well, Baby, let's start; but pray remember one thing,--if I'm not as
agreeable on the journey as I ought to be, if I don't say as many pretty
things to my pretty coz, it's because these confounded beasts will give me
as much as I can do."
"Oh, yes, look after the cattle, and take another time for squeezing my
hand. I say, Charley, you'd like to smoke, now, wouldn't you? If so, don't
mind me."
"A thousand thanks for thinking of it; but I'll not commit such a trespass
on good breeding."
When we reached the door, the prospect looked dark and dismal enough. The
rain had almost ceased, but masses of black clouds were hurrying across
the sky, and the low rumbling noise of a gathering storm crept along the
ground. Our panting equipage, with its two mounted grooms behind,--for to
provide against all accident, Mike ordered two such to follow us,--stood
in waiting. Miss Blake's horse, held by the smallest imaginable bit of
boyhood, bringing up the rear.
"Look at Paddy Byrne's face," said Baby, directing my attention to the
little individual in question.
Now, small as the aforesaid face was, it contrived, within its limits, to
exhibit an expression of unqualified fear. I had no time, however, to give
a second look, when I jumped into the phaeton and seized the reins. Mike
sprang up behind at a look from me, and without speaking a word, the
stablemen and helpers flew right and left. The chestnuts, seeing all free
before them, made one tremendous plunge, carrying the fore-carriage clear
off the ground, and straining every nut, bolt, screw, and strap about us
with the effort.
"They're off now," cried Mickey.
"Yes, they are off now," said Baby. "Keep them going."
Nothing could be easier to follow than this advice; and in fact so little
merit had I in obeying it, that I never spoke a word. Down the avenue we
went, at the speed of lightning, the stones and the water from the late
rain flying and splashing about us. In one series of plunges, agreeably
diversified by a strong bang upon the splash-board, we reached the gate.
Before I had time to utter a prayer for our safety, we were through and
fairly upon the high road.
"Musha, but the master's mad!" cried the old dame of the gate-lodge; "he
wasn't out of this gate for a year and a half, and look now--"
The rest was lost in the clear ringing laugh of Baby, who clapped her hands
in ecstasy and delight.
"What a spanking pair they are! I suppose you wouldn't let me get my hand
on them?" said she, making a gesture as if to take the reins.
"Heaven forbid, my dear!" said I; "they've nearly pulled my wrists off
already."
Our road, like many in the west of Ireland, lay through a level tract of
bog; deep ditches, half filled with water, on either side of us, but,
fortunately, neither hill nor valley for several miles.
"There's the mail," said Baby, pointing to a dark speck at a long distance
off.
Ere many minutes elapsed, our stretching gallop, for such had our pace
sobered into, brought us up with it, and as we flew by, at top speed, Baby
jumped to her feet, and turning a waggish look at our beaten rivals, burst
out into a fit of triumphant laughter.
Mike was correct as to time; in some few seconds less than forty minutes we
turned into the avenue of Gurt-na-Morra. Tearing along like the very moment
of their starting, the hot and fiery animals galloped up the approach, and
at length came to a stop in a deep ploughed field, into which, fortunately
for us, Mr. Blake, animated less by the picturesque than the profitable,
had converted his green lawn. This check, however, was less owing to my
agency than to that of my servants; for dismounting in haste, they flew to
the horses' heads, and with ready tact, and before I had helped my cousin
to the ground, succeeded in unharnessing them from the carriage, and led
them, blown and panting, covered with foam, and splashed with mud, into the
space before the door.
By this time we were joined by the whole Blake family, who poured forth in
astonishment at our strange and sudden appearance. Explanation on my part
was unnecessary, for Baby, with a volubility quite her own, gave the whole
recital in less than three minutes. From the moment of her advent to her
departure, they had it all; and while she mingled her ridicule at my
surprise, her praise of my luncheon, her jests at my prudence, the whole
family joined heartily in her mirth, while they welcomed, with most
unequivocal warmth, my first visit to Gurt-na-Morra.
I confess it was with no slight gratification I remarked that Baby's visit
was as much a matter of surprise to them as to me. Believing her to have
gone to visit at Portumna Castle, they felt no uneasiness at her absence;
so that, in her descent upon me, she was really only guided by her own
wilful fancy, and that total absence of all consciousness of wrong which
makes a truly innocent girl the hardiest of all God's creatures. I was
reassured by this feeling, and satisfied that, whatever the intentions of
the elder members of the Blake family, Baby was, at least, no participator
in their plots or sharer in their intrigues.
CHAPTER XLVI.
NEW VIEWS.
When I found myself the next morning at home, I could not help ruminating
over the strange adventures of the preceding day, and felt a kind of
self-reproach at the frigid manner in which I had hitherto treated all the
Blake advances, contrasting so ill for me with the unaffected warmth and
kind good-nature of their reception. Never alluding, even by accident, to
my late estrangement; never, by a chance speech, indicating that they
felt any soreness for the past,--they talked away about the gossip of
the country: its feuds, its dinners, its assizes, its balls, its
garrisons,--all the varied subjects of country life were gayly and
laughingly discussed; and when, as I entered my own silent and deserted
home, and contrasted its look of melancholy and gloom with the gay and
merry scene I so lately parted from, when my echoing steps reverberated
along the flagged hall,--I thought of the happy family picture I left
behind me, and could not help avowing to myself that the goods of fortune
I possessed were but ill dispensed, when, in the midst of every means and
appliance for comfort and happiness, I lived a solitary man, companionless
and alone.
I arose from breakfast a hundred times,--now walking impatiently towards
the window, now strolling into the drawing-room. Around, on every side, lay
scattered the prints and drawings, as Baby had thrown them carelessly
upon the floor; her handkerchief was also there. I took it up; I know not
why,--some lurking leaven of old romance perhaps suggested it,--but I hoped
it might prove of delicate texture, and bespeaking that lady-like coquetry
which so pleasantly associates with the sex in our minds. Alas, no! Nothing
could be more palpably the opposite: torn, and with a knot--some hint to
memory--upon one corner, it was no aid to my careering fancy. And yet--and
yet, what a handsome girl she is; how finely, how delicately formed that
Greek outline of forehead and brow; how transparently soft that downy pink
upon her cheek! With what varied expression those eyes can beam!--ay, that
they can: but, confound it, there's this fault, their very archness, their
sly malice, will be interpreted by the ill-judging world to any but the
real motive. "How like a flirt!" will one say. "How impertinent! How
ill-bred!" The conventional stare of cold, patched, and painted beauty,
upon whose unblushing cheek no stray tinge of modesty has wandered, will be
tolerated, even admired; while the artless beamings of the soul upon the
face of rural loveliness will be condemned without appeal.
Such a girl may a man marry who destines his days to the wild west; but woe
unto him!--woe unto him, should he migrate among the more civilized and
less charitable coteries of our neighbors!
"Ah, here are the papers, and I was forgetting. Let me see--'Bayonne'--ay,
'march of the troops--Sixth Corps.' What can that be without? I say, Mike,
who is cantering along the avenue?"
"It's me, sir. I'm training the brown filly for Miss Mary, as your honor
bid me last night."
"Ah, very true. Does she go quietly?"
"Like a lamb, sir; barrin' she does give a kick now and then at the sheet,
when it bangs against her legs."
"Am I to go over with the books now, sir?" said a wild-looking shockhead
appearing within the door.
"Yes, take them over, with my compliments; and say I hope Miss Mary Blake
has caught no cold."
"You were speaking about a habit and hat, sir?" said Mrs. Magra, curtsying
as she entered.
"Yes, Mrs. Magra; I want your advice. Oh, tell Barnes I really cannot be
bored about those eternal turnips every day of my life. And, Mike, I wish
you'd make them look over the four-horse harness. I want to try those
grays; they tell me they'll run well together. Well, Freney, more
complaints, I hope? Nothing but trespasses! I don't care, so you'd not
worry me, if they eat up every blade of clover in the grounds; I'm sick
of being bored this way. Did you say that we'd eight couple of good
dogs?--quite enough to begin with. Tell Jones to ride into Banagher and
look after that box; Buckmaster sent it from London two months ago, and it
has been lying there ever since. And, Mrs. Magra, pray let the windows be
opened, and the house well aired; that drawing-room would be all the better
for new papering."
These few and broken directions may serve to show my readers--what
certainly they failed to convince myself of--that a new chapter of my life
had opened before me; and that, in proportion to the length of time
my feelings had found neither vent nor outlet, they now rushed madly,
tempestuously into their new channels, suffering no impediment to arrest,
no obstacle to oppose their current.
Nothing can be conceived more opposite to my late, than my present habits
now became. The house, the grounds, the gardens, all seemed to participate
in the new influence which beamed upon myself; the stir and bustle of
active life was everywhere perceptible; and amidst numerous preparations
for the moors and the hunting-field, for pleasure parties upon the river,
and fishing excursions up the mountains, my days were spent. The Blakes,
without even for a moment pressing their attentions upon me, permitted me
to go and come among them unquestioned and unasked. When, nearly every
morning, I appeared in the breakfast-room, I felt exactly like a member of
the family; the hundred little discrepancies of thought and habit which
struck me forcibly at first, looked daily less apparent; the careless
inattentions of my fair cousins as to dress, their free-and-easy boisterous
manner, their very accents, which fell so harshly on my ear, gradually made
less and less impression, until at last, when a raw English Ensign, just
arrived in the neighborhood, remarked to me in confidence, "What devilish
fine girls they were, if they were not so confoundedly Irish!" I could not
help wondering what the fellow meant, and attributed the observation more
to his ignorance than to its truth.
Papa and Mamma Blake, like prudent generals, so long as they saw the forces
of the enemy daily wasting before them; so long as they could with impunity
carry on the war at his expense,--resolved to risk nothing by a pitched
battle. Unlike the Dalrymples, they could leave all to time.
Oh, tell me not of dark eyes swimming in their own ethereal essence;
tell me not of pouting lips, of glossy ringlets, of taper fingers, and
well-rounded insteps; speak not to me of soft voices, whose seductive
sounds ring sweetly in our hearts; preach not of those thousand womanly
graces so dear to every man, and doubly to him who lives apart from all
their influences and their fascinations; neither dwell upon congenial
temperament, similarity of taste, of disposition, and of thought; these are
not the great risks a man runs in life. Of all the temptations, strong as
these may be, there is one greater than them all, and that is, propinquity!
Show me the man who has ever stood this test; show me the man, deserving
the name of such, who has become daily and hourly exposed to the breaching
artillery of flashing eyes, of soft voices, of winning smiles, and kind
speeches, and who hasn't felt, and that too soon too, a breach within
the rampart of his heart. He may, it is true,--nay, he will, in many
cases,--make a bold and vigorous defence; sometimes will he re-intrench
himself within the stockades of his prudence; but, alas! it is only to
defer the moment when he must lay down his arms. He may, like a wise man
who sees his fate inevitable, make a virtue of necessity, and surrender at
discretion; or, like a crafty foe, seeing his doom before him, under the
cover of the night he may make a sortie from the garrison, and run for his
life. Ignominious as such a course must be, it is often the only one left.
But to come back. Love, like the small-pox, is most dangerous when you take
it in the natural way. Those made matches, which Heaven is supposed to
have a hand in, when placing an unmarried gentleman's property in the
neighborhood of an unmarried lady's, which destine two people for each
other in life, because their well-judging friends have agreed, "They'll do
very well; they were made for each other,"--these are the mild cases of the
malady. This process of friendly vaccination takes out the poison of the
disease, substituting a more harmless and less exciting affection; but the
really dangerous instances are those from contact, that same propinquity,
that confounded tendency every man yields to, to fall into a railroad of
habit; that is the risk, that is the danger. What a bore it is to find that
the absence of one person, with whom you're in no wise in love, will spoil
your morning's canter, or your rowing party upon the river! How much put
out are you, when she, to whom you always gave your arm in to dinner,
does not make her appearance in the drawing-room; and your tea, too, some
careless one, indifferent to your taste, puts a lump of sugar too little,
or cream too much, while she--But no matter; habit has done for you what
no direct influence of beauty could do, and a slave to your own selfish
indulgences, and the cultivation of that ease you prize so highly, you fall
over head and ears in love.
Now, you are not, my good reader, by any means to suppose that this was my
case. No, no; I was too much what the world terms the "old soldier" for
that. To continue my illustration: like the fortress that has been often
besieged, the sentry upon the walls keeps more vigilant watch; his ear
detects the far-off clank of the dread artillery; he marks each parallel;
he notes down every breaching battery; and if he be captured, at least it
is in fair fight.
Such were some of my reflections as I rode slowly home one evening from
Gurt-na-Morra. Many a time, latterly, had I contrasted my own lonely and
deserted hearth with the smiling looks, the happy faces, and the merry
voices I had left behind me; and many a time did I ask myself, "Am I never
to partake of a happiness like this?" How many a man is seduced into
matrimony from this very feeling! How many a man whose hours have passed
fleetingly at the pleasant tea-table, or by the warm hearth of some old
country-house, going forth into the cold and cheerless night, reaches his
far-off home only to find it dark and gloomy, joyless and companionless?
How often has the hard-visaged look of his old butler, as, with sleepy eyes
and yawning face, he hands a bed-room candle, suggested thoughts of married
happiness? Of the perils of propinquity I have already spoken; the risks of
contrast are also great. Have you never, in strolling through some fragrant
and rich conservatory, fixed your eye upon a fair and lovely flower, whose
blossoming beauty seems to give all the lustre and all the incense of
the scene around? And how have you thought it would adorn and grace the
precincts of your home, diffusing fragrance on every side. Alas, the
experiment is not always successful. Much of the charm and many of the
fascinations which delight you are the result of association of time and of
place. The lovely voice, whose tones have spoken to your heart, may, like
some instrument, be delightful in the harmony of the orchestra, but, after
all, prove a very middling performer in a duet.
I say not this to deter men from matrimony, but to warn them from a
miscalculation which may mar their happiness. Flirtation is a very fine
thing, but it's only a state of transition after all. The tadpole existence
of the lover would be great fun, if one was never to become a frog under
the hands of the parson. I say all this dispassionately and advisedly. Like
the poet of my country, for many years of my life,--
"My only books were woman's looks,"
and certainly I subscribe to a circulating library.
All this long digression may perhaps bring the reader to where it brought
me,--the very palpable conviction, that, though not in love with my cousin
Baby, I could not tell when I might eventually become so.
CHAPTER XLVII.
A RECOGNITION.
The most pleasing part about retrospect is the memory of our bygone hopes.
The past, however happy, however blissful, few would wish to live over
again; but who is there that does not long for, does not pine after the
day-dream which gilded the future, which looked ever forward to the time to
come as to a realization of all that was dear to us, lightening our present
cares, soothing our passing sorrows by that one thought?
Life is marked out in periods in which, like stages in a journey, we rest
and repose ourselves, casting a look, now back upon the road we have been
travelling, now throwing a keener glance towards the path left us. It is at
such spots as these remembrance comes full upon us, and that we feel how
little our intentions have swayed our career or influenced our actions;
the aspirations, the resolves of youth, are either looked upon as puerile
follies, or a most distant day settled on for their realization. The
principles we fondly looked to, like our guide-stars, are dimly visible,
not seen; the friends we cherished are changed and gone; the scenes
themselves seem no longer the sunshine and the shade we loved; and, in
fact, we are living in a new world, where our own altered condition gives
the type to all around us; the only link that binds us to the past being
that same memory that like a sad curfew tolls the twilight of our fairest
dreams and most cherished wishes.
That these glimpses of the bygone season of our youth should be but fitful
and passing--tinging, not coloring the landscape of our life--we should be
engaged in all the active bustle and turmoil of the world, surrounded by
objects of hope, love, and ambition, stemming the strong tide in whose
fountain is fortune.
He, however, who lives apart, a dreary and a passionless existence, will
find that in the past, more than in the future, his thoughts have found
their resting-place; memory usurps the place of hope, and he travels
through life like one walking onward; his eyes still turning towards some
loved forsaken spot, teeming with all the associations of his happiest
hours, and preserving, even in distance, the outline that he loved.
Distance in time, as in space, smooths down all the inequalities of
surface; and as the cragged and rugged mountain, darkened by cliff and
precipice, shows to the far-off traveller but some blue and misty mass,
so the long-lost-sight-of hours lose all the cares and griefs that tinged
them, and to our mental eye, are but objects of uniform loveliness and
beauty; and if we do not think of
"The smiles, the tears,
Of boyhood's years,"
it is because, like April showers, they but checker the spring of our
existence.
For myself, baffled in hope at a period when most men but begin to feel it,
I thought myself much older than I really was; the disappointments of the
world, like the storms of the ocean, impart a false sense of experience to
the young heart, as he sails forth upon his voyage; and it is an easy error
to mistake trials for time.
The goods of fortune by which I was surrounded, took nothing from the
bitterness of my retrospect; on the contrary, I could not help feeling that
every luxury of my life was bought by my surrender of that career which had
elated me in my own esteem, and which, setting a high and noble ambition
before me, taught me to be a man.
To be happy, one must not only fulfil the duties and exactions of his
station, but the station itself must answer to his views and aspirations
in life. Now, mine did not sustain this condition: all that my life had
of promise was connected with the memory of her who never could share my
fortunes; of her for whom I had earned praise and honor; becoming ambitious
as the road to her affection, only to learn after, that my hopes were but a
dream, and my paradise a wilderness.
While thus the inglorious current of my life ran on, I was not indifferent
to the mighty events the great continent of Europe was witnessing. The
successes of the Peninsular campaign; the triumphant entry of the
British into France; the downfall of Napoleon; the restoration of the
Bourbons,--followed each other with the rapidity of the most common-place
occurrences; and in the few short years in which I had sprung from boyhood
to man's estate, the whole condition of the world was altered. Kings
deposed; great armies disbanded; rightful sovereigns restored to their
dominions; banished and exiled men returned to their country, invested with
rank and riches; and peace, in the fullest tide of its blessings, poured
down upon the earth devastated and blood-stained.
Years passed on; and between the careless abandonment to the mere amusement
of the hour, and the darker meditation upon the past, time slipped away.
From my old friends and brother officers I heard but rarely. Power, who at
first wrote frequently, grew gradually less and less communicative. Webber,
who had gone to Paris at the peace, had written but one letter; while, from
the rest, a few straggling lines were all I received. In truth be it told,
my own negligence and inability to reply cost me this apparent neglect.
It was a fine evening in May, when, rigging up a sprit-sail, I jumped into
my yawl, and dropped easily down the river. The light wind gently curled
the crested water, the trees waved gently and shook their branches in the
breeze, and my little barque, bending slightly beneath, rustled on her
foamy track with that joyous bounding motion so inspiriting to one's
heart. The clouds were flying swiftly past, tinging with their shadows the
mountains beneath; the Munster shore, glowing with a rich sunlight, showed
every sheep-cot and every hedge-row clearly out, while the deep shadow of
tall Scariff darkened the silent river where Holy Island, with its ruined
churches and melancholy tower, was reflected in the still water.
It was a thoroughly Irish landscape: the changeful sky; the fast-flitting
shadows; the brilliant sunlight; the plenteous fields; the broad and
swelling stream; the dark mountain, from whose brown crest a wreath of thin
blue smoke was rising,--were all there smiling yet sadly, like her own
sons, across whose lowering brow some fitful flash of fancy ever playing
dallies like sunbeams on a darkening stream, nor marks the depth that lies
below.
I sat musing over the strange harmony of Nature with the temperament of
man, every phase of his passionate existence seeming to have its type in
things inanimate, when a loud cheer from the land aroused me, and the
words, "Charley! Cousin Charley!" came wafted over the water to where
I lay. For some time I could but distinguish the faint outline of some
figures on the shore; but as I came nearer, I recognized my fair cousin
Baby, who, with a younger brother of some eight or nine years old, was
taking an evening walk.
"Do you know, Charley," said she, "the boys have gone over to the castle to
look for you; we want you particularly this evening."
"Indeed, Cousin Baby! Well, I fear you must make my excuses."
"Then, once for all, I will not. I know this is one of your sulky moods,
and I tell you frankly I'll not put up with them any more."
"No, no, Baby, not so; out of spirits if you will, but not out of temper."
"The distinction is much too fine for me, if there be any. But there now,
do be a good fellow; come up with us--come up with me!"
As she said this she placed her arm within mine. I thought, too,--perhaps
it was but a thought,--she pressed me gently. I know she blushed and turned
away her head to hide it.
"I don't pretend to be proof to your entreaty, Cousin Baby," said I, with
half-affected gallantry, putting her fingers to my lips.
"There, how can you be so foolish; look at William yonder; I am sure he
must have seen you!" But William, God bless him! was bird's-nesting or
butterfly-hunting or daisy-picking or something of that kind.
O ye young brothers, who, sufficiently old to be deemed companions and
chaperons, but yet young enough to be regarded as having neither eyes nor
ears, what mischief have ye to answer for; what a long reckoning of tender
speeches, of soft looks, of pressed hands, lies at your door! What an
incentive to flirtation is the wily imp who turns ever and anon from his
careless gambols to throw his laughter-loving eyes upon you, calling up the
mantling blush to both your cheeks! He seems to chronicle the hours of your
dalliance, making your secrets known unto each other. We have gone through
our share of flirtation in this life: match-making mothers, prying aunts,
choleric uncles, benevolent and open-hearted fathers, we understand to the
life, and care no more for such man-traps than a Melton man, well mounted
on his strong-boned thorough-bred, does for a four-barred ox-fence that
lies before him. Like him, we take them flying; never relaxing the slapping
stride of our loose gallop, we go straight ahead, never turning aside,
except for a laugh at those who flounder in the swamps we sneer at. But we
confess honestly, we fear the little, brother, the small urchin who, with
nankeen trousers and three rows of buttons, performs the part of Cupid. He
strikes real terror into our heart; he it is who, with a cunning wink or
sly smile, seems to confirm the soft nonsense we are weaving; by some
slight gesture he seems to check off the long reckoning of our attentions,
bringing us every moment nearer to the time when the score must be settled
and the debt paid. He it is who, by a memory delightfully oblivious of
his task and his table-book, is tenacious to the life of what you said
to Fanny; how you put your head under Lucy's bonnet; he can imitate to
perfection the way you kneeled upon the grass; and the wretch has learned
to smack his lips like a gourmand, that he, may convey another stage of
your proceeding.
Oh, for infant schools for everything under the age of ten! Oh, for
factories for the children of the rich! The age of prying curiosity is from
four-and-a-half to nine, and Fonch himself might get a lesson in police
from an urchin in his alphabet.
I contrived soon, however, to forget the presence of even the little
brother. The night was falling; Baby appeared getting fatigued with her
walk, for she leaned somewhat more heavily upon my arm, and I--I cannot
tell wherefore--fell into that train of thinking aloud, which somehow, upon
a summer's eve, with a fair girl beside one, is the very nearest thing to
love-making.
"There, Charley, don't now--ah, don't! Do let go my hand; they are coming
down the avenue."
I had scarcely time to obey the injunction, when Mr. Blake called out:--
"Well, indeed! Charley, this is really fortunate; we have got a friend to
take tea with us, and wanted you to meet him."
Muttering an internal prayer for something not exactly the welfare of the
aforesaid friend, whom I judged to be some Galway squire, I professed aloud
the pleasure I felt in having come in so opportunely.
"He wishes particularly to make your acquaintance."
"So much the worse," thought I to myself; "it rarely happens that this
feeling is mutual."
Evidently provoked at the little curiosity I exhibited, Blake added,--
"He's on his way to Fermoy with a detachment."
"Indeed! what regiment, pray?"
"The 28th Foot."
"Ah, I don't know them."
By this time we reached the steps of the hall-door, and just as we did so,
the door opened suddenly, and a tall figure in uniform presented himself.
With one spring he seized my hand and nearly wrung it off.
"Why what," said I, "can this be? Is it really--"
"Sparks," said he,--"your old friend Sparks, my boy; I've changed into the
infantry, and here I am. Heard by chance you were in the neighborhood; met
Mr. Blake, your friend here, at the inn, and accepted his invitation to
meet you."
Poor Sparks, albeit the difference in his costume, was the same as ever.
Having left the Fourteenth soon after I quitted them, he knew but little of
their fortunes; and he himself had been on recruiting stations nearly the
whole time since we had met before.
While we each continued to extol the good fortune of the other,--he mine as
being no longer in the service, and I his for still being so,--we learned
the various changes which had happened to each of us during our separation.
Although his destination was ultimately Fermoy, Portumua was ordered to
be his present quarter; and I felt delighted to have once more an old
companion within reach, to chat over former days of campaigning and nights
of merriment in the Peninsula.
Sparks soon became a constant visitor and guest at Gurt-na-Morra; his good
temper, his easy habits, his simplicity of character, rapidly enabled him
to fall into all their ways; and although evidently not what Baby would
call "the man for Galway," he endeavored with all his might to please every
one, and certainly succeeded to a considerable extent.
Baby alone seemed to take pleasure in tormenting the poor sub. Long before
she met with him having heard much from me of his exploits abroad, she was
continually bringing up some anecdote of his unhappy loves or mis-placed
passions; which he evidently smarted under the more, from the circumstance
that he appeared rather inclined to like my fair cousin.
As she continued this for some time, I remarked that Sparks, who at
first was all gayety and high spirits, grew gradually more depressed and
dispirited. I became convinced that the poor fellow was in love; very
little management on my part was necessary to obtain his confession; and
accordingly, the same evening the thought first struck me, as we were
riding slowly home towards O'Malley Castle, I touched at first generally
upon the merits of the Blakes, their hospitality, etc., then diverged to
the accomplishments and perfections of the girls, and lastly, Baby herself,
in all form, came up for sentence.
"Ah, yes!" said Sparks, with a deep sigh, "it is quite as you say; she is a
lovely girl; and that liveliness in her character, that elasticity in her
temperament, chastened down as it might be, by the feeling of respect for
the man she loved! I say, Charley, is it a very long attachment of yours?"
"A long attachment of mine! Why, my dear Sparks, you can't suppose that
there is anything between us! I pledge you my word most faithfully."
"Oh, no, don't tell me that; what good can there be in mystifying me?"
"I have no such intention, believe me. My cousin Baby, however I like and
admire her, has no other place in my affection than a very charming girl
who has lightened a great many dreary and tiresome hours, and made my
banishment from the world less irksome than I should have found it without
her."
"And you are really not in love?"
"Not a bit of it!"
"Nor going to marry her either?"
"Not the least notion of it!--a fact. Baby and I are excellent friends, for
the very reason that we were never lovers; we have had no petits jeux
of fallings out and makings up; no hide-and-seek trials of affected
indifference and real disappointments; no secrets, no griefs, nor grudges;
neither quarrels nor keepsakes. In fact, we are capital cousins; quizzing
every one for our own amusement; riding, walking, boating together; in
fact, doing and thinking of everything save sighs and declarations; always
happy to meet, and never broken-hearted when we parted. And I can only add,
as a proof of my sincerity, that if you feel as I suspect you do from your
questions, I'll be your ambassador to the court of Gurt-na-Morra with
sincere pleasure."
"Will you really? Will you, indeed, Charley, do this for me? Will you
strengthen my wishes by your aid, and give me all your influence with the
family?"
I could scarcely help smiling at poor Sparks's eagerness, or the
unwarrantable value he put upon my alliance, in a case where his own
unassisted efforts did not threaten much failure.
"I repeat it, Sparks, I'll make a proposal for you in all form, aided and
abetted by everything recommendatory and laudatory I can think of; I'll
talk of you as a Peninsular of no small note and promise; and observe rigid
silence about your Welsh flirtation and your Spanish elopement."
"You'll not blab about the Dalrymples, I hope?"
"Trust me; I only hope you will be always equally discreet: but now--when
shall it be? Should you like to consider the matter more?"
"Oh, no, nothing of the kind; let it be to-morrow, at once, if I am to
fail; even that--anything's better than suspense."
"Well, then, to-morrow be it," said I.
So I wished him a good-night, and a stout heart to hear his fortune withal.
CHAPTER XLVIII.
A MISTAKE.
I ordered my horses at an early hour; and long before Sparks--lover that
he was--had opened his eyes to the light, was already on my way towards
Gurt-na-Morra. Several miles slipped away before I well determined how I
should open my negotiations: whether to papa Blake, in the first instance,
or to madame, to whose peculiar province these secrets of the home
department belonged; or why not at once to Baby?--because, after all, with
her it rested finally to accept or refuse. To address myself to the heads
of the department seemed the more formal course; and as I was acting
entirely as an "envoy extraordinary," I deemed this the fitting mode of
proceeding.
It was exactly eight o'clock as I drove up to the door. Mr. Blake was
standing at the open window of the breakfast-room, sniffing the fresh air
of the morning. The Blake mother was busily engaged with the economy of the
tea-table; a very simple style of morning costume, and a nightcap with a
flounce like a petticoat, marking her unaffected toilet. Above stairs, more
than one head en papillate took a furtive peep between the curtains; and
the butler of the family, in corduroys and a fur cap, was weeding turnips
in the lawn before the door.
Mrs. Blake had barely time to take a hurried departure, when her husband
came out upon the steps to bid me welcome. There is no physiognomist like
your father of a family, or your mother with marriageable daughters.
Lavater was nothing to them, in reading the secret springs of action, the
hidden sources of all character. Had there been a good respectable bump
allotted by Spurzheim to "honorable intentions," the matter had been
all fair and easy,--the very first salute of the gentleman would have
pronounced upon his views. But, alas! no such guide is forthcoming; and the
science, as it now exists, is enveloped in doubt and difficulty. The gay,
laughing temperament of some, the dark and serious composure of others; the
cautious and reserved, the open and the candid, the witty, the sententious,
the clever, the dull, the prudent, the reckless,--in a word, every variety
which the innumerable hues of character imprint upon the human face divine
are their study. Their convictions are the slow and patient fruits of
intense observation and great logical accuracy. Carefully noting down
every lineament and feature,--their change, their action, and their
development,--they track a lurking motive with the scent of a bloodhound,
and run down a growing passion with an unrelenting speed. I have been
in the witness-box, exposed to the licensed badgering and privileged
impertinence of a lawyer, winked, leered, frowned, and sneered at with all
the long-practised tact of a nisi prius torturer; I have stood before the
cold, fish-like, but searching eye of a prefect of police, as he compared
my passport with my person, and thought he could detect a discrepancy in
both,--but I never felt the same sense of total exposure as when glanced at
by the half-cautious, half-prying look of a worthy father or mother, in a
family where there are daughters to marry, and "nobody coming to woo."
"You're early, Charley," said Mr. Blake, with an affected mixture of
carelessness and warmth. "You have not had breakfast?"
"No, sir. I have come to claim a part of yours; and if I mistake not, you
seem a little later than usual."
"Not more than a few minutes. The girls will be down presently; they're
early risers, Charley; good habits are just as easy as bad ones; and, the
Lord be praised! my girls were never brought up with any other."
"I am well aware of it, sir; and indeed, if I may be permitted to take
advantage of the apropos, it was on the subject of one of your daughters
that I wished to speak to you this morning, and which brought me over at
this uncivilized hour, hoping to find you alone."
Mr. Blake's look for a moment was one of triumphant satisfaction; it was
but a glance, however, and repressed the very instant after, as he said,
with a well got-up indifference,--
"Just step with me into the study, and we're sure not to be interrupted."
Now, although I have little time or space for such dallying, I cannot help
dwelling for a moment upon the aspect of what Mr. Blake dignified with the
name of his study. It was a small apartment with one window, the panes of
which, independent of all aid from a curtain, tempered the daylight through
the medium of cobwebs, dust, and the ill-trained branches of some wall-tree
without.
Three oak chairs and a small table were the only articles of furniture,
while around, on all sides, lay the disjecta membra of Mr. Blake's
hunting, fishing, shooting, and coursing equipments,--old top-boots,
driving whips, odd spurs, a racing saddle, a blunderbuss, the helmet of the
Galway Light Horse, a salmon net, a large map of the county with a marginal
index to several mortgages marked with a cross, a stable lantern, the
rudder of a boat, and several other articles representative of his daily
associations; but not one book, save an odd volume of Watty Cox's
Magazine, whose pages seemed as much the receptacle of brown hackles for
trout-fishing as the resource of literary leisure.
"Here we'll be quite cosey, and to ourselves," said Mr. Blake, as, placing
a chair for me, he sat down himself, with the air of a man resolved to
assist, by advice and counsel, the dilemma of some dear friend.
After a few preliminary observations, which, like a breathing canter before
a race, serves to get your courage up, and settle you well in your seat,
I opened my negotiation by some very broad and sweeping truisms about the
misfortunes of a bachelor existence, the discomforts of his position,
his want of home and happiness, the necessity for his one day thinking
seriously about marriage; it being in a measure almost as inevitable
a termination of the free-and-easy career of his single life as
transportation for seven years is to that of a poacher. "You cannot go on,
sir," said I, "trespassing forever upon your neighbors' preserves; you must
be apprehended sooner or later; therefore, I think, the better way is to
take out a license."
Never was a small sally of wit more thoroughly successful. Mr. Blake
laughed till he cried, and when he had done, wiped his eyes with a snuffy
handkerchief, and cried till he laughed again. As, somehow, I could not
conceal from myself a suspicion as to the sincerity of my friend's mirth,
I merely consoled myself with the French adage, that "he laughs best who
laughs last;" and went on:--
"It will not be deemed surprising, sir, that a man should come to the
discovery I have just mentioned much more rapidly by having enjoyed the
pleasure of intimacy with your family; not only by the example of perfect
domestic happiness presented to him, but by the prospect held out that
a heritage of the fair gifts which adorn and grace a married life may
reasonably be looked for among the daughters of those themselves the
realization of conjugal felicity."
Here was a canter, with a vengeance; and as I felt blown, I slackened my
pace, coughed, and resumed:--
"Mary Blake, sir, is, then, the object of my present communication; she
it is who has made an existence that seemed fair and pleasurable before,
appear blank and unprofitable without her. I have, therefore, to come at
once to the point, visited you this morning, formally to ask her hand in
marriage; her fortune, I may observe at once, is perfectly immaterial, a
matter of no consequence [so Mr. Blake thought also]; a competence fully
equal to every reasonable notion of expenditure--"
"There, there; don't, don't!" said Mr. Blake, wiping his eyes, with a sob
like a hiccough,--"don't speak of money! I know what you would say, a
handsome settlement,--a well-secured jointure, and all that. Yes, yes, I
feel it all."
"Why, yes, sir, I believe I may add that everything in this respect will
answer your expectations."
"Of course; to be sure. My poor dear Baby! How to do without her, that's
the rub! You don't know, O'Malley, what that girl is to me--you can't know
it; you'll feel it one day though--that you will!"
"The devil I shall!" said I to myself. "The great point is, after all, to
learn the young lady's disposition in the matter--"
"Ah, Charley, none of this with me, you sly dog! You think I don't know
you. Why, I've been watching,--that is, I have seen--no, I mean I've
heard--They--they,--people will talk, you know."
"Very true, sir. But, as I was going to remark--"
Just at this moment the door opened, and Miss Baby herself, looking most
annoyingly handsome, put in her head.
"Papa, we're waiting breakfast. Ah, Charley, how d'ye do?"
"Come in, Baby," said Mr. Blake; "you haven't given me my kiss this
morning."
The lovely girl threw her arms around his neck, while her bright and
flowing locks fell richly upon his shoulder. I turned rather sulkily away;
the thing always provokes me. There is as much cold, selfish cruelty in
such coram publico endearments, as in the luscious display of rich rounds
and sirloins in a chop-house to the eyes of the starved and penniless
wretch without, who, with dripping rags and watering lip, eats imaginary
slices, while the pains of hunger are torturing him!
"There's Tim!" said Mr. Blake, suddenly. "Tim Cronin!--Tim!" shouted he
to, as it seemed to me, an imaginary individual outside; while, in the
eagerness of pursuit, he rushed out of the study, banging the door as he
went, and leaving Baby and myself to our mutual edification.
I should have preferred it being otherwise; but as the Fates willed it
thus, I took Baby's hand, and led her to the window. Now, there is one
feature of my countrymen which, having recognized strongly in myself, I
would fain proclaim; and writing as I do--however little people may suspect
me--solely for the sake of a moral, would gladly warn the unsuspecting
against. I mean, a very decided tendency to become the consoler, the
confidant of young ladies; seeking out opportunities of assuaging their
sorrow, reconciling their afflictions, breaking eventful passages to
their ears; not from any inherent pleasure in the tragic phases of
the intercourse, but for the semi-tenderness of manner, that harmless
hand-squeezing, that innocent waist-pressing, without which consolation is
but like salmon without lobster,--a thing maimed, wanting, and imperfect.
Now, whether this with me was a natural gift, or merely a "way we have in
the army," as the song says, I shall not pretend to say; but I venture
to affirm that few men could excel me in the practice I speak of some
five-and-twenty years ago. Fair reader, do pray, if I have the happiness
of being known to you, deduct them from my age before you subtract from my
merits.
"Well, Baby, dear, I have just been speaking about you to papa. Yes,
dear--don't look so incredulous--even of your own sweet self. Well, do you
know, I almost prefer your hair worn that way; those same silky masses look
better falling thus heavily--"
"There, now, Charley! ah, don't!"
"Well, Baby, as I was saying, before you stopped me, I have been asking
your papa a very important question, and he has referred me to you for the
answer. And now will you tell me, in all frankness and honesty, your mind
on the matter?"
She grew deadly pale as I spoke these words, then suddenly flushed up
again, but said not a word. I could perceive, however, from her heaving
chest and restless manner, that no common agitation was stirring her bosom.
It was cruelty to be silent, so I continued:--
"One who loves you well, Baby, dear, has asked his own heart the question,
and learned that without you he has no chance of happiness; that your
bright eyes are to him bluer than the deep sky above him; that your soft
voice, your winning smile--and what a smile it is!--have taught him that he
loves, nay, adores you! Then, dearest--what pretty fingers those are! Ah,
what is this? Whence came that emerald? I never saw that ring before,
Baby!"
"Oh, that," said she, blushing deeply,--"that is a ring the foolish
creature Sparks gave me a couple of days ago; but I don't like it--I don't
intend to keep it."
So saying, she endeavored to draw it from her finger, but in vain.
"But why, Baby, why take it off? Is it to give him the pleasure of putting
it on again? There, don't look angry; we must not fall out, surely."
"No, Charley, if you are not vexed with me--if you are not--"
"No, no, my dear Baby; nothing of the kind. Sparks was quite right in not
trusting his entire fortune to my diplomacy; but at least, he ought to have
told me that he had opened the negotiation. Now, the question simply is:
Do you love him? or rather, because that shortens matters: Will you accept
him?"
"Love who?"
"Love whom? Why Sparks, to be sure!"
A flash of indignant surprise passed across her features, now pale as
marble; her lips were slightly parted, her large full eyes were fixed
upon me steadfastly, and her hand, which I had held in mine, she suddenly
withdrew from my grasp.
"And so--and so it is of Mr. Sparks's cause you are so ardently the
advocate?" she said at length, after a pause of most awkward duration.
"Why, of course, my dear cousin. It was at his suit and solicitation I
called on your father; it was he himself who entreated me to take this
step; it was he--"
But before I could conclude, she burst into a torrent of tears and rushed
from the room.
Here was a situation! What the deuce was the matter? Did she, or did she
not, care for him? Was her pride or her delicacy hurt at my being made the
means of the communication to her father? What had Sparks done or said to
put himself and me in such a devil of a predicament? Could she care for any
one else?
"Well, Charley!" cried Mr. Blake, as he entered, rubbing his hands in a
perfect paroxysm of good temper,--"well, Charley, has love-making driven
breakfast out of your head?"
"Why, faith, sir, I greatly fear I have blundered my mission sadly. My
cousin Mary does not appear so perfectly satisfied; her manner--"
"Don't tell me such nonsense. The girl's manner! Why, man, I thought you
were too old a soldier to be taken in that way."
"Well, then, sir, the best thing, under the circumstances, is to send over
Sparks himself. Your consent, I may tell him, is already obtained."
"Yes, my boy; and my daughter's is equally sure. But I don't see what we
want with Sparks at all. Among old friends and relatives as we are, there
is, I think, no need of a stranger."
"A stranger! Very true, sir, he is a stranger; but when that stranger is
about to become your son-in-law--"
"About to become what?" said Mr. Blake, rubbing his spectacles, and placing
them leisurely on his nose to regard me,--"to become what?"
"Your son-in-law. I hope I have been sufficiently explicit, sir, in making
known Mr. Sparks's wishes to you."
"Mr. Sparks! Why damn me, sir--that is--I beg pardon for the
warmth--you--you never mentioned his name to-day till now. You led me to
suppose that--in fact, you told me most clearly--"
Here, from the united effects of rage and a struggle for concealment, Mr.
Blake was unable to proceed, and walked the room with a melodramatic stamp
perfectly awful.
"Really, sir," said I at last, "while I deeply regret any misconception or
mistake I have been the cause of, I must, in justice to myself, say that
I am perfectly unconscious of having misled you. I came here this morning
with a proposition for the hand of your daughter in behalf of--"
"Yourself, sir. Yes, yourself. I'll be--no! I'll not swear; but--but just
answer me, if you ever mentioned one word of Mr. Sparks, if you ever
alluded to him till the last few minutes?"
I was perfectly astounded. It might be, alas, it was exactly as he stated!
In my unlucky effort at extreme delicacy, I became only so very mysterious
that I left the matter open for them to suppose that it might be the Khan
of Tartary was in love with Baby.
There was but one course now open. I most humbly apologized for my blunder;
repeated by every expression I could summon up, my sorrow for what had
happened; and was beginning a renewal of negotiation "in re Sparks," when,
overcome by his passion, Mr. Blake could hear no more, but snatched up his
hat and left the room.
Had it not been for Baby's share in the transaction I should have laughed
outright. As it was, I felt anything but mirthful; and the only clear and
collected idea in my mind was to hurry home with all speed, and fasten a
quarrel on Sparks, the innocent cause of the whole mishap. Why this thought
struck me let physiologists decide.
A few moments' reflection satisfied me that under present circumstances,
it would be particularly awkward to meet with any others of the family.
Ardently desiring to secure my retreat, I succeeded, after some little
time, in opening the window-sash; consoling myself for any injury I was
about to inflict upon Mr. Blake's young plantation in my descent, by the
thought of the service I was rendering him while admitting a little fresh
air into his sanctum.
For my patriotism's sake I will not record my sensations as I took my way
through the shrubbery towards the stable. Men are ever so prone to revenge
their faults and their follies upon such inoffensive agencies as time and
place, wind or weather, that I was quite convinced that to any other but
Galway ears my expos would have been perfectly clear and intelligible;
and that in no other country under heaven would a man be expected to marry
a young lady from a blunder in his grammar.
"Baby may be quite right," thought I; "but one thing is assuredly true,--if
I'll never do for Galway, Galway will never do for me. No, hang it! I have
endured enough for above two years. I have lived in banishment, away from
society, supposing that, at least, if I isolated myself from the pleasures
of the world I was exempt from its annoyances." But no; in the seclusion of
my remote abode troubles found their entrance as easily as elsewhere, so
that I determined at once to leave home; wherefor, I knew not. If life had
few charms, it had still fewer ties for me. If I was not bound by the bonds
of kindred, I was untrammelled by their restraints.
The resolution once taken, I burned to put it into effect; and so
impatiently did I press forward as to call forth more than one remonstrance
on the part of Mike at the pace we were proceeding. As I neared home, the
shrill but stirring sounds of drum and fife met me; and shortly after a
crowd of country people filled the road. Supposing it some mere recruiting
party, I was endeavoring to press on, when the sounds of a full military
band, in the exhilarating measure of a quick-step, convinced me of my
error; and as I drew to one side of the road, the advanced guard of an
infantry regiment came forward. The men's faces were flushed, their
uniforms dusty and travel-stained, their knapsacks strapped firmly on, and
their gait the steady tramp of the march. Saluting the subaltern, I asked
if anything of consequence had occurred in the south that the troops were
so suddenly under orders. The officer stared at me for a moment or two
without speaking, and while a slight smile half-curled his lip, answered:--
"Apparently, sir, you seem very indifferent to military news, otherwise you
can scarcely be ignorant of the cause of our route."
"On the contrary," said I, "I am, though a young man, an old soldier, and
feel most anxious about everything connected with the service."
"Then it is very strange, sir, you should not have heard the news.
Bonaparte has returned from Elba, has arrived at Paris, been received with
the most overwhelming enthusiasm, and at this moment the preparations for
war are resounding from Venice to the Vistula. All our forces, disposable,
are on the march for embarkation. Lord Wellington has taken the command,
and already, I may say, the campaign has begun."
The tone of enthusiasm in which the young officer spoke, the astounding
intelligence itself, contrasting with the apathetic indolence of my own
life, made me blush deeply, as I, muttered some miserable apology for my
ignorance.
"And you are now en route?"
"For Fermoy; from which we march to Cove for embarkation. The first
battalion of our regiment sailed for the West Indies a week since, but a
frigate has been sent after them to bring them back; and we hope all to
meet in the Netherlands before the month is over. But I must beg your
pardon for saying adieu. Good-by, sir."
"Good-by, sir; good-by," said I, as still standing in the road, I was so
overwhelmed with surprise that I could scarcely credit my senses.
A little farther on, I came up with the main body of the regiment, from
whom I learned the corroboration of the news, and also the additional
intelligence that Sparks had been ordered off with his detachment early in
the morning, a veteran battalion being sent into garrison in the various
towns of the south and west.
"Do you happen to know a Mr. O'Malley, sir?" said the major, coming up with
a note in his hand.
"I beg to present him to you," said I, bowing.
"Well, sir, Sparks gave me this note, which he wrote with a pencil as we
crossed each other on the road this morning. He told me you were an old
Fourteenth man. But your regiment is in India, I believe; at least Power
said they were under orders when we met him."
"Fred Power! Are you acquainted with him? Where is he now, pray?"
"Fred is on the staff with General Vandeleur, and is now in Belgium."
"Indeed!" said I, every moment increasing my surprise at some new piece of
intelligence. "And the Eighty-eighth?" said I, recurring to my old friends
in that regiment.
"Oh, the Eighty-eighth are at Gibraltar, or somewhere in the Mediterranean;
at least, I know they are not near enough to open the present campaign
with us. But if you'd like to hear any more news, you must come over to
Borrisokane; we stop there to-night."
"Then I'll certainly do so."
"Come at six then, and dine with us."
"Agreed," said I; "and now, good-morning."
So saying, I once more drove on; my head full of all that I had been
hearing, and my heart bursting with eagerness to join the gallant fellows
now bound for the campaign.
CHAPTER XLIX.
BRUSSELS.
I must not protract a tale already far too long, by the recital of my
acquaintance with the gallant Twenty-sixth. It is sufficient that I should
say that, having given Mike orders to follow me to Cove, I joined the
regiment on their march, and accompanied them to Cork. Every hour of
each day brought us in news of moment and importance; and amidst all the
stirring preparations for the war, the account of the splendid spectacle
of the Champ de Mai burst upon astonished Europe, and the intelligence
spread far and near that the enthusiasm of France never rose higher in
favor of the Emperor. And while the whole world prepared for the deadly
combat, Napoleon surpassed even himself, by the magnificent conceptions for
the coming conflict, and the stupendous nature of those plans by which he
resolved on resisting combined and united Europe.
While our admiration and wonder of the mighty spirit that ruled the
destinies of the continent rose high, so did our own ardent and burning
desire for the day when the open field of fight should place us once more
in front of each other.
Every hard-fought engagement of the Spanish war was thought of and talked
over; from Talavera to Toulouse, all was remembered. And while among the
old Peninsulars the military ardor was so universally displayed, among the
regiments who had not shared the glories of Spain and Portugal, an equal,
perhaps a greater, impulse was created for the approaching campaign.
When we arrived at Cork, the scene of bustle and excitement exceeded
anything I ever witnessed. Troops were mustering in every quarter;
regiments arriving and embarking; fresh bodies of men pouring in; drills,
parades, and inspections going forward; arms, ammunition, and military
stores distributing; and amidst all, a spirit of burning enthusiasm
animated every rank for the approaching glory of the newly-arisen war.
While thus each was full of his own hopes and expectations, I alone felt
depressed and downhearted. My military caste was lost to me forever, my
regiment many, many a mile from the scene of the coming strife; though
young, I felt like one already old and bygone. The last-joined ensign
seemed, in his glowing aspiration, a better soldier than I, as, sad and
dispirited, I wandered through the busy crowds, surveying with curious eye
each gallant horseman as he rode proudly past. What was wealth and fortune
to me? What had they ever been, compared with all they cost me?--the
abandonment of the career I loved, the path in life I sought and panted
for. Day after day I lingered on, watching with beating heart each
detachment as they left the shore; and when their parting cheer rang high
above the breeze, turned sadly back to mourn over a life that had failed in
its promise, and an existence now shorn of its enjoyment.
It was on the evening of the 3d of June that I was slowly wending my way
back towards my hotel. Latterly I had refused all invitations to dine
at the mess. And by a strange spirit of contradiction, while I avoided
society, could yet not tear myself away from the spot where every
remembrance of my past life was daily embittered by the scenes around me.
But so it was; the movement of the troops, their reviews, their arrivals,
and departures, possessed the most thrilling interest for me. While I could
not endure to hear the mention of the high hopes and glorious vows each
brave fellow muttered.
It was, as I remember, on the evening of the 3d of June, I entered my hotel
lower in spirits even than usual. The bugles of the gallant Seventy-first,
as they dropped down with the tide, played a well-known march I had heard
the night before Talavera. All my bold and hardy days came rushing madly to
my mind; and my present life seemed no longer endurable. The last army
list and the newspaper lay on my table, and I turned to read the latest
promotions with that feeling of bitterness by which an unhappy man loves to
tamper with his misery.
Almost the first paragraph I threw my eyes upon ran thus:--
OSTEND, May 24.
The "Vixen" sloop-of-war, which arrived at our port this morning,
brought among several other officers of inferior note
Lieutenant-General Sir George Dashwood, appointed as
Assistant-Adjutant-General
on the staff of his Grace the Duke of Wellington. The gallant
general was accompanied by his lovely and accomplished daughter,
and his military secretary and aide-de-camp, Major Hammersley,
of the 2d Life Guards. They partook of a hurried djeun
with the Burgomaster, and left immediately after for Brussels.
Twice I read this over, while a burning, hot sensation settled upon my
throat and temples. "So Hammersley still persists; he still hopes. And
what then?--what can it be to me?--my prospects have long since faded and
vanished! Doubtless, ere this, I am as much forgotten as though we had
never met,--would that we never had!" I threw up the window-sash; a light
breeze was gently stirring, and as it fanned my hot and bursting head, I
felt cooled and relieved. Some soldiers were talking beneath the window and
among them I recognized Mike's voice.
"And so you sail at daybreak, Sergeant?"
"Yes, Mister Free; we have our orders to be on board before the flood-tide.
The 'Thunderer' drops down the harbor to-night, and we are merely here to
collect our stragglers."
"Faix, it's little I thought I'd ever envy a sodger any more; but someway,
I wish I was going with you."
"Nothing easier, Mike," said another, laughing.
"Oh, true for you, but that's not the way I'd like to do it. If my master,
now, would just get over his low spirits, and spake a word to the Duke of
York, devil a doubt but he'd give him his commission back again, and then
one might go in comfort."
"Your master likes his feather pillow better than a mossy stone under his
head, I'm thinking; and he ain't far wrong either."
"You're out there, Neighbor. It's himself cares as little for hardship as
any one of you; and sure it's not becoming me to say it, but the best blood
and the best bred was always the last to give in for either cold or hunger,
ay, or even complain of it."
Mike's few words shot upon me a new and a sudden conviction,--what was to
prevent my joining once more? Obvious as such a thought now was, yet never
until this moment did it present itself so palpably. So habituated does
the mind become to a certain train of reasoning, framing its convictions
according to one preconceived plan, and making every fact and
every circumstance concur in strengthening what often may be but a
prejudice,--that the absence of the old Fourteenth in India, the sale of
my commission, the want of rank in the service, all seemed to present an
insurmountable barrier to my re-entering the army. A few chance words now
changed all this, and I saw that as a volunteer at least, the path of glory
was still open, and the thought was no sooner conceived, than the resolve
to execute it. While, therefore, I walked hurriedly up and down, devising,
planning, plotting, and contriving, each instant I would stop to ask myself
how it happened I had not determined upon this before.
As I summoned Mike before me, I could not repress a feeling of false shame,
as I remembered how suddenly so natural a resolve must seem to have
been adopted; and it was with somewhat of hesitation that I opened the
conversation.
"And so, sir, you are going after all,--long life to you? But I never
doubted it. Sure, you wouldn't be your father's son, and not join divarsion
when there was any going on."
The poor fellow's eyes brightened up, his look gladdened, and before he
reached the foot of the stairs, I heard his loud cheer of delight that once
more we were off to the wars.
The packet sailed for Liverpool the next morning. By it we took our
passage, and on the third morning I found myself in the waiting-room at
the Horse Guards, expecting the moment of his Royal Highness's arrival; my
determination being to serve as a volunteer in any regiment the duke might
suggest, until such time as a prospect presented itself of entering the
service as a subaltern.
The room was crowded by officers of every rank and arm in the service. The
old, gray-headed general of division; the tall, stout-looking captain of
infantry; the thin and boyish figure of the newly-gazetted cornet,--were
all there; every accent, every look that marked each trait of national
distinction in the empire, had its representative. The reserved and distant
Scotchman; the gay, laughing, exuberant Patlander; the dark-eyed, and
dark-browed North Briton,--collected in groups, talked eagerly together;
while every instant, as some new arrival would enter, all eyes would turn
to the spot, in eager expectation of the duke's coming. At last the clash
of arms, as the guard turned out, apprised us of his approach, and we
had scarcely time to stand up and stop the buzz of voices, when the door
opened, and an aide-de-camp proclaimed in a full tone,--
"His Royal Highness the Commander-in-Chief!"
Bowing courteously on every side, he advanced through the crowd, turning
his rapid and piercing look here and there through the room, while with
that tact, the essential gift of his family, he recognized each person by
his name, directing from one to the other some passing observation.
"Ah, Sir George Cockburn, how d' ye do?--your son's appointment is made
out. Major Conyers, that application shall be looked to. Forbes, you must
explain that I cannot possibly put men in the regiment of their choice; the
service is the first thing. Lord L----, your memorial is before the Prince
Regent; the cavalry command will, I believe, however, include your name."
While he spoke thus, he approached the place where I was standing, when,
suddenly checking himself, he looked at me for a moment somewhat sternly.
"Why not in uniform, sir?"
"Your Royal Highness, I am not in the army."
"Not in the army--not in the army? And why, may I beg to know, have
you--But I'm speaking to Captain O'Malley, if I mistake not?"
"I held that rank, sir, once; but family necessities compelled me to sell
out. I have now no commission in the service, but am come to beseech your
Royal Highness's permission to serve as a volunteer."
"As a volunteer, eh--a volunteer? Come, that's right, I like that; but
still, we want such fellows as you,--the man of Ciudad Rodrigo. Yes, my
Lord L----, this is one of the stormers; fought his way through the trench
among the first; must not be neglected. Hold yourself in readiness,
Captain--hang it, I was forgetting; Mr. O'Malley, I mean--hold yourself
in readiness for a staff appointment. Smithson, take a note of this."
So saying, he moved on; and I found myself in the street, with a heart
bounding with delight, and a step proud as an emperor's.
With such rapidity the events of my life now followed one upon the other,
that I could take no note of time as it passed. On the fourth day after
my conversation with the duke I found myself in Brussels. As yet I heard
nothing of the appointment, nor was I gazetted to any regiment or any
situation on the staff. It was strange enough, too, I met but few of my old
associates, and not one of those with whom I had been most intimate in my
Peninsular career; but it so chanced that very many of the regiments who
most distinguished themselves in the Spanish campaigns, at the peace of
1814 were sent on foreign service. My old friend Power was, I learned,
quartered at Courtrai; and as I was perfectly at liberty to dispose of my
movements at present, I resolved to visit him there.
It was a beautiful evening on the 12th of June. I had been inquiring
concerning post-horses for my journey, and was returning slowly through
the park. The hour was late--near midnight--but a pale moonlight, a calm,
unruffled air, and stronger inducements still, the song of the nightingales
that abound in this place, prevailed on many of the loungers to prolong
their stay; and so from many a shady walk and tangled arbor, the clank of
a sabre would strike upon the ear, or the low, soft voice of woman would
mingle her dulcet sound with the deep tones of her companion. I wandered
on, thoughtful and alone; my mind pre-occupied so completely with the
mighty events passing before me, I totally forgot my own humble career, and
the circumstances of my fortune. As I turned into an alley which leads from
the Great Walk towards the Palace of the Prince of Orange, I found my path
obstructed by three persons who were walking slowly along in front of me.
I was, as I have mentioned, deeply absorbed in thought, so that I found
myself close behind them before I was aware of their presence. Two of the
party were in uniform, and by their plumes, upon which a passing ray of
moonlight flickered, I could detect they were general officers; the
third was a lady. Unable to pass them, and unwilling to turn back, I
was unavoidably compelled to follow, and however unwilling, to overhear
somewhat of their conversation.
"You mistake, George, you mistake! Depend upon it, this will be no
lengthened campaign; victory will soon decide for one side or the other.
If Napoleon beats the Prussians one day, and beat us the next, the German
States will rally to his standard, and the old confederation of the Rhine
will spring up once more in all the plenitude of its power. The Champ de
Mai has shown the enthusiasm of France for their Emperor. Louis XVIII fled
from his capital, with few to follow, and none to say, 'God bless him!' The
warlike spirit of the nation is roused again; the interval of peace, too
short to teach habits of patient and enduring industry, is yet sufficient
to whet the appetite for carnage; and nothing was wanting, save the
presence of Napoleon alone, to restore all the brilliant delusions and
intoxicating splendors of the empire."
"I confess," said the other, "I take a very different view from yours in
this matter; to me, it seems that France is as tired of battles as of the
Bourbons--"
I heard no more; for though the speaker continued, a misty confusion passed
across my mind. The tones of his voice, well-remembered as they were by me,
left me unable to think; and as I stood motionless on the spot, I muttered
half aloud, "Sir George Dashwood." It was he, indeed; and she who leaned
upon his arm could be no other than Lucy herself. I know not how it was;
for many a long month I had schooled my heart, and taught myself to believe
that time had dulled the deep impression she had made upon me, and that,
were we to meet again, it would be with more sorrow on my part for my
broken dream of happiness than of attachment and affection for her who
inspired it; but now, scarcely was I near her--I had not gazed upon her
looks, I had not even heard her voice--and yet, in all their ancient force,
came back the early passages of my love; and as her footfall sounded gently
upon the ground, my heart beat scarce less audibly. Alas, I could no
longer disguise from myself the avowal that she it was, and she only, who
implanted in my heart the thirst for distinction; and the moment was ever
present to my mind in which, as she threw her arms around her father's
neck, she muttered, "Oh, why not a soldier!"
As I thus reflected, an officer in full dress passed me hurriedly,
and taking off his hat as he came up with the party before me, bowed
obsequiously.
"My Lord ----, I believe, and Sir George Dashwood?" They replied by a
bow. "Sir Thomas Picton wishes to speak with you both for a moment; he is
standing beside the 'Basin.' If you will permit--" said he, looking towards
Lucy.
"Thank you, sir," said Sir George; "if you will have the goodness to
accompany us, my daughter will wait our coming here. Sit down, Lucy, we
shall not be long away."
The next moment she was alone. The last echoes of their retiring footsteps
had died away in the grassy walk, and in the calm and death-like stillness
I could hear every rustle of her silk dress. The moonlight fell in
fitful, straggling gleams between the leafy branches, and showed me her
countenance, pale as marble. Her eyes were upturned slightly; her brown
hair, divided upon her fair forehead, sparkled with a wreath of brilliants,
which heightened the lustrous effect of her calm beauty; and now I could
perceive her dress bespoke that she had been at some of the splendid
entertainments which followed day after day in the busy capital.
Thus I stood within a few paces of her, to be near to whom, a few hours
before, I would willingly have given all I possessed in the world; and yet
now a barrier, far more insurmountable than time and space, intervened
between us; still it seemed as though fortune had presented this incident
as a last farewell between us. Why should I not take advantage of it? Why
should I not seize the only opportunity that might ever occur of rescuing
myself from the apparent load of ingratitude which weighed on my memory?
I felt in the cold despair of my heart that I could have no hold upon her
affection; but a pride, scarce less strong that the attachment that gave
rise to it, urged me to speak. By one violent effort I summoned up my
courage; and while I resolved to limit the few words I should say merely
to my vindication, I prepared to advance. Just at this instant, however, a
shadow crossed the path; a rustling sound was heard among the branches, and
the tall figure of a man in a dragoon cloak stood before me. Lucy turned
suddenly at the sound; but scarcely had her eyes been bent in the
direction, when, throwing off his cloak, he sprang forward and dropped at
her feet. All my feeling of shame at the part I was performing was now
succeeded by a sense of savage and revengeful hatred. It was enough that
I should be brought to look upon her whom I had lost forever without the
added bitterness of witnessing her preference for a rival. The whirlwind
passion of my brain stunned and stupefied me. Unconsciously I drew my sword
from my scabbard, and it was only as the pale light fell upon the keen
blade that the thought flashed across me, "What could I mean to do?"
"No, Hammersley,"--it was he indeed,--said she, "it is unkind, it is
unfair, nay, it is unmanly to press me thus; I would not pain you, were
it not that, in sparing you now, I should entail deeper injury upon you
hereafter. Ask me to be your sister, your friend; ask me to feel proudly
in your triumphs, to glory in your success; all this I do feel; but, oh! I
beseech you, as you value your happiness, as you prize mine, ask me no more
than this."
There was a pause of some seconds; and at length, the low tones of a man's
voice, broken and uncertain in their utterance, said,--
"I know it--I feel it--my heart never bade me hope--and now--'tis over."
He stood up as he spoke, and while he threw the light folds of his mantle
round him, a gleam of light fell upon his features. They were pale as
death; two dark circles surrounded his sunken eyes, and his bloodless lip
looked still more ghastly, from the dark mustache that drooped above it.
"Farewell!" said he, slowly, as he crossed his arms sadly upon his breast;
"I will not pain you more."
"Oh, go not thus from me!" said she, as her voice became tremulous with
emotion; "do not add to the sorrow that weighs upon my heart! I cannot,
indeed I cannot, be other than I am; and I do but hate myself to think that
I cannot give my love where I have given all my esteem. If time--" But
before she could continue further, the noise of approaching footsteps was
heard, and the voice of Sir George, as he came near. Hammersley disappeared
at once, and Lucy, with rapid steps, advanced to meet her father, while I
remained riveted upon the spot. What a torrent of emotions then rushed upon
my heart! What hopes, long dead or dying, sprang up to life again! What
visions of long-abandoned happiness flitted before me! Could it be
then--dare I trust myself to think it--that Lucy cared for me? The thought
was maddening! With a bounding sense of ecstasy, I dashed across the park,
resolving, at all hazards, to risk everything upon the chance, and wait
the next morning upon Sir George Dashwood. As I thought thus, I reached my
hotel, where I found Mike in waiting with a letter. As I walked towards the
lamp in the porte cochere, my eyes fell upon the address. It was General
Dashwood's hand; I tore it open, and read as follows:--
Dear Sir,--Circumstances into which you will excuse me entering,
having placed an insurmountable barrier to our former terms of
intimacy, you will, I trust, excuse me declining the honor of any
nearer acquaintance, and also forgive the liberty I take in informing
you of it, which step, however unpleasant to my feelings, will save
us both the great pain of meeting.
I have only this moment heard of your arrival in Brussels, and
take thus the earliest opportunity of communicating with you.
With every assurance of my respect for you personally, and an
earnest desire to serve you in your military career, I beg to remain,
Very faithfully yours,
GEORGE DASHWOOD
"Another note, sir," said Mike, as he thrust into my unconscious hands a
letter he had just received from an orderly.
Stunned, half stupefied, I broke the seal. The contents were but three
lines:--
Sir,--I have the honor to inform you that Sir Thomas Picton has
appointed you an extra aide-de-camp on his personal staff. You will,
therefore, present yourself to-morrow morning at the Adjutant-General's
office, to receive your appointment and instructions.
I have the honor to be, etc.,
G. FITZROY.
Crushing the two letters in my fevered hand, I retired to my room, and
threw myself, dressed as I was, upon my bed. Sleep, that seems to visit us
in the saddest as in the happiest times of our existence, came over me,
and I did not wake until the bugles of the Ninety-fifth were sounding the
reveille through the park, and the brightest beams of the morning sun were
peering through the window.
CHAPTER L.
AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE.
"Mr. O'Malley," said a voice, as my door opened, and an officer in undress
entered,--"Mr. O'Malley, I believe you received your appointment last night
on General Picton's staff?"
I bowed in reply, as he resumed:--
"Sir Thomas desires you will proceed to Courtrai with these despatches in
all haste. I don't know if you are well mounted, but I recommend you, in
any case, not to spare your cattle."
So saying, he wished me a good-morning, and left me, in a state of no small
doubt and difficulty, to my own reflections. What the deuce was I to do?
I had no horse; I knew not where to find one. What uniform should I wear?
For, although appointed on the staff, I was not gazetted to any regiment
that I knew of, and hitherto had been wearing an undress frock and a
foraging cap; for I could not bring myself to appear as a civilian among
so many military acquaintances. No time was, however, to be lost; so I
proceeded to put on my old Fourteenth uniform, wondering whether my costume
might not cost me a reprimand in the very outset of my career. Meanwhile
I despatched Mike to see after a horse, caring little for the time, the
merits, or the price of the animal provided he served my present purpose.
In less than twenty minutes my worthy follower appeared beneath my window,
surrounded by a considerable mob, who seemed to take no small interest in
the proceedings.
"What the deuce is the matter?" cried I, as I opened the sash and looked
out.
"Mighty little's the matter, your honor; it's the savages, here,
that's admiring my horsemanship," said Mike, as he belabored a tall,
scraggy-looking mule with a stick which bore an uncommon resemblance to a
broom-handle.
"What do you mean to do with that beast?" said I. "You surely don't expect
me to ride a mule to Courtrai?"
"Faith, and if you don't, you are likely to walk the journey; for there
isn't a horse to be had for love or money in the town; but I am told that
Mr. Marsden is coming up to-morrow with plenty, so that you may as well
take the journey out of the soft horns as spoil a better; and if he only
makes as good use of his fore-legs as he does of his hind ones, he'll think
little of the road."
[Illustration: MICKEY ASTONISHES THE NATIVES.]
A vicious lash out behind served in a moment to corroborate Mike's
assertion, and to scatter the crowd on every side.
However indisposed to exhibit myself with such a turn-out, my time did not
admit of any delay; and so, arming myself with my despatches, and having
procured the necessary information as to the road, I set out from the Belle
Vue, amidst an ill-suppressed titter of merriment from the mob, which
nothing but fear of Mike and his broomstick prevented becoming a regular
shout of laughter.
It was near night-fall as, tired and weary of the road, I entered the
little village of Halle. All was silent and noiseless in the deserted
streets; nor a lamp threw its glare upon the pavement, nor even a solitary
candle flickered through the casement. Unlike a town, garrisoned by troops,
neither sentry nor outpost was to be met with; nothing gave evidence that
the place was held by a large body of men; and I could not help feeling
struck, as the footsteps of my mule were echoed along the causeway, with
the silence almost of desolation around me. By the creaking of a sign, as
it swung mournfully to and fro, I was directed to the door of the village
inn, where, dismounting, I knocked for some moments, but without success.
At length, when I had made an uproar sufficient to alarm the entire
village, the casement above the door slowly opened, and a head enveloped
in a huge cotton nightcap--so, at least, it appeared to me from the
size--protruded itself. After muttering a curse in about the most barbarous
French I ever heard, he asked me what I wanted there; to which I replied,
most nationally, by asking in return, where the British dragoons were
quartered.
"They have left for Nivelle this morning, to join some regiments of your
own country."
"Ah! ah!" thought I, "he mistakes me for a Brunswicker;" to which, by
the uncertain light, my uniform gave me some resemblance. As it was now
impossible for me to proceed farther, I begged to ask where I could procure
accommodation for the night.
"At the burgomaster's. Turn to your left at the end of this street, and
you will soon find it. They have got some English officers there, who, I
believe in my soul, never sleep."
This was, at least, pleasant intelligence, and promised a better
termination to my journey than I had begun to hope for; so wishing my
friend a good-night, to which he willingly responded, I resumed my way
down the street. As he closed the window, once more leaving me to my own
reflections, I began to wonder within myself to what arm of the service
belonged these officers to whose convivial gifts he bore testimony. As I
turned the corner of the street, I soon discovered the correctness of his
information. A broad glare of light stretched across the entire pavement
from a large house with a clumsy stone portico before it. On coming nearer,
the sound of voices, the roar of laughter, the shouts of merriment that
issued forth, plainly bespoke that a jovial party were seated within.
The half-shutter which closed the lower part of the windows prevented my
obtaining a view of the proceedings; but having cautiously approached the
casement, I managed to creep on the window-sill and look into the room.
[Illustration: THE GENTLEMEN WHO NEVER SLEEP.]
There the scene was certainly a curious one. Around a large table sat a
party of some twenty persons, the singularity of whose appearance may
be conjectured when I mention that all those who appeared to be British
officers were dressed in the robes of the chevins (or aldermen) of the
village; while some others, whose looks bespoke them as sturdy Flemings,
sported the cocked hats and cavalry helmets of their associates. He who
appeared the ruler of the feast sat with his back towards me, and wore, in
addition to the dress of burgomaster, a herald's tabard, which gave him
something the air of a grotesque screen at its potations. A huge fire
blazed upon the ample hearth, before which were spread several staff
uniforms, whose drabbled and soaked appearance denoted the reason of the
party's change of habiliments. Every imaginable species of drinking-vessel
figured upon the board, from the rich flagon of chased silver to the humble
cruche we see in a Teniers picture. As well as I could hear, the language
of the company seemed to be French, or, at least, such an imitation of that
language as served as a species of neutral territory for both parties to
meet in.
He of the tabard spoke louder than the others, and although, from the
execrable endeavors he made to express himself in French, his natural voice
was much altered, there was yet something in his accents which seemed
perfectly familiar to me.
"Mosheer l'Abbey," said he, placing his arm familiarly on the shoulder of
a portly personage, whose shaven crown strangely contrasted with a pair
of corked moustachios,--"Mosheer l'Abbey, nous sommes frres, et moi,
savez-vous, suis vque,--'pon my life it's true; I might have been Bishop
of Saragossa, if I only consented to leave the Twenty-third. Je suis bong
Catholique. Lord bless you, if you saw how I loved the nunneries in Spain!
J'ai tres jolly souvenirs of those nunneries; a goodly company of little
silver saints; and this waistcoat you see--mong gilet--was a satin
petticoat of our Lady of Loretto."
Need I say, that before this speech was concluded, I had recognized in the
speaker nobody but that inveterate old villain, Monsoon himself.
"Permettez, votre Excellence," said a hale, jolly-looking personage on his
left, as he filled the major's goblet with obsequious politeness.
"Bong engfong," replied Monsoon, tapping him familiarly on the head.
"Burgomaster, you are a trump; and when I get my promotion, I'll make
you prefect in a wine district. Pass the lush, and don't look sleepy!
'Drowsiness,' says Solomon, 'clothes a man in rags;' and no man knew the
world better than Solomon. Don't you be laughing, you raw boys. Never mind
them, Abbey; ils sont petits garongs--fags from Eton and Harrow; better
judges of mutton broth than sherry negus."
"I say, Major, you are forgetting this song you promised us."
"Yes, yes," said several voices together; "the song, Major! the song!"
"Time enough for that; we're doing very well as it is. Upon my life,
though, they hold a deal of wine. I thought we'd have had them fit to
bargain with before ten, and see, it's near midnight; and I must have my
forage accounts ready for the commissary-general by to-morrow morning."
This speech having informed me the reason of the Major's presence there,
I resolved to wait no longer a mere spectator of their proceedings; so
dismounting from my position, I commenced a vigorous attack upon the door.
It was some time before I was heard; but at length the door was opened, and
I was accosted by an Englishman, who, in a strange compound of French and
English, asked, "What the devil I meant by all that uproar?" Determining
to startle my old friend the major, I replied, that "I was aide-de-camp to
General Picton, and had come down on very unpleasant business." By this
time the noise of the party within had completely subsided, and from a few
whispered sentences, and their thickened breathing, I perceived that they
were listening.
"May I ask, sir," continued I, "if Major Monsoon is here?"
"Yes," stammered out the ensign, for such he was.
"Sorry for it, for his sake," said I; "but my orders are peremptory."
A deep groan from within, and a muttered request to pass down the sherry,
nearly overcame my gravity; but I resumed:--
"If you will permit me, I will make the affair as short as possible. The
major, I presume, is here?"
So saying, I pushed forward into the room, where now a slight scuffling
noise and murmur of voices had succeeded silence. Brief as was the
interval of our colloquy, the scene within had, notwithstanding, undergone
considerable change. The English officers, hastily throwing off their
aldermanic robes, were busily arraying themselves in their uniforms, while
Monsoon himself, with a huge basin of water before him, was endeavoring to
wash the cork from his countenance in the corner of his tabard.
"Very hard upon me, all this; upon my life, so it is! Picton is always at
me, just as if we had not been school-fellows. The service is getting worse
every day. Regardez-moi, Curey, mong face est propre? Eh? There, thank you.
Good fellow the Curey is, but takes a deal of fluid. Oh, Burgomaster! I
fear it is all up with me! No more fun, no more jollification, no more
plunder--and how I did do it. Nothing like watching one's little chances!
'The poor is hated even by his neighbor.' Oui, Curey, it is Solomon says
that, and they must have had a heavy poor-rate in his day to make him say
so. Another glass of sherry!"
By this time I approached the back of the chair, and slapping him heartily
on the shoulder, called out,--
"Major, old boy, how goes it?"
"Eh?--what--how!--who is this? It can't be--egad, sure it is, though.
Charley! Charley O'Malley, you scapegrace, where have you been? When did
you join?"
"A week ago, Major. I could resist it no longer. I did my best to be a
country gentleman, and behave respectably, but the old temptation was too
strong for me. Fred Power and yourself, Major, had ruined my education; and
here I am once more among you."
"And so Picton and the arrest and all that, was nothing but a joke?" said
the old fellow, rolling his wicked eyes with a most cunning expression.
"Nothing more, Major, set your heart at rest."
"What a scamp you are," said he, with another grin. "Il est mon fils--il
est mon fils, Curey," presenting me, as he spoke, while the burgomaster, in
whose eyes the major seemed no inconsiderable personage, saluted me with
profound respect.
Turning at once towards this functionary, I explained that I was the
bearer of important despatches, and that my horse--I was ashamed to say my
mule--having fallen lame, I was unable to proceed.
"Can you procure me a remount, Monsieur?" said I, "for I must hasten on to
Courtrai."
"In half an hour you shall be provided, as well as with a mounted guide for
the road. Le fils de son Excellence," said he, with emphasis, bowing to the
major as he spoke; who, in his turn, repaid the courtesy with a still lower
obeisance.
"Sit down, Charley; here is a clean glass. I am delighted to see you, my
boy! They tell me you have got a capital estate and plenty of ready. Lord,
we so wanted you, as there's scarcely a fellow with sixpence among us. Give
me the lad that can do a bit of paper at three months, and always be ready
for a renewal. You haven't got a twenty-pound note?" This was said sotto
voce. "Never mind; ten will do. You can give me the remainder at Brussels.
Strange, is it not, I have not seen a bit of clean bank paper like this for
above a twelvemonth!" This was said as he thrust his hand into his pocket,
with one of those peculiar leers upon his countenance which, unfortunately,
betrayed more satisfaction at his success than gratitude for the service.
"You are looking fat--too fat, I think," said he, scrutinizing me from head
to foot; "but the life we are leading just now will soon take that off. The
slave-trade is luxurious indolence compared to it. Post haste to Nivelle
one day; down to Ghent the next; forty miles over a paved road in a
hand-gallop, and an aide-de-camp with a watch in his hand at the end of it,
to report if you are ten minutes too late. And there is Wellington has his
eye everywhere. There is not a truss of hay served to the cavalry, nor a
pair of shoes half-soled in the regiment, that he don't know of it. I've
got it over the knuckles already."
"How so, Major? How was that?"
"Why, he ordered me to picket two squadrons of the Seventh, and a supper
was waiting. I didn't like to leave my quarters, so I took up my telescope
and pitched upon a sweet little spot of ground on a hill; rather difficult
to get up, to be sure, but a beautiful view when you're on it. 'There is
your ground, Captain,' said I, as I sent one of my people to mark the spot.
He did not like it much; however, he was obliged to go. And, would you
believe it?--so much for bad luck!--there turned out to be no water within
two miles of it--not a drop, Charley; and so, about eleven at night, the
two squadrons moved down into Grammont to wet their lips, and what is
worse, to report me to the commanding officer. And only think! They put me
under arrest because Providence did not make a river run up a mountain!"
Just as the major finished speaking, the distant clatter of horses' feet
and the clank of cavalry was heard approaching. We all rushed eagerly to
the door; and scarcely had we done so, when a squadron of dragoons came
riding up the street at a fast trot.
"I say, good people," cried the officer, in French, "where does the
burgomaster live here?"
"Fred Power, 'pon my life!" shouted the major.
"Eh, Monsoon, that you? Give me a tumbler of wine, old boy; you are sure to
have some, and I am desperately blown."
"Get down, Fred, get down! We have an old friend here."
"Who the deuce d'ye mean?" said he, as throwing himself from the saddle he
strode into the room. "Charley O'Malley, by all that's glorious!"
"Fred, my gallant fellow!" said I.
"It was but this morning, Charley, that I so wished for you here. The
French are advancing, my lad. They have crossed the frontier; Zeithen's
corps have been attacked and driven in; Blucher is falling back upon Ligny;
and the campaign is opened. But I must press forward. The regiment is close
behind me, and we are ordered to push for Brussels in all haste."
"Then these despatches," said I, showing my packet, "'tis unnecessary to
proceed with?"
"Quite so. Get into the saddle and come back with us."
The burgomaster had kept his word with me; so mounted upon a strong
hackney, I set out with Power on the road to Brussels. I have had occasion
more than once to ask pardon of my reader for the prolixity of my
narrative, so I shall not trespass on him here by the detail of our
conversation as we jogged along. Of me and my adventures he already knows
enough--perhaps too much. My friend Power's career, abounding as it did in
striking incidents, and all the light and shadow of a soldier's life,
yet not bearing upon any of the characters I have presented to your
acquaintance, except in one instance,--of that only shall I speak.
"And the senhora, Fred; how goes your fortune in that quarter?"
"Gloriously, Charley! I am every day expecting the promotion in my regiment
which is to make her mine."
"You have heard from her lately, then?"
"Heard from her! Why, man, she is in Brussels."
"In Brussels?"
"To be sure. Don Emanuel is in high favor with the duke, and is now
commissary-general with the army; and the senhora is the belle of the
Rue Royale, or at least, it's a divided sovereignty between her and Lucy
Dashwood. And now, Charley, let me ask, what of her? There, there, don't
blush, man. There is quite enough moonlight to show how tender you are in
that quarter."
"Once for all, Fred, pray spare me on that subject. You have been far too
fortunate in your affaire de coeur, and I too much the reverse, to permit
much sympathy between us."
"Do you not visit, then; or is it a cut between you?" "I have never met her
since the night of the masquerade of the villa--at least, to speak to--"
"Well, I must confess, you seem to manage your own affairs much worse than
your friends'; not but that in so doing you are exhibiting a very Irish
feature of your character. In any case, you will come to the ball? Inez
will be delighted to see you; and I have got over all my jealousy."
"What ball? I never heard of it."
"Never heard of it! Why, the Duchess of Richmond's, of course. Pooh, pooh,
man! Not invited?--of course you are invited; the staff are never left out
on such occasions. You will find your card at your hotel on your return."
"In any case, Fred--"
"I shall insist upon your going. I have no arrire pense about a
reconciliation with the Dashwoods, no subtle scheme, on my honor; but
simply I feel that you will never give yourself fair chances in the world,
by indulging your habit of shrinking from every embarrassment. Don't be
offended, boy. I know you have pluck enough to storm a battery; I have seen
you under fire before now. What avails your courage in the field, if you
have not presence of mind in the drawing-room? Besides, everything else out
of the question, it is a breach of etiquette towards your chief to decline
such an invitation."
"You think so?"
"Think so?--no; I am sure of it."
"Then, as to uniform, Fred?"
"Oh, as to that, easily managed. And now I think of it, they have sent me
an unattached uniform, which you can have; but remember, my boy, if I put
you in my coat, I don't want you to stand in my shoes. Don't forget also
that I am your debtor in horseflesh, and fortunately able to repay you. I
have got such a charger; your own favorite color, dark chestnut, and
except one white leg, not a spot about him; can carry sixteen stone over a
five-foot fence, and as steady as a rock under fire."
"But, Fred, how are you--"
"Oh, never mind me; I have six in my stable, and intend to share with you.
The fact is, I have been transferred from one staff to another for the last
six months, and four of my number are presents. Is Mike with you? Ah, glad
to hear it; you will never get on without that fellow. Besides, it is a
capital thing to have such a connecting link with one's nationality. No
fear of your ever forgetting Ireland with Mr. Free in your company. You
are not aware that we have been correspondents. A fact, I assure you. Mike
wrote me two letters; and such letters they were! The last was a Jeremiad
over your decline and fall, with a very ominous picture of a certain Miss
Baby Blake."
"Confound the rascal!"
"By Jove, though, Charley, you were coming it rather strong with Baby. Inez
saw the letter, and as well as she could decipher Mike's hieroglyphics, saw
there was something in it; but the name Baby puzzled her immensely, and she
set the whole thing down to your great love of children. I don't think that
Lucy quite agreed with her."
"Did she tell it to Miss Dashwood?" I inquired, with fear and trembling.
"Oh, that she did; in fact, Inez never ceases talking of you to Lucy. But
come, lad, don't look so grave. Let's have another brush with the enemy;
capture a battery of their guns; carry off a French marshal or two; get the
Bath for your services, and be thanked in general orders,--and I will wager
all my chteau en Espagne that everything goes well."
Thus chatting away, sometimes over the past, of our former friends and
gay companions, of our days of storm and sunshine; sometimes indulging in
prospects for the future, we trotted along, and as the day was breaking,
mounted the ridge of low hills, from whence, at the distance of a couple of
leagues, the city of Brussels came into view.
CHAPTER LI.
THE DUCHESS OF RICHMOND'S BALL.
Whether we regard the illustrious and distinguished personages who thronged
around, or we think of the portentous moment in which it was given, the
Duchess of Richmond's ball, on the night of the 15th of June, 1815, was not
only one of the most memorable, but, in its interest, the most exciting
entertainment that the memory of any one now living can compass.
There is always something of no common interest in seeing the bronzed and
war-worn soldier mixing in the crowd of light-hearted and brilliant
beauty. To watch the eye whose proud glance has flashed over the mail-clad
squadrons now bending meekly beneath the look of some timid girl; to hear
the voice that, high above the battle or the breeze, has shouted the
hoarse word "Charge!" now subdued into the low, soft murmur of flattery or
compliment. This, at any rate, is a picture full of its own charm; but when
we see these heroes of a hundred fights; when we look upon these hardy
veterans, upon whose worn brows the whitened locks of time are telling,
indulging themselves in the careless gayety of a moment, snatched as it
were from the arduous career of their existence, while the tramp of the
advancing enemy shakes the very soil they stand on, and where it may be
doubted whether each aide-de-camp who enters comes a new votary of pleasure
or the bearer of tidings that the troops of the foe are advancing, and
already the work of death has begun: this is, indeed, a scene to make the
heart throb, and the pulse beat high; this is a moment second in its proud
excitement only to the very crash and din of battle itself. And into this
entrancing whirlwind of passion and of pleasure, of brilliant beauty
and ennobled greatness, of all that is lovely in woman and all that is
chivalrous and heroic in man, I brought a heart which, young in years, was
yet tempered by disappointment; still, such was the fascination, such the
brilliancy of the spectacle, that scarcely had I entered, than I felt a
change come over me,--the old spirit of my boyish ardor, that high-wrought
enthusiasm to do something, to be something which men may speak of, shot
suddenly through me, and I felt my cheek tingle and my temples throb, as
name after name of starred and titled officers were announced, to think
that to me, also, the path of glorious enterprise was opening.
"Come along, come along," said Power, catching me by the arm, "you've not
been presented to the duchess. I know her. I'll do it for you; or perhaps
it is better Sir Thomas Picton should. In any case, filez after me, for
the dark-eyed senhora is surely expecting us. There, do you see that dark,
intelligent-looking fellow leaning over the end of the sofa? That is Alava.
And there, you know who that is, that beau ideal of a hussar? Look how
jauntily he carries himself; see the careless but graceful sling with which
he edges through the crowd; and look! Mark his bow! Did you see that,
Charley? Did you catch the quick glance he shot yonder, and the soft smile
that showed his white teeth? Depend upon it, boy, some fair heart is not
the better nor the easier for that look."
"Who is it?" said I.
"Lord Uxbridge, to be sure; the handsomest fellow in the service; and there
goes Vandeleur, talking with Vivian; the other, to the left, is Ponsonby."
"But stay, Fred, tell me who that is?" For a moment or two, I had some
difficulty in directing his attention to the quarter I desired. The
individual I pointed out was somewhat above the middle size; his uniform of
blue and gold, though singularly plain, had a look of richness about it;
besides that, among the orders which covered his breast, he wore one star
of great brilliancy and size. This, however, was his least distinction; for
although surrounded on every side by those who might be deemed the very
types and pictures of their caste, there was something in the easy but
upright carriage of his head, the intrepid character of his features, the
bold and vigorous flashing of his deep blue eye, that marked him as no
common man. He was talking with an old and prosy-looking personage in
civilian dress; and while I could detect an anxiety to get free from
a tiresome companion, there was an air of deferential, and even kind
attention in his manner, absolutely captivating.
"A thorough gentleman, Fred, whoever he be," said I.
"I should think so," replied Power, dryly; "and as our countrymen would
say, 'The Devil thank him for it!' That is the Prince of Orange; but see,
look at him now, his features have learned another fashion." And true it
was; with a smile of the most winning softness, and with a voice, whose
slightly foreign accent took nothing from its interest, I heard him
engaging a partner for a waltz.
There was a flutter of excitement in the circle as the lady rose to take
his arm, and a muttered sound of, "How very beautiful, quelle est belle,
c'est un ange!" on all sides. I leaned forward to catch a glance as she
passed; it was Lucy Dashwood. Beautiful beyond anything I had ever seen
her, her lovely features lit up with pleasure and with pride, she looked in
every way worthy to lean upon the arm of royalty. The graceful majesty of
her walk, the placid loveliness of her gentle smile, struck every one
as she passed on. As for me, totally forgetting all else, not seeing or
hearing aught around me, I followed her with my eye until she was lost
among the crowd, and then, with an impulse of which I was not master,
followed in her steps.
"This way, this way," said Power; "I see the senhora." So saying, we
entered a little boudoir, where a party was playing at cards. Leaning on
the back of a chair, Inez was endeavoring, with that mixture of coquetry
and half malice she possessed, to distract the attention of the player. As
Power came near, she scarcely turned her head to give him a kind of saucy
smile; while, seeing me, she held out her hand with friendly warmth, and
seemed quite happy to meet me.
"Do, pray, take her away; get her to dance, to eat ice, or flirt with you,
for Heaven's sake!" said the half-laughing voice of her victim. "I have
revoked twice, and misdealt four times since she has been here. Believe me,
I shall take it as the greatest favor, if you'll--"
As he got thus far he turned round towards me, and I perceived it was Sir
George Dashwood. The meeting was as awkward for him as for me; and while a
deep flush covered my face, he muttered some unintelligible apology, and
Inez burst into a fit of laughter at the ludicrous contretemps of our
situation.
"I will dance with you now, if you like," said she, "and that will be
punishing all three. Eh, Master Fred?"
So saying, she took my arm as I led her toward the ball-room.
"And so you really are not friends with the Dashwoods? How very provoking,
and how foolish, too! But really, Chevalier, I must say you treat ladies
very ill. I don't forget your conduct to me. Dear me, I wish we could move
forward, there is some one pushing me dreadfully!"
"Get on, Ma'am, get on!" said a sharp, decided voice behind me. I turned,
half smiling, to see the speaker. It was the Duke of Wellington himself,
who, with his eye fixed upon some person at a distance, seemed to care
very little for any intervening obstruction. As I made way for him to pass
between us, he looked hardly at me, while he said in a short, quick way,--
"Know your face very well: how d'ye do?" With this brief recognition he
passed on, leaving me to console Inez for her crushed sleeve, by informing
her who had done it.
The ball was now at its height. The waltzers whirled past in the wild
excitement of the dance. The inspiriting strains of the music, the sounds
of laughter, the din, the tumult, all made up that strange medley which,
reacting upon the minds of those who cause it, increases the feeling
of pleasurable abandonment, making the old feel young, and the young
intoxicated with delight.
As the senhora leaned upon me, fatigued with waltzing, I was endeavoring to
sustain a conversation with her; while my thoughts were wandering with my
eyes to where I had last seen Lucy Dashwood.
"It must be something of importance; I'm sure it is," said she, at the
conclusion of a speech of which I had not heard one word. "Look at General
Picton's face!"
"Very pretty, indeed," said I; "but the hair is unbecoming," replying to
some previous observation she had made, and still lost in a revery. A
hearty burst of laughter was her answer as she gently shook my arm,
saying,--
"You really are too bad! You've never listened to one word I've been
telling you, but keep continually staring with your eyes here and there,
turning this way and looking that, and with a dull, vacant, and unmeaning
smile, answering at random, in the most provoking manner. There now, pray
pay attention, and tell me what that means." As she said this, she pointed
with her fan to where a dragoon officer, in splashed and spattered uniform,
was standing talking to some three or four general officers. "But here
comes the duke; it can't be anything of consequence."
At the same instant the Duke of Wellington passed with the Duchess of
Richmond on his arm.
"No, Duchess; nothing to alarm you. Did you say ice?"
"There, you heard that, I hope!" said Inez; "there is nothing to alarm us."
"Go to General Picton at once; but don't let it be remarked," said an
officer, in a whisper, as he passed close by me.
"Inez, I have the greatest curiosity to learn what that new arrival has to
say for himself; and if you will permit me, I'll leave you with Lady Gordon
for one moment--"
"Delighted, of all things. You are without exception, the most
tiresome--Good-by."
"Sans adieu," said I, as I hurried through the crowd towards an open
window, on the balcony outside of which Sir Thomas Picton was standing.
"Ah, Mr. O'Malley, have you a pencil? There, that'll do. Ride down to
Etterbeeck with this order for Godwin. You have heard the news, I suppose,
that the French are in advance? The Seventy-ninth will muster in the Grando
Place. The Ninety-second and the Twenty-eighth along the Park and the
Boulevard. Napoleon left Fresnes this morning. The Prussians have fallen
back. Zeithen has been beaten. We march at once."
"To-morrow, sir?"
"No, sir, to-night. There, don't delay! But above all, let everything be
done quietly and noiselessly. The duke will remain here for an hour longer
to prevent suspicion. When you've executed your orders, come back here."
I mounted the first horse I could find at the door, and galloped with top
speed over the heavy causeway to Etterbeeck. In two minutes the drum beat
to arms, and the men were mustering as I left. Thence I hastened to the
barracks of the Highland Brigade and the 28th Regiment; and before half an
hour, was back in the ball-room, where, from the din and tumult, I guessed
the scene of pleasure and dissipation continued unabated. As I hurried up
the staircase a throng of persons were coming down, and I was obliged to
step aside to let them pass.
"Ah, come here, pray," said Picton, who, with a lady cloaked and hooded
leaning upon his arm, was struggling to make way through the crowd. "The
very man!"
"Will you excuse me if I commit you to the care of my aide-de-camp, who
will see you to your carriage? The duke has just desired to see me." This
he said in a hurried and excited tone; and the same moment beckoned to me
to take the lady's arm.
It was with some difficulty I succeeded in reaching the spot, and had only
time to ask whose carriage I should call for, ere we arrived in the hall.
"Sir George Dashwood's," said a low, soft voice, whose accents sank into
my very heart. Heaven! it was Lucy herself; it was her arm that leaned on
mine, her locks that fluttered beside me, her hand that hung so near, and
yet I could not speak. I tried one word; but a choking feeling in my throat
prevented utterance, and already we were upon the door-steps.
"Sir George Dashwood's carriage," shouted the footman, and the announcement
was repeated by the porter. The steps were hurried down; the footman stood
door in hand; and I led her forward, mute and trembling. Did she know me? I
assisted her as she stepped in; her hand touched mine: it was the work of a
second; to me it was the bliss of years. She leaned a little forward; and
as the servant put up the steps, said in her soft, sweet tone, "Thank you,
sir. Good-night."
I felt my shoulder touched by some one who, it appeared, was standing close
to me for some seconds; but so occupied was I in gazing at her that I paid
no attention to the circumstance. The carriage drove away and disappeared
in the thick darkness of a starless night. I turned to re-enter the house,
and as I did so, the night lamp of the hall fell upon the features of
the man beside me, and showed me the pale and corpse-like face of Fred
Hammersley. His eye was bent upon me with an expression of fierce and fiery
passion, in which the sadness of long-suffering also mingled. His bloodless
lips parted, moved as though speaking, while yet no sound issued; and his
nostril, dilating and contracting by turns, seemed to denote some deep and
hidden emotion that worked within him.
"Hammersley," said I, holding out my hand towards him,--"Hammersley, do not
always mistake me?"
He shook his head mournfully as it fell forward upon his breast, and
covering his arm, moved slowly away without speaking.
General Picton's voice as he descended the stairs, accompanied by Generals
Vandeleur and Vivian, aroused me at once, and I hurried towards him.
"Now, sir, to horse. The troops will defile by the Namur gate, and meet me
there in an hour. Meanwhile tell Colonel Cameron that he must march with
the light companies of his own and the Ninety-second at once."
"I say, Picton, they'll say we were taken by surprise in England; won't
they?" said a sharp, strong voice, in a half-laughing tone from behind.
"No, your Grace," said Sir Thomas, bowing slightly; "they'll scarcely do so
when they hear the time we took to get under arms."
I heard no more; but throwing myself into the saddle of my troop horse,
once more rode back to the Belle Vue to make ready for the road.
The thin pale crescent of a new moon, across which masses of dark and inky
clouds were hurrying, tipped with its faint and sickly light the tall
minarets of the Hotel de Ville, as I rode into the Grande Place. Although
midnight, the streets were as crowded as at noonday; horse, foot, and
dragoons passing and hurrying hither; the wild pibroch of the Highlander;
the mellow bugle of the Seventy-first; the hoarse trumpet of the cavalry;
the incessant roll of the drum,--mingled their sounds with the tide of
human voices, in which every accent was heard, from the reckless cheer of
anticipated victory, to the heart-piercing shriek of woman's agony. Lights
gleamed from every window; from the doors of almost every house poured
forth a crowd of soldiers and townsfolk. The sergeants, on one side,
might be seen telling off their men, their cool and steady countenances
evidencing no semblance of emotion; while near them some young ensign,
whose beardless cheek and vacant smile bespoke the mere boy, looked on with
mingled pride and wonder at the wild scene before him. Every now and then
some general officer with his staff came cantering past; and as the efforts
to muster and form the troops grew more pressing, I could mark how soon we
were destined to meet the enemy.
There are few finer monuments of the architecture of the Middle Ages than
the Grande Place of Brussels,--the rich faade of the Htel de Ville, with
its long colonnade of graceful arches, upon every keystone of which some
grim, grotesque head is peering; the massive cornices; the heavy corbels
carved into ten thousand strange and uncouth fancies; but finer than all,
the taper and stately spire, fretted and perforated like some piece of
silver filigree, stretches upward towards the sky, its airy pinnacle
growing finer and more beautiful as it nears the stars it points to.
How full of historic associations is every dark embrasure, every narrow
casement around! Here may have stood the great emperor, Charles the Fifth,
meditating upon that greatness he was about to forego forever; here from
this tall window, may have looked the sad and sickly features of Jeanne
Laffolle, as with wandering eye and idiot smile she gazed upon the gorgeous
procession beneath. There is not a stone that has not echoed to the tread
of haughty prince or bold baron; yet never, in the palmiest days of ancient
chivalry, did those proud dwellings of the great of old look out upon a
braver and more valiant host than now thronged beneath their shadow. It was
indeed a splendid sight, where the bright gleams of torch and lantern threw
the red light around, to watch the measured tread and steady tramp of the
Highland regiments as they defiled into the open space; each footstep as it
met the ground, seeming in its proud and firm tread, to move in more than
sympathy with the wild notes of their native mountains; silent and still
they moved along; no voice spoke within their ranks, save that of some
command to "Close up--take ground--to the right--rear rank--close order."
Except such brief words as these, or the low muttered praise of some
veteran general as he rode down the line, all was orderly and steady as
on a parade. Meanwhile, from an angle of the square, the band of an
approaching regiment was heard; and to the inspiriting quickness of "The
Young May Moon," the gallant Twenty-eighth came forward and took up their
ground opposite to the Highlanders.
The deep bell of the Htel de Ville tolled one. The solemn sound rang out
and died away in many an echo, leaving upon the heart a sense of some
unknown depression; and there was something like a knell in the deep
cadence of its bay; and over many a cheek a rapid trace of gloomy thought
now passed; and true--too true, alas!--how many now listened for the last
time!
"March! march!" passed from front to rear; and as the bands burst forth
again in streams of spirit-stirring harmony, the Seventy-ninth moved on;
the Twenty-eighth followed; and as they debouched from the "Place" the
Seventy-first and the Ninety-second succeeded them. Like wave after wave,
the tide of armed men pressed on, and mounted the steep and narrow street
towards the upper town of Brussels. Here Pack's Brigade was forming in the
Place Royale; and a crowd of staff officers dictating orders, and writing
hurriedly on the drum-heads, were also seen. A troop of dragoons stood
beside their horses at the door of the Belle Vue, and several grooms with
led horses walked to and fro.
"Ride forward, sir, to the Bois de Cambre," said Picton, "and pivot the
troops on the road to Mont St. Jean. You will then wait for my coming up,
or further orders."
This command, which was given to me, I hastened to obey; and with
difficulty forcing my way through the opposing crowd, at length reached the
Namur gate. Here I found a detachment of the Guards, who as yet had got no
orders to march, and were somewhat surprised to learn the forward movement.
Ten minutes' riding brought me to the angle of the wood, whence I wrote a
few lines to my host of the Belle Vue, desiring him to send Mike after me
with my horses and my kit. The night was cold, dark, and threatening; the
wind howled with a low and wailing cry through the dark pine-trees; and as
I stood alone and in solitude, I had time to think of the eventful hours
before me, and of that field which ere long was to witness the triumph or
the downfall of my country's arms. The road which led through the forest of
Soignies caught an additional gloom from the dark, dense woods around. The
faint moon only showed at intervals; and a lowering sky, without a single
star, stretched above us. It was an awful and a solemn thing to hear the
deep and thundering roll of that mighty column, awakening the echoes of
the silent forest as they went. So hurried was the movement that we had
scarcely any artillery, and that of the lightest calibre; but the clash and
clank of the cavalry, the heavy, monotonous tramp of infantry were there;
and as division followed after division, staff officers rode hurriedly to
and fro, pressing the eager troops still on.
"Move up there, Ninety-fifth. Ah, Forty-second, we've work before us!" said
Picton, as he rode up to the head of his brigade. The air of depression
which usually sat upon his careworn features now changed for a light and
laughing look, while his voice was softened and subdued into a low and
pleasing tone. Although it was midsummer, the roads were heavy and deep
with mud. For some weeks previously the weather had been rainy; and
this, added to the haste and discomfort of the night march, considerably
increased the fatigue of the troops. Notwithstanding these disadvantages,
not a murmur nor complaint was heard on any side.
"I'm unco glad to get a blink o' them, onyhow," said a tall, raw-boned
sergeant, who marched beside me.
"Faith, and may be you won't be over pleased at the expression of their
faces, when you see them," said Mike, whose satisfaction at the prospect
before him was still as great as that of any other amidst the thousands
there.
The day was slowly breaking, as a Prussian officer, splashed and covered
with foam, came galloping up at full speed past us. While I was yet
conjecturing what might be the intelligence he brought, Power rode up to my
side.
"We're in for it, Charley," said he. "The whole French army are in march;
and Blucher's aide-de-camp, who has arrived, gives the number at one
hundred and fifty thousand men. The Prussians are drawn up between St.
Amand and Sombref, and the Nassau and Dutch troops are at Quatre Bras, both
expecting to be attacked."
"Quatre Bras was the original rallying spot for our troops, was it not?"
said I.
"Yes, yes. It is that we're now marching upon; but our Prussian friend
seems to think we shall arrive too late. Strong French corps are already at
Fresnes, under the command, it is said, of Marshal Ney."
The great object of the British commander-in-chief was to arrive at Quatre
Bras in sufficient time to effect his junction with Blucher before a battle
should be fought. To effect this no exertion was spared: efforts almost
super-human were made; for, however prepared for a forward movement, it was
impossible to have anticipated anything until the intentions of Napoleon
became clearly manifest. While Nivelles and Charleroi were exposed to him
on one side, Namur lay open on the other; and he could either march upon
Brussels, by Mons or Halle, or, as he subsequently attempted, by Quatre
Bras and Waterloo. No sooner, however, were his intentions unmasked, and
the line of his operations manifested, than Lord Wellington, with an energy
equal to the mighty occasion that demanded it, poured down with the whole
force under his command to meet him.
The march was a most distressing one; upward of three-and-twenty miles,
with deep and cut-up roads, in hot, oppressive weather, in a country almost
destitute of water. Still the troops pressed forward, and by noon came
within hearing of the heavy cannonade in front, which indicated the
situation of the battle. From this time aide-de-camp followed aide-de-camp
in quick succession, who, from their scared looks and hurried gestures,
seemed to bode but ill-fortune to the cause we cared for. What the precise
situation of the rival armies might be we knew not; but we heard the French
were in overwhelming numbers; that the Dutch troops had abandoned their
position; the Hanoverians being driven back, the Duke of Brunswick--the
brave sovereign of a gallant people--fell charging at the head of his black
hussars. From one phrase which constantly met our ears, it seemed that
the Bois de Bossu was the key of the position. This had been won and lost
repeatedly by both sides; and as we neared the battle-field a despatch
hurriedly announced to Picton the importance of at once recovering this
contested point. The Ninety-fifth were ordered up to the attack. Scarcely
was the word given, when fatigue, thirst, and exhaustion were forgotten;
with one cheer the gallant regiment formed into line, and advanced upon
the wood. Meanwhile the Highland Brigade moved down towards the right; the
Royals and the Twenty-eighth debouched upon the left of the road; and in
less than half an hour after our arrival our whole force was in action.
There is something appalling, to the bravest army, in coming up to battle
at the time that an overwhelming and conquering foe are carrying victory
triumphantly before them: such was our position at Quatre Bras. Bravely and
gloriously as the forces of the Prince of Orange fought, the day, however,
was not theirs. The Bois de Bossu, which opened to the enemy the road to
Brussels, was held by their tirailleurs; the valley to the right was rode
over by their mounted squadrons, who with lance and sabre carried all
before them; their dark columns pressed steadily on; and a death-dealing
artillery swept the allied ranks from flank to flank. Such was the field
when the British arrived, and throwing themselves into squares, opposed
their unaided force to the dreadful charges of the enemy. The batteries
showered down their storms of grape; Milhaud's Heavy Dragoons, assisted by
crowds of lancers, rushed upon the squares, but they stood unbroken and
undaunted, as sometimes upon three sides of their position the infuriated
horsemen of the enemy came down. Once, and once only, were the French
successful; the 42d, who were stationed amidst tall corn-fields, were
surrounded with cavalry before they knew it. The word was given to form
square; the Lancers were already among them, and fighting back to back, the
gallant Highlanders met the foe. Fresh numbers poured down upon them, and
already half the regiment was disabled and their colonel killed. These
brave fellows were rescued by the 44th, who, throwing in a withering
volley, fixed bayonets and charged. Meanwhile the 95th had won and lost the
wood, which, now in the possession of the French tirailleurs, threatened to
turn the left of our position. It was at this time that a body of cavalry
were seen standing to the left of the Enghien road, as if in observation.
An officer sent forward to reconnoitre, returned with the intelligence that
they were British troops, for he had seen their red uniforms.
"I can't think it, sir," said Picton. "It is hardly possible that any
regiment from Enghien could have arrived already. Ride forward, O'Malley,
and if they be our fellows, let them carry that height yonder; there are
two guns there cutting the 92d to pieces."
I put spurs to my horse, cleared the road at once, and dashing across
the open space to the left of the wood, rode on in the direction of the
horsemen. When I came within the distance of three hundred yards I examined
them with my glass, and could plainly detect the scarlet coats and bright
helmets. "Ha," thought I, "the 1st Dragoon Guards, no doubt." Muttering
to myself thus much, I galloped straight on; and waving my hand as I came
near, announced that I was the bearer of an order. Scarcely had I done so,
when four horsemen, dashing spurs into their steeds, plunged hastily out
from the line, and before I could speak, surrounded me. While the foremost
called out, as he flourished his sabre above his head, "Rendez-vous!" At
the same moment I was seized on each side, and led back a captive into the
hands of the enemy.
"We guess your mistake, Capitaine," said the French officer before whom I
was brought. "We are the regiment of Berg, and our scarlet uniform cost us
dearly enough yesterday."
This allusion, I afterwards learned, was in reference to a charge by a
cuirassier regiment, which, in mistaking them for English, poured a volley
into them, and killed and wounded about twenty of their number.
CHAPTER LII.
QUATRE BRAS.
Those who have visited the field of Quatre Bras will remember that on the
left of the high road, and nearly at the extremity of the Bois de Bossu,
stands a large Flemish farm-house, whose high pitched roof, pointed gables,
and quaint, old-fashioned chimneys, remind one of the architecture
so frequently seen in Tenier's pictures. The house, which, with its
dependencies of stables, granaries, and out-houses, resembles a little
village, is surrounded by a large, straggling orchard of aged fruit-trees,
through which the approach from the high road leads. The interior of this
quaint dwelling, like all those of its class, is only remarkable for a
succession of small, dark, low-ceiled rooms, leading one into another;
their gloomy aspect increased by the dark oak furniture, the heavy
armories, and old-fashioned presses, carved in the grotesque taste of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Those who visit it now may mark the
trace of cannon-shot here and there through the building; more than
one deep crack will attest the force of the dread artillery. Still the
traveller will feel struck with the rural peace and quietude of the scene;
the speckled oxen that stand lowing in the deep meadows; the splash of the
silvery trout as he sports in the bright stream that ripples along over its
gravelly bed; the cawing of the old rooks in the tall beech-trees; but more
than all, the happy laugh of children,--speak of the spot as one of retired
and tranquil beauty; yet when my eyes opened upon it on the morning of the
17th of June, the scene presented features of a widely different interest.
The day was breaking as the deep, full sound of the French bugles announced
the reveille. Forgetful of where I was, I sprang from my bed and rushed to
the window; the prospect before me at once recalled me to my recollection,
and I remembered that I was a prisoner. The exciting events around left me
but little time and as little inclination to think over my old misfortunes;
and I watched, with all the interest of a soldier, the movement of the
French troops in the orchard beneath. A squadron of dragoons, who seemed to
have passed the night beside their horses, lay stretched or seated in all
the picturesque groupings of a bivouac,--some already up and stirring;
others leaned half listlessly upon their elbows, and looked about as if
unwilling to believe the night was over; and some, stretched in deep
slumber, woke not with the noise and tumult around them. The room in which
I was confined looked out upon the road to Charleroi; I could therefore
see the British troops; and as the French army had fallen back during the
night, only an advanced guard maintaining the position, I was left to my
unaided conjectures as to the fortune of the preceding day of battle. What
a period of anxiety and agitation was that morning to me; what would I
not have given to learn the result of the action since the moment of my
capture! Stubborn as our resistance had been, we were evidently getting the
worst, of it; and if the Guards had not arrived in time, I knew we must
have been beaten.
I walked up and down my narrow room, tortured and agonized by my doubts,
now stopping to reason over the possibilities of success, now looking from
the window to try if, in the gesture and bearing of those without, I could
conjecture anything that passed. Too well I knew the vaunting character
of the French soldier, in defeat as in victory, to put much confidence in
their bearing. While, however, I watched them with an eager eye, I heard
the tramp of horsemen coming along the paved causeway. From the moment my
ear caught the sound to that of their arrival at the gate of the orchard,
but few minutes elapsed; their pace was indeed a severe one, and as they
galloped through the narrow path that led to the farm-house, they never
drew rein till they reached the porch. The party consisted of about a dozen
persons whose plumed hats bespoke them staff officers; but their uniforms
were concealed beneath their great-coats. As they came along the picket
sprang to their feet, and the guard at the door beneath presented arms.
This left no doubt upon my mind that some officer of rank was among them,
and as I knew that Ney himself commanded on the preceding day, I thought
it might be he. The sound of voices beneath informed me that the party
occupied the room under that in which I was, and although I listened
attentively I could hear nothing but the confused murmur of persons
conversing together without detecting even a word. My thoughts now fell
into another channel, and as I ruminated over my old position, I heard the
noise of the sentry at my door as he brought his musket to the shoulder,
and the next moment an officer in the uniform of the Chasseurs of the Guard
entered. Bowing politely as he advanced to the middle of the room, he
addressed me thus:--
"You speak French, sir?" and as I replied in the affirmative, continued:--
"Will you, then, have the goodness to follow me this way?"
Although burning with anxiety to learn what had taken place, yet somehow I
could not bring myself to ask the question. A secret pride mingled with my
fear that all had not gone well with us, and I durst not expose myself to
hear of our defeat from the lips of an enemy. I had barely time to ask into
whose presence I was about to be ushered, when with a slight smile of a
strange meaning, he opened the door and introduced me into the saloon.
Although I had seen at least twelve or fourteen horsemen arrive, there were
but three persons in the room as I entered. One of these, who sat writing
at a small table near the window, never lifted his head on my entrance, but
continued assiduously his occupation. Another, a tall, fine-looking man
of some sixty years or upward, whose high, bald forehead and drooping
mustache, white as snow, looked in every way the old soldier of the empire,
stood leaning upon his sabre; while the third, whose stature, somewhat
below the middle size, was yet cast in a strong and muscular mould, stood
with his back to the fire, holding on his arms the skirts of a gray surtout
which he wore over his uniform; his legs were cased in the tall bottes 
l'cuyre worn by the chasseur  cheval, and on his head a low cocked
hat, without plume or feather, completed his costume. There was something
which, at the very moment of my entrance, struck me as uncommon in his air
and bearing, so much so that when my eyes had once rested on his pale but
placid countenance, his regular, handsome, but somewhat stern features, I
totally forgot the presence of the others and looked only at him.
"What's your rank, sir?" said he, hurriedly, and with a tone which bespoke
command.
"I have none at present, save--"
"Why do you wear your epaulettes then, sir?" said he, harshly, while from
his impatient look, and hurried gesture, I saw that he put no faith in my
reply.
"I am an aide-de-camp to General Picton, but without regimental rank."
"What was the British force under arms yesterday?"
"I do not feel at liberty to give you any information as to the number or
the movements of our army."
"Diantre! Diantre!" said he, slapping his boot with his horsewhip, "do
you know what you've been saying there, eh? Cambronne, you heard him, did
you?"
"Yes, Sire, and if your Majesty would permit me to deal with him, I would
have his information, if he possess any, and that ere long, too."
"Eh, gaillard," said he, laughing, as he pinched the old general's ear in
jest, "I believe you, with all my heart."
The full truth flashed upon my mind. I was in presence of the Emperor
himself. As, however, up to this moment I was unconscious of his presence,
I resolved now to affect ignorance of it throughout.
"Had you despatches, sir?" said he, turning towards me with a look of stern
severity. "Were any despatches found upon him when he was taken?" This
latter question was directed to the aide-de-camp who introduced me, and who
still remained at the door.
"No, Sire, nothing was found upon him except this locket."
As he said these words he placed in Napoleon's hands the keepsake which St.
Croix had left with me years before in Spain, and which, as the reader may
remember, was a miniature of the Empress Josephine.
The moment the Emperor threw his eyes upon it, the flush which excitement
had called into his cheek disappeared at once. He became pale as death, his
very lips as bloodless as his wan cheek.
"Leave me, Lefebvre; leave me, Cambronne, for a moment. I will speak with
this gentleman alone."
As the door closed upon them he leaned his arm upon the mantelpiece, and
with his head sunk upon his bosom, remained some moments without speaking.
"Augure sinistre!" muttered he within his teeth, as his piercing gaze was
riveted upon the picture before him. "Voil la troisime fois peut-tre
la dernire." Then suddenly rousing himself, he advanced close to me, and
seizing me by the arm with a grasp like iron, inquired:--
"How came you by this picture? The truth, sir; mark me, the truth!"
Without showing any sign of feeling hurt at the insinuation of this
question, I detailed, in as few words as I could, the circumstance by which
the locket became mine. Long before I had concluded, however, I could mark
that his attention flagged, and finally wandered far away from the matter
before him.
"Why will you not give me the information I look for? I seek for no breach
of faith. The campaign is all but over. The Prussians were beaten at Ligny,
their army routed, their artillery captured, ten thousand prisoners taken.
Your troops and the Dutch were conquered yesterday, and they are in full
retreat on Brussels. By to-morrow evening I shall date my bulletin from
the palace at Laeken. Antwerp will be in my possession within twenty-four
hours. Namur is already mine. Cambronne, Lefebvre," cried he, "cet homme-l
n'en sait rien," pointing to me as he spoke; "let us see the other." With
this he motioned slightly with his hand as a sign for me to withdraw, and
the next moment I was once more in the solitude of my prison-room, thinking
over the singular interview I had just had with the great Emperor.
How anxiously pass the hours of one who, deprived of other means of
information, is left to form his conjectures by some passing object or some
chance murmur. The things which, in the ordinary course of life, are passed
by unnoticed and unregarded, are now matters of moment,--with what scrutiny
he examines the features of those whom he dare not question; with what
patient ear he listens to each passing word. Thus to me, a prisoner,
the hours went by tardily yet anxiously; no sabre clanked; no war-horse
neighed; no heavy-booted cuirassier tramped in the courtyard beneath my
window, without setting a hundred conjectures afloat as to what was about
to happen. For some time there had been a considerable noise and bustle in
and about the dwelling. Horsemen came and went continually. The sounds of
galloping could be heard along the paved causeway; then the challenge of
the sentry at the gate; then the nearer tread of approaching stops, and
many voices speaking together, would seem to indicate that some messenger
had arrived with despatches. At length all these sounds became hushed and
still. No longer were the voices heard; and except the measured tread of
the heavy cuirassier, as he paced on the flags beneath, nothing was to be
heard. My state of suspense, doubly greater now than when the noise and
tumult suggested food for conjecture, continued till towards noon, when
a soldier in undress brought me some breakfast, and told me to prepare
speedily for the road.
Scarcely had he left the room, when the rumbling noise of wagons was heard
below, and a train of artillery carts moved into the little courtyard
loaded with wounded men. It was a sad and frightful sight to see these poor
fellows, as, crammed side by side in the straw of the charrette, they
lay, their ghastly wounds opening with every motion of the wagon, while
their wan, pale faces were convulsed with agony and suffering. Of every
rank, from the sous-lieutenant to the humble soldier, from every arm of the
service, from the heavy cuirassier of the guard to the light and intrepid
tirailleur, they were there. I well remember one, an artillery-man of
the guard, who, as they lifted him forth from the cart, presented the
horrifying spectacle of one both of whose legs had been carried away by a
cannon-shot. Pale, cold, and corpse-like, ha lay in their arms; his head
lay heavily to one side, his arms fell passively as in death. It was at
this moment a troop of lancers, the advanced guard of D'Erlon's Division,
came trotting up the road; the cry of "Vive l'Empereur!" burst from them
as they approached; its echo rang within the walls of the farm-house, when
suddenly the dying man, as though some magic touch had called him back to
life and vigor, sprang up erect between his bearers, his filmy eye flashing
fire, a burning spot of red coloring his bloodless cheek. He cast one wild
and hurried look around him, like one called back from death to look
upon the living; and as he raised his blood-stained hand above his head,
shouted, in a heart-piercing cry, "Vive l'Empereur!" The effort was his
last. It was the expiring tribute of allegiance to the chief he adored. The
blood spouted in cataracts from his half-closed wounds, a convulsive spasm
worked through his frame, his eyes rolled fearfully, as his outstretched
hands seemed striving to clutch some object before them, and he was dead.
Fresh arrivals of wounded continued to pour in; and now I thought I could
detect at intervals the distant noise of a cannonade. The wind, however,
was from the southward, and the sounds were too indistinct to be relied on.
"Allons, aliens, mon cher!" said a rough but good-humored looking fellow,
as he strode into my room. He was the quartermaster of Milhaud's Dragoons,
under whose care I was now placed, and came to inform me that we were to
set out immediately.
Monsieur Bonnard was a character in his way; and if it were not so near the
conclusion of my history, I should like to present him to my readers. As
it is, I shall merely say he was a thorough specimen of one class of
his countrymen,--a loud talker, a louder swearer, a vaporing, boasting,
overbearing, good-natured, and even soft-hearted fellow, who firmly
believed that Frenchmen were the climax of the species, and Napoleon the
climax of Frenchmen. Being a great bavard, he speedily told me all that
had taken place during the last two days. From him I learned that the
Prussians had really been beaten at Ligny, and had fallen back, he knew
not where. They were, however, he said, hotly pursued by Grouchy, with
thirty-five thousand men, while the Emperor himself was now following the
British and Dutch armies with seventy thousand more.
"You see," continued he, "l'affaire est faite! Who can resist the Emperor?"
These were sad tidings for me; and although I did not place implicit
confidence in my informant, I had still my fears that much of what he said
was true.
"And the British, now," said I, "what direction have they taken?"
"Bah, they're in retreat on Brussels, and will probably capitulate
to-morrow."
"Capitulate!"
"Oui, oui; ne vous fchez pas, camarade," said he, laughing. "What could
you do against Napoleon? You did not expect to beat him, surely? But come,
we must move on; I have my orders to bring you to Planchenoit this evening,
and our horses are tired enough already."
"Mine, methinks, should be fresh," said I.
"Parbleu, mon!" replied he; "he has twice made the journey to Fresnes
this morning with despatches for Marshal Ney; the Emperor is enraged
with the marshal for having retreated last night, having the wood in his
possession; he says he should have waited till daybreak, and then fallen
upon your retreating columns. As it is, you are getting away without much
loss. Sacristie, that was a fine charge!" These last words he muttered to
himself, adding, between his teeth, "Sixty-four killed and wounded."
"What was that? Who were they?" said I.
"Our fellows," replied he, frankly; "the Emperor ordered up two
twelve-pounders, and eight squadrons of lancers; they fell upon your light
dragoons in a narrow part of the high road. But suddenly we heard a noise
in front; your hussars fell back, and a column of your heavy dragoons came
thundering down upon us. Parbleu! they swept over us as if we were broken
infantry; and there! there!" said he, pointing to the courtyard, from
whence the groans of the wounded still rose,--"there are the fruits of that
terrible charge."
I could not restrain an outbreak of triumphant pleasure at this gallant
feat of my countrymen.
"Yes, yes," said the honest quartermaster; "it was a fine thing; but a
heavy reckoning is at hand. But come, now, let us take the road."
In a few moments more I found myself seated upon a heavy Norman horse,
whose lumbering demi-peak saddle was nearly cleft in two by a sabre-cut.
"Ay, ay," said Monsieur Bonnard, as he saw my eye fixed on the spot, "it
was one of your fellows did that; and the same cut clove poor Pierre from
the neck to the seat."
"I hope," said I, laughing, "the saddle may not prove an unlucky one."
"No, no," said the Frenchman, seriously; "it has paid its debt to fate."
As we pressed on our road, which, broken by the heavy guns, and ploughed up
in many places by the artillery, was nearly impassable, we could distinctly
hear from time to time the distant boom of the large guns, as the retiring
and pursuing armies replied to each other; while behind us, but still a
long way off, a dark mass appeared on the horizon: they were the advancing
columns of Ney's Division.
"Have the troops come in contact more than once this morning?"
"Not closely," said the quartermaster; "the armies have kept a respectful
distance; they were like nothing I can think of," said the figurative
Frenchman, "except two hideous serpents wallowing in mire, and vomiting at
each other whole rivers of fire and flame."
As we approached Planchenoit, we came up to the rear-guard of the French
army; from them we learned that Ney's Division, consisting of the Eighth
Corps, had joined the Emperor; that the British were still in retreat, but
that nothing of any importance had occurred between the rival armies, the
French merely firing their heavy guns from time to time to ascertain by
the reply the position of the retreating forces. The rain poured down in
torrents; gusts of cold and stormy wind swept across the wide plains, or
moaned sorrowfully through the dense forest. As I rode on by the side of my
companion, I could not help remarking how little the effects of a fatiguing
march and unfavorable weather were apparent on those around me. The spirit
of excited gayety pervaded every rank; and unlike the stern features which
the discipline of our service enforces, the French soldiers were talking,
laughing and even singing, as they marched; the canteens passed freely from
hand to hand, and jests and toasts flew from front to rear along the dark
columns; many carried their loaves of dark rye-bread on the tops of their
bayonets; and to look upon that noisy and tumultuous mass as they poured
along, it would have needed a practised eye to believe them the most
disciplined of European armies.
The sun was just setting, as mounting a ridge of high land beside the high
road, my companion pointed with his finger to a small farm-house, which,
standing alone in the plain, commands an extensive view on every side of
it.
"There," said he,--"there is the quartier gnral; the Emperor sleeps
there to-night. The King of Holland will afford him a bed to-morrow night."
The dark shadows of the coming night were rapidly falling as I strained my
eyes to trace the British position. A hollow, rumbling sound announced the
movement of artillery in our front.
"What is it, Arnotte?" said the quartermaster to a dragoon officer who rode
past.
"It is nothing," replied the other, laughing, "but a ruse of the Emperor.
He wishes to ascertain if the enemy are in force, or if we have only a
strong rear-guard before us."
As he spoke fifteen heavy guns opened there fire, and the still air
reverberated with a loud thunder. The sound had not died away, the very
smoke lay yet heavily upon the moist earth, when forty pieces of British
cannon rang out their answer, and the very plain trembled beneath the
shock.
"Ha, they are there, then!" exclaimed the dragoon, as his eyes flashed with
ecstasy. "Look! see! the artillery are limbering up already. The Emperor is
satisfied."
And so it was. A dark column of twelve hundred horse that accompanied the
guns into the plain, now wheeled slowly round, and wound their long track
far away to the right. The rain fell in torrents; the wind was hushed;
and as the night fell in darkness, the columns moved severally to their
destinations. The bivouacs were formed; the watch-fires were lighted; and
seventy thousand men and two hundred pieces of cannon occupied the heights
of Planchenoit.
"My orders are to bring you to La Caillon," said the quartermaster; "and if
you only can spur your jaded horse into a trot, we shall soon reach it."
About a hundred yards from the little farm-house, stood a small cottage of
a peasant. Here some officers of Marshal Soult's staff had taken up their
quarters; and thither my guide now bent his steps.
"Comment, Bonnard!" said an aide-de-camp, as we rode up. "Another prisoner?
Sacrebleu! We shall have the whole British staff among us. You are
in better luck than your countryman, the general, I hope," said the
aide-decamp. "His is a sad affair; and I'm sorry for it, too. He's a fine,
soldier-like looking fellow."
"Pray, what has happened?" said I. "To what do you allude?"
"Merely to one of your people who has just been taken with some letters and
papers of Bourmont's in his possession. The Emperor is in no very amicable
humor towards the traitor, and resolves to pay off some part of his debt on
his British correspondent."
"How cruel! How unjust!"
"Why, yes, it is hard, I confess, to be shot for the fault of another.
Mais, que voulez-vous?"
"And when is this atrocious act to take place?"
"By daybreak to-morrow," said he, bowing, as he turned towards the hut.
"Meanwhile, let me counsel you, if you would not make another in the party,
to reserve your indignation for your return to England."
"Come along," said the quartermaster; "I find they have got quarters for
you in the granary of the farm. I'll not forget you at supper-time."
So saying, he gave his horse to an orderly, and led me by a little path
to a back entrance of the dwelling. Had I time or inclination for such a
scene, I might have lingered long to gaze at the spectacle before me. The
guard held their bivouac around the quarters of the Emperor; and here,
beside the watch-fires, sat the bronzed and scarred veterans who had braved
every death and danger, from the Pyramids to the Kremlin. On every side I
heard the names of those whom history has already consigned to immortality;
and as the fitful blaze of a wood-fire flashed from within the house, I
could mark the figure of one who, with his hands behind his back, walked
leisurely to and fro, his head leaned a little forward as though in deep
thought; but as the light fell upon his pale and placid features, there was
nothing there to indicate the stormy strife of hope and fear that raged
beneath. From the rapid survey I took around I was roused by an officer,
who, saluting me, politely desired me to follow him. We mounted a flight of
stone steps which, outside the wall of the building, led to the upper story
of a large but ruined granary. Here a sentry was posted, who permitting us
to pass forward, I found myself in a small, mean-looking apartment, whose
few articles of coarse furniture were dimly lighted by the feeble glimmer
of a lamp. At the farther end of the room sat a man wrapped in a large blue
cavalry cloak, whose face, covered with his hands as he bent downward,
was completely concealed from view. The noise of the opening door did not
appear to arouse him, nor did he notice my approach. As I entered, a faint
sigh broke from him, as he turned his back upon the light; but he spoke not
a word.
I sat for some time in silence, unwilling to obtrude myself upon the
sorrows of one to whom I was unknown; and as I walked up and down the
gloomy chamber, my thoughts became riveted so completely upon my own
fortunes that I ceased to remember my fellow-prisoner. The hours passed
thus lazily along, when the door suddenly opened, and an officer in the
dress of a lancer of the guard stood for an instant before me, and then,
springing forward, clasped me by both hands, and called out,--
"Charles, mon ami, c'est bien toi?"
The voice recalled to my recollections what his features, altered by time
and years, had failed to do. It was Jules St. Croix, my former prisoner in
the Peninsula. I cannot paint the delight with which I saw him again; his
presence now, while it brought back the memory of some of my happiest days,
also assured me that I was not friendless.
His visit was a brief one, for he was in attendance on Marshal Lobau's
staff. In the few minutes, however, of his stay, he said,--
"I have a debt to pay, Charles, and have come to discharge it. In an hour
hence I shall leave this with despatches for the left of our line. Before
I go, I'll come here with two or three others, as it were, to wish you a
good-night. I'll take care to carry a second cloak and a foraging cap; I'll
provide a fast horse; you shall accompany us for some distance. I'll see
you safe across our pickets; for the rest, you must trust to yourself.
C'est arrang, n'est-ce-pas?"
One firm grasp of his hand, to which I responded by another, followed, and
he was gone.
Everything concurred to show me that a tremendous battle must ensue on the
morrow, if the British forces but held their position. It was, then, with a
feeling of excitement approaching to madness that I saw my liberty before
me; that once more I should join in the bold charge and the rude shock
of arms, hear the wild cry of my gallant countrymen, and either live to
triumph with them in victory, or wait not to witness our defeat. Fast flew
my hopes, as with increasing impatience I waited St. Croix's coming, and
with anxious heart listened to every sound upon the stairs which might
indicate his approach. At length he came. I heard the gay and laughing
voices of his companions as they came along; the door opened, and affecting
the familiarity of old acquaintance to deceive the sentry, they all shook
me by the hand and spoke in terms of intimacy.
"Labedoyre is below," said St. Croix, in a whisper; "you must wait here a
few moments longer, and I'll return for you; put on the cloak and cap, and
speak not a word as you pass out. The sentry will suppose that one of our
party has remained behind; for I shall call out as if speaking to him, as I
leave the room."
The voice of an officer calling in tones of impatience for the party
to come down, cut short the interview; and again assuring me of their
determination to stand by me, they left the chamber and descended into the
court. Scarcely had the door closed behind them, when my fellow-prisoner,
whom I had totally forgotten, sprang on his legs and came towards me. His
figure screening the lamplight as he stood, prevented my recognizing his
features, but the first tones of his voice told me who he was.
"Stay, sir," cried he, as he placed his hand upon my arm; "I have overheard
your project. In an hour hence you will be free. Can you---will you perform
a service for one who will esteem it not the less that it will be the last
that man can render him? The few lines which I have written here with my
pencil are for my daughter."
I could bear no more, and called out in a voice broken as his own,--
"Oh, be not deceived, sir. Will you, even in an hour like this, accept a
service from one whom you have banished from your house?"
The old man started as I spoke; his hand trembled till it shook my very
arm, and after a pause and with an effort to seem calm and collected, he
added,--
"My hours are few. Some despatches of General Bourmont with which the duke
intrusted me were found in my possession. My sentence is a hurried one, and
it is death. By to-morrow's sunrise--"
"Stay, stay!" said I. "You shall escape; my life is in no danger. I have,
as you see, even friends among the staff. Besides, I have done nothing to
compromise or endanger my position."
"No, sir," said he, sternly, "I will not act such a part as this. The tears
you have seen in these old eyes are not for myself. I fear not death.
Better it were it should have come upon the field of glorious battle; but
as it is, my soldier's honor is intact, untainted."
"You refuse the service on account of him who proffers it," said I, as I
fell heavily upon a seat, my head bowed upon my bosom.
"Not so, not so, my boy," replied he, kindly. "The near approach of death,
like the fading light of day, gives us a longer and a clearer view before
us. I feel that I have wronged you; that I have imputed to you the errors
of others; but, believe me, if I have wronged you, I have punished my own
heart; for, Charles, I have loved you like a son."
"Then prove it," said I, "and let me act towards you as towards a father.
You will not? You refuse me still? Then, by Heaven, I remain to share your
fate! I well know the temper of him who has sentenced you, and that, by one
word of mine, my destiny is sealed forever."
"No, no, boy! This is but rash and insane folly. Another year or two, nay,
perhaps a few months more, and in the common course of Nature I had ceased
to be; but you, with youth, with fortune, and with hope--"
"Oh, not with hope!" said I, in a voice of agony.
"Nay, say not so," replied he, calmly, while a sickly smile played sadly
over his face; "you will give this letter to my daughter, you will tell her
that we parted as friends should part; and if after that, when time shall
have smoothed down her grief, and her sorrow be rather a dark dream of the
past than a present suffering,--if then you love her, and if--"
"Oh, tempt me not thus!" said I, as the warm tears gushed from my eyes.
"Lead me not thus astray from what my honor tells me I should do. Hark!
They are coming already. I hear the clank of their sabres; they are
mounting the steps; not a moment is to be lost! Do you refuse me still?"
"I do," replied he, firmly; "I am resolved to bide my fate."
"Then so do I," cried I, as folding my arms, I sat down beside the window,
determined on my course.
"Charley, Charley," said he, stooping over me, "my friend, my last hope,
the protector of my child--"
"I will not go," said I, in a hollow whisper.
Already they were at the door; I heard their voices as they challenged the
sentry; I heard his musket as he raised it to his shoulder. The thought
flashed across me. I jumped up, and throwing the loose mantle of the French
dragoon around him, and replacing his own with the foraging cap of St.
Croix, I sprang into a corner of the room, and seating myself so as to
conceal my face, waited the result. The door opened, the party entered
laughing and talking together.
"Come, Eugne," said one, taking Sir George by the arm, "you have spent
long enough time here to learn the English language. We shall be late at
the outpost. Messieurs les Anglais, good-night, good-night!"
This was repeated by the others as they passed out with Sir George Dashwood
among them, who, seeing that my determination was not to be shaken, and
that any demur on his part must necessarily compromise both, yielded to a
coup-de-main what he never would have consented to from an appeal to his
reason. The door closed; their steps died away in the distance. Again a
faint sound struck my ear; it was the challenge of the sentry beneath,
and I heard the tramp of horses' feet. All was still, and in a burst of
heart-felt gratitude I sank upon my knees, and thanked God that he was
safe.
So soundly did I sleep, that not before I was shaken several times by the
shoulder could I awake on the following morning.
"I thought there were two prisoners here," said a gruff voice, as an old
mustached-looking veteran cast a searching look about the room. "However,
we shall have enough of them before sunset. Get--get up; Monsieur le Duc de
Dalmatie desires some information you can give him."
As he said this, he led me from the room; and descending the flight of
stone steps, we entered the courtyard. It was but four o'clock, the rain,
still falling in torrents, yet every one was up and stirring.
"Mount this horse," said my gruff friend, "and come with me towards the
left; the marshal has already gone forward."
The heavy mist of the morning, darkened by the lowering clouds which almost
rested on the earth, prevented our seeing above a hundred yards before
us; but the hazy light of the watch-fires showed me extent of the French
position, as it stretched away along the ridge towards the Halle road. We
rode forward at a trot, but in the deep clayey soil we sank at each moment
to our horses' fetlocks. I turned my head as I heard the tramp and splash
of horsemen behind, and perceived that I was followed by two dragoons,
who, with their carbines on the rest, kept their eyes steadily upon me to
prevent any chance of escape. In a slight hollow of the ground before us
stood a number of horsemen, who conversed together in a low tone as we came
up.
"There, that is the marshal," said my companion, in a whisper, as we joined
the party.
"Yes, Monsieur le Duc," said an engineer colonel, who stood beside Soult's
horse with a colored plan in his hand,--"yes, that is the Chteau de
Goumont, yonder. It is, as you perceive, completely covered by the rising
ground marked here. They will doubtless place a strong artillery force in
this quarter."
"Ah, who is this?" said the marshal, turning his eyes suddenly upon me, and
then casting a look of displeasure around him, lest I should have overheard
any portion of their conversation. "You are deficient in cavalry, it would
appear, sir," said he to me.
"You must feel, Monsieur le Duc," said I, calmly, "how impossible it is for
me, as a man of honor and a soldier, to afford you any information as to
the army I belong to."
"I do not see that, sir. You are a prisoner in our hands; your treatment,
your fortune, your very life depends on us. Besides, sir, when French
officers fall into the power of your people, I have heard they meet with no
very ceremonious treatment."
"Those who say so, say falsely," said I, "and wrong both your countrymen
and mine. In any case--"
"The Guards are an untried force in your service," said he, with a mixture
of inquiry and assertion.
I replied not a word.
"You must see, sir," continued he, "that all the chances are against you.
The Prussians beaten, the Dutch discouraged, the Belgians only waiting for
victory to incline to our standard, to desert your ranks and pass over to
ours; while your troops, scarcely forty thousand,--nay, I might say, not
more than thirty-five thousand. Is it not so?"
Here was another question so insidiously conveyed that even a change of
feature on my part might have given the answer. A half smile, however, and
a slight bow was all my reply; while Soult muttered something between his
teeth, which called forth a laugh from those around him.
"You may retire, sir, a little," said he, dryly, to me.
Not sorry to be freed from the awkwardness of my position, I fell back to
the little rising ground behind. Although the rain poured down without
ceasing, the rising sun dispelled, in part, the heavy vapor, and by degrees
different portions of the wide plain presented themselves to view; and
as the dense masses of fog moved slowly along, I could detect, but still
faintly, the outline of the large, irregular building which I had heard
them call the Chteau de Goumont, and from whence I could hear the clank of
masonry, as, at intervals, the wind bore the sounds towards me. These were
the sappers piercing the walls for musketry; and this I could now perceive
was looked upon as a position of no small importance. Surrounded by a
straggling orchard of aged fruit-trees, the chteau lay some hundred yards
in advance of the British line, commanded by two eminences,--one of which,
in the possession of the French, was already occupied by a park of eleven
guns; of the other I knew nothing, except the passing glance I had obtained
of its position on the map. The Second Corps, under Jerome Bonaparte, with
Foy and Kellermann's Brigade of light artillery, stretched behind us. On
the right of these came D'Erlon's Corps, extending to a small wood, which
my companion told me was Frischermont; while Lobau's Division was stationed
to the extreme right towards St. Lambert, to maintain the communication
with Grouchy at Wavre, or, if need be, to repel the advance of the
Prussians and prevent their junction with the Anglo-Dutch army. The
Imperial Guard, with the cavalry, formed the reserve. Such was, in
substance, the information given me by my guide, who seemed to expatiate
with pleasure over the magnificent array of battle, while he felt a pride
in displaying his knowledge of the various divisions and their leaders.
"I see the marshal moving towards the right," said he; "we had better
follow him."
It was now about eight o'clock as from the extremity of the line I could
see a party of horsemen advancing at a sharp canter.
"That must be Ney," said my companion. "See how rashly he approaches the
English lines!"
And so it was. The party in question rode fearlessly down the slope, and
did not halt until they reached within about three hundred yards of what
appeared a ruined church.
"What is that building yonder?"
"That--that," replied he, after a moment's thought,--"that must be La Haye
Sainte; and yonder, to the right of it, is the road to Brussels. There,
look now! Your people are in motion. See, a column is moving towards the
right, and the cavalry are defiling on the other side of the road! I was
mistaken, that cannot be Ney. Sacre Dieu! it was the Emperor himself, and
here he comes."
As he spoke, the party galloped forward and pulled up short within a few
yards of where we stood.
"Ha!" cried he, as his sharp glance fell upon me, "there is my taciturn
friend of Quatre Bras. You see, sir, I can dispense with your assistance
now; the chess-board is before me;" and then added, in a tone he intended
not to be overheard, "Everything depends on Grouchy."
"Well, Haxo," he called out to an officer who galloped up, chapeau in
hand, "what say you? Are they intrenched in that position?"
"No, Sire, the ground is open, and in two hours more will be firm enough
for the guns to manoeuvre."
"Now, then, for breakfast," said Napoleon, as with an easy and tranquil
smile he turned his horse's head and cantered gently up the heights
towards La Belle Alliance. As he approached the lines, the cry of "Vive
l'Empereur!" burst forth. Regiment after regiment took it up; and from the
distant wood of Frischermont to the far left beside Merke-braine, the
shout resounded. So sudden, so simultaneous the outbreak, that he himself,
accustomed as he well was to the enthusiasm of his army, seemed as he
reined in his horse, and looked with proud and elated eye upon the
countless thousands, astounded and amazed. He lifted with slow and graceful
action his unplumed hat above his head, and while he bowed that proud front
before which kings have trembled, the acclamation burst forth anew, and
rent the very air.
At this moment the sun shone brilliantly from out the dark clouds, and
flashed upon the shining blades and glistening bayonets along the line. A
dark and lowering shadow hung gloomily over the British position, while the
French sparkled and glittered in the sunbeams. His quick glance passed with
lightning speed from one to the other; and I thought that, in his look,
upturned to heaven, I could detect the flitting thought which bade him hope
it was an augury. The bands of the Imperial Guard burst forth in joyous and
triumphant strains; and amidst the still repeated cries of "L'Empereur!
l'Empereur!" he rode slowly along towards La Belle Alliance.
CHAPTER LIII.
WATERLOO.
Napoleon's first intention was to open the battle by an attack upon the
extreme right; but Ney, who returned from an observation of the ground,
informed him that a rivulet swollen by the late rains had now become a
foaming torrent perfectly impassable to infantry. To avoid this difficulty
he abandoned his favorite manoeuvre of a flank movement, and resolved to
attack the enemy by the centre. Launching his cavalry and artillery by the
road to Brussels, he hoped thus to cut off the communication of the British
with their own left, as well as with the Prussians, for whom he trusted
that Grouchy would be more than a match.
The reserves were in consequence all brought up to the centre. Seven
thousand cavalry and a massive artillery assembled upon the heights of La
Belle Alliance, and waited but the order to march. It was eleven o'clock,
and Napoleon mounted his horse and rode slowly along the line; again the
cry of "Vive l'Empereur!" resounded, and the bands of the various regiments
struck up their spirit-stirring strains as the gorgeous staff moved along.
On the British side all was tranquil; and still the different divisions
appeared to have taken up their ground, and the long ridge from Ter-la-Haye
to Merke-braine bristled with bayonets. Nothing could possibly be more
equal than the circumstances of the field. Each army possessed an eminence
whence their artillery might play. A broad and slightly undulating valley
lay between both. The ground permitted in all places both cavalry and
infantry movements, and except the crumbling walls of the Chteau of
Hougoumont, or the farm-house of La Haye Sainte, both of which were
occupied by the British, no advantage either by Nature or art inclined to
either side. It was a fair stand-up fight. It was the mighty tournament,
not only of the two greatest nations, but the two deadliest rivals and
bitterest enemies, led on by the two greatest military geniuses that the
world has ever seen; it might not be too much to say, or ever will see.
As for me, condemned to be an inactive spectator of the mighty struggle,
doomed to witness all the deep-laid schemes and well-devised plans of
attack which were destined for the overthrow of my country's arms, my state
was one of torture and suspense. I sat upon the little rising ground of
Rossomme; before me in the valley, where yet the tall corn waved in ripe
luxuriance, stood the quiet and peaceful-looking old Chteau of Hougoumont,
and the blossoming branches of the orchard; the birds were gayly singing
their songs; the shrill whistle of the fatal musketry was to be heard; and
through my glass I could detect the uniform of the soldiers who held the
position, and my heart beat anxiously and proudly as I recognized the
Guards. In the orchard and the garden were stationed some riflemen,--at
least their dress and the scattered order they assumed bespoke them such.
While I looked, the tirailleurs of Jerome's Division advanced from the
front of the line, and descending the hill in a sling trot, broke into
scattered parties, keeping up as they went a desultory and irregular fire.
The English skirmishers, less expert in this peculiar service, soon fell
back, and the head of Reille's Brigade began their march towards the
chteau. The English artillery is unmasked and opens its fire. Kellermann
advances at a gallop his twelve pieces of artillery; the chteau is
concealed from view by the dense smoke, and as the attack thickens, fresh
troops pour forward, the artillery thundering on either side; the entire
lines of both armies stand motionless spectators of the terrific combat,
while every eye is turned towards that devoted spot from whose dense mass
of cloud and smoke the bright glare of artillery is flashing, as the
crashing masonry, the burning rafters, and the loud yell of battle add
to the frightful interest of the scene. For above an hour the tremendous
attack continues without cessation; the artillery stationed upon the height
has now found its range, and every ringing shot tells upon the tottering
walls; some wounded soldiers return faint and bleeding from the conflict,
but there are few who escape. A crashing volley of fire-arms is now heard
from the side where the orchard stands; a second, and a third succeed, one
after the other as rapid as lightning itself. A silence follows, when,
after a few moments, a deafening cheer bursts forth, and an aide-de-camp
gallops up to say that the orchard has been carried at the point of the
bayonet, the Nassau sharp-shooters who held it having, after a desperate
resistance, retired before the irresistible onset of the French infantry.
"A moi! maintenant!" said General Foy, as he drew his sabre and rode down
to the head of his splendid division, which, anxious for the word to
advance, was standing in the valley. "En avant! mes braves!" cried he,
while, pointing to the chteau with his sword, he dashed boldly forward.
Scarcely had he advanced a hundred yards, when a cannon-shot, "ricocheting"
as it went, struck his horse in the counter and rolled him dead on the
plain. Disengaging himself from the lifeless animal, at once he sprang to
his feet, and hurried forward. The column was soon hid from my view, and I
was left to mourn over the seemingly inevitable fate that impended over my
gallant countrymen.
In the intense interest which chained me to this part of the field, I had
not noticed till this moment that the Emperor and his staff were standing
scarcely thirty yards from where I was. Napoleon, seated upon a gray,
almost white, Arabian, had suffered the reins to fall loosely on the neck
as he held with both hands his telescope to his eye; his dress, the usual
green coat with white facings, the uniform of the chasseurs  cheval,
was distinguished merely by the cross of the legion; his high boots were
splashed and mud-stained from riding through the deep and clayey soil; his
compact and clean-bred charger looked also slightly blown and heated, but
he himself, and I watched his features well, looked calm, composed, and
tranquil. How anxiously did I scrutinize that face; with what a throbbing
heart did I canvass every gesture, hoping to find some passing trait of
doubt, of difficulty, or of hesitation; but none was there. Unlike one who
looked upon the harrowing spectacle of the battle-field, whose all was
depending on the game before him; gambling with one throw his last his only
stake, and that the empire of the world. Yet, could I picture to myself one
who felt at peace within himself,--naught of reproach, naught of regret to
move or stir his spirit, whose tranquil barque had glided over the calm sea
of life, unruffled by the breath of passion,--I should have fancied such
was he.
Beside him sat one whose flashing eye and changing features looked in every
way his opposite; watching with intense anxiety the scene of the deadly
struggle round the chteau, every look, every gesture told the changing
fortune of the moment; his broad and brawny chest glittered with orders and
decorations, but his heavy brow and lowering look, flushed almost black
with excitement, could not easily be forgotten. It was Soult, who, in his
quality of major-general, accompanied the Emperor throughout the day.
"They have lost it again, Sire," said the marshal, passionately; "and see,
they are forming beneath the cross-fire of the artillery; the head of the
column keeps not its formation two minutes together; why does he not move
up?"
"Domont, you know the British; what troops are those in the orchard? They
use the bayonet well."
The officer addressed pointed his glass for a moment to the spot. Then,
turning to the Emperor, replied, as he touched his hat, "They are the
Guards, Sire."
During this time Napoleon spoke not a word; his eye ever bent upon the
battle, he seemed to pay little if any attention to the conversation about
him. As he looked, an aide-de-camp, breathless and heated, galloped up.
"The columns of attack are formed, Sire; everything is ready, and the
marshal only waits the order."
Napoleon turned upon his saddle, and directing his glass towards Ney's
Division, looked fixedly for some moments at them. His eye moved from front
to rear slowly, and at last, carrying his telescope along the line, he
fixed it steadily upon the far left. Here, towards St. Lambert, a slight
cloud seemed to rest on the horizon, as the Emperor continued to gaze
steadfastly at it. Every glass of the staff was speedily turned in that
direction.
"It is nothing but a cloud; some exhalation from the low grounds in that
quarter," whispered one.
"To me," said another, "they look like trees, part of the Bois de Wavre."
"They are men," said the Emperor, speaking for the first time. "Est-ce
Grouchy? Est-ce Blucher?"
Soult inclines to believe it to be the former, and proceeds to give his
reasons; but the Emperor, without listening, turns towards Domont, and
orders him, with his division of light cavalry and Subervic's Brigade, to
proceed thither at once. If it be Grouchy, to establish a junction with
him; to resist, should it prove to be the advanced guard of Marshal
Blucher. Scarcely is the order given when a column of cavalry, wheeling
"fours about," unravels itself from the immense mass, and seems to
serpentine like an enormous snake between the squares of the mighty army.
The pace increases at every moment, and at length we see them emerge from
the extreme right and draw up, as if on parade, above half a mile from the
wood. This movement, by its precision and beauty, attracted our entire
attention, not only from the attack upon Hougoumont, but also from an
incident which had taken place close beside us. This was the appearance
of a Prussian hussar who had been taken prisoner between Wavre and
Planchenoit; he was the bearer of a letter from Bulow to Wellington,
announcing his arrival at St. Lambert, and asking for orders.
This at once explains the appearance on the right; but the prisoner also
adds, that the three Prussian corps were at Wavre, having pushed their
patrols two leagues from that town without ever encountering any portion of
the force under the command of Grouchy. For a moment not a word is spoken.
A silence like a panic pervades the staff; the Emperor himself is the first
to break it.
"This morning," said he, turning towards Soult, "the chances were ninety to
one in our favor; Bulow's arrival has already lost us thirty of the number;
but the odds are still sufficient, if Grouchy but repair the horrible
fault he has committed."
He paused for a moment, and as he lifted up his own hand, and turned a look
of indignant passion towards the staff, added, in a voice the sarcasm of
whose tone there is no forgetting:--
"Il s'amuse  Gembloux! Still," said he, speaking rapidly and with more
energy than I had hitherto noticed, "Bulow may be entirely cut off. Let
an officer approach. Take this letter, sir," giving as he spoke, Bulow's
letter to Lord Wellington,--"give this letter to Marshal Grouchy; tell him
that at this moment he should be before Wavre; tell him that already, had
he obeyed his orders--but no, tell him to march at once, to press forward
his cavalry, to come up in two hours, in three at farthest. You have but
five leagues to ride; see, sir, that you reach him within an hour."
As the officer hurries away at the top of his speed, an aide-de-camp from
General Domont confirms the news; they are the Prussians whom he has before
him. As yet, however, they are debouching from the wood, and have attempted
no forward movement.
"What's Bulow's force, Marshal?"
"Thirty thousand, Sire."
"Let Lobau take ten thousand, with the Cuirassiers of the Young Guard, and
hold the Prussians in check."
"Maintenant, pour les autres," this he said with a smile, as he turned his
eyes once more towards the field of battle. The aide-de-camp of Marshal
Ney, who, bare-headed and expectant, sat waiting for orders, presented
himself to view. The Emperor turned towards him as he said, with a clear
and firm voice:--
"Tell the marshal to open the fire of his batteries; to carry La Haye
Sainte with the bayonet, and leaving an infantry division for its
protection, to march against La Papelotte and La Haye. They must be carried
by the bayonet."
The aide-de-camp was gone; Napoleon's eye followed him as he crossed the
open plain and was lost in the dense ranks of the dark columns. Scarcely
five minutes elapsed when eighty guns thundered out together, and as the
earth shook and trembled beneath, the mighty movement of the day began its
execution. From Hougoumont, where the slaughter and the carnage continued
unslackened and unstayed, every eye was now turned towards the right. I
knew not what troops occupied La Haye Sainte, or whether they were British
who crowned the heights above it; but in my heart how fervently did I pray
that they might be so. Oh, in that moment of suspense and agonizing doubt,
what would I not have given to know that Picton himself and the fighting
Fifth were there; that behind that ridge the Greys, the Royals, and the
Enniskilleners sat motionless, but burning to advance; and the breath
of battle waved among the tartans of the Highlanders, and blew upon the
flashing features of my own island countrymen. Had I known this, I could
have marked the onset with a less failing spirit.
"There goes Marcognet's Division," said my companion, springing to his
legs; "they're moving to the right of the road. I should like to see the
troops that will stand before them."
So saying, he mounted his horse, and desiring me to accompany him, rode to
the height beside La Belle Alliance. The battle was now raging from the
Chteau de Hougoumont to St. Lambert, where the Prussian tirailleurs, as
they issued from the wood, were skirmishing with the advanced posts of
Lobau's Brigade. The attack upon the centre, however, engrossed all my
attention, and I watched the dark columns as they descended into the plain,
while the incessant roll of the artillery played about them. To the right
of Ney's attack, D'Erlon advanced with three divisions, and the artillery
of the Guard. Towards this part of the field my companion moved. General le
Vasseur desired to know if the division on the Brussels road were English
or Hanoverian troops, and I was sent for to answer the question. We passed
from square to square until at length we found ourselves upon the flank of
D'Erlon's Division. Le Vasseur, who at the head of his cuirassiers waited
but the order to charge, waved impatiently with his sword for us to
approach. We were now to the right of the high road, and about four hundred
yards from the crest of the hill where, protected by a slight hedge,
Picton, with Kempt's Brigade, waited the attack of the enemy.
Just at this moment an incident took place which, while in itself one of
the most brilliant achievements of the day, changed in a signal manner my
own fortunes. The head of D'Erlon's column pressed with fixed bayonets up
the gentle slope. Already the Belgian infantry give way before them. The
brave Brunswickers, overwhelmed by the heavy cavalry of France, at first
begin to waver, then are broken; and at last retreat in disorder up the
road, a whirlwind of pursuing squadrons thundering behind them. "En avant!
en avant! la victoire est nous," is shouted madly through the impatient
ranks; and the artillery is called up to play upon the British squares;
upon which, fixed and immovable, the cuirassiers have charged without
success. Like a thunderbolt, the flying artillery dashes to the front;
but scarcely has it reached the bottom of the ascent, when, from the deep
ground, the guns become embedded in the soil, the wheels refuse to move. In
vain the artillery drivers whip and spur their laboring cattle. Impatiently
the leading files of the column prick with their bayonets the struggling
horses. The hesitation is fatal; for Wellington, who, with eager glance,
watches from an eminence beside the high road the advancing column, sees
the accident. An order is given; and with one fell swoop, the heavy cavalry
brigade pour down. Picton's Division deploys into line; the bayonets glance
above the ridge; and with a shout that tells above the battle, on they
come, the fighting Fifth. One volley is exchanged; but the bayonet is now
brought to the charge, and the French division retreat in close column,
pursued by their gallant enemy. Scarcely have the leading divisions fallen
back, and the rear pressed down upon, or thrown into disorder, when the
cavalry trumpets sound a charge; the bright helmets of the Enniskilleners
come flashing in the sunbeams, and the Scotch Greys, like a white-crested
wave, are rolling upon the foe. Marcognet's Division is surrounded; the
dragoons ride them down on every side; the guns are captured; the drivers
cut down; and two thousand prisoners are carried off. A sudden panic seems
to seize upon the French, as cavalry, infantry, and artillery are hurried
back on each other. Vainly the French attempt to rally; the untiring enemy
press madly on; the household brigade, led on by Lord Uxbridge, came
thundering down the road, riding down with their gigantic force the mailed
cuirassiers of France. Borne along with the retreating torrents, I was
carried on amidst the densely commingled mass. The British cavalry, which,
like the lightnings that sever the thunder-cloud, pierces through in every
direction, plunged madly upon us. The roar of battle grew louder, as hand
to hand they fought. Milhaud's Heavy Dragoons, with the 4th Lancers, came
up at a gallop. Picton presses forward, waving his plumed hat above his
head; his proud eye flashes with the fire of victory. That moment is his
last. Struck in the forehead by a musket-ball, he falls dead from the
saddle; and the wild yell of the Irish regiments, as they ring his
death-cry, are the last sounds which he hears. Meanwhile the Life Guards
are among us; prisoners of rank are captured on every side; and I, seizing
the moment, throw myself among the ranks of my countrymen, and am borne to
the rear with the retiring squadrons.
As we reached the crest of the hill above the road, a loud cheer in the
valley beneath us burst forth, and from the midst of the dense smoke a
bright and pointed flame shot up towards the sky. It was the farm-house La
Haye Sainte, which the French had succeeded in setting fire to with hot
shot. For some time past the ammunition of the corps that held it had
failed, and a dropping irregular musketry was the only reply to the
incessant rattle of the enemy. As the smoke cleared away we discovered that
the French had carried the position; and as no quarter was given in that
deadly hand-to-hand conflict, not one returned to our ranks to toll the
tale of their defeat.
"This is the officer that I spoke of," said an aide-decamp, as he rode up
to where I was standing bare-headed and without a sword. "He has just made
his escape from the French lines, and will be able to give your lordship
some information."
The handsome features and gorgeous costume of Lord Uxbridge were known
to me; but I was not aware, till afterward, that a soldier-like,
resolute-looking officer beside him was General Graham. It was the latter
who first addressed me.
"Are you aware, sir," said he, "if Grouchy's force have arrived?"
"They have not; on the contrary, shortly before I escaped, an aide-de-camp
was despatched to Gembloux, to hasten his coming. And the troops, for they
must be troops, were debouching from the wood yonder. They seem to form a
junction with the corps to the right; they are the Prussians. They arrived
there before noon from St. Lambert, and are part of Bulow's Corps. Count
Lobau and his division of ten thousand men were despatched, about an hour
since, to hold them in check."
"This is great news," said Lord Uxbridge. "Fitzroy must know it at once."
So saying, he dashed spurs into his horse, and soon disappeared amidst the
crowd on the hill-top.
"You had better see the duke, sir," said Graham. "Your information is too
important to be delayed. Captain Calvert, let this officer have a horse;
his own is too tired to go much farther."
"And a cap, I beg of you," added I in an undertone, "for I have already
found a sabre."
By a slightly circuitous route we reached the road, upon which a mass
of dismounted artillery-carts, baggage-wagons, and tumbrils were heaped
together as a barricade against the attack of the French dragoons, who more
than once had penetrated to the very crest of our position. Close to this
and on a little rising ground, from which a view of the entire field
extended, from Hougoumont to the far left, the Duke of Wellington stood
surrounded by his staff. His eye was bent upon the valley before him, where
the advancing columns of Ney's attack still pressed onward; while the fire
of sixty great guns poured death and carnage into his lines. The Second
Belgian Division, routed and broken, had fallen back upon the 27th
Regiment, who had merely time to throw themselves into square, when
Milhaud's cuirassiers, armed with their terrible long, straight swords,
came sweeping down upon them. A line of impassable bayonets, a living
chevaux-de-frise of the best blood of Britain, stood firm and motionless
before the shock. The French mitraille played mercilessly on the ranks;
but the chasms were filled up like magic, and in vain the bold horsemen of
Gaul galloped round the bristling files. At length the word, "Fire!" was
heard within the square, and as the bullets at pistol-range rattled upon
them, the cuirass afforded them no defence against the deadly volley. Men
and horses rolled indiscriminately upon the earth. Then would come a charge
of our clashing squadrons, who, riding recklessly upon the foe, were in
their turn to be repulsed by numbers, and fresh attacks poured down upon
our unshaken infantry.
"That column yonder is wavering. Why does he not bring up his supporting
squadrons?" inquired the duke, pointing to a Belgian regiment of light
dragoons, who were formed in the same brigade with the 7th Hussars.
"He refuses to oppose his light cavalry to cuirassiers, my lord," said an
aide-de-camp, who had just returned from the division in question.
"Tell him to march his men off the ground," said the duke in a quiet and
impassive tone.
In less than ten minutes the "Belgian regiment" was seen to defile from the
mass and take the road to Brussels, to increase the panic of that city by
circulating and strengthening the report that the English were beaten, and
Napoleon in full march upon the capital.
"What's Ney's force; can you guess, sir?" said the Duke of Wellington,
turning to me.
"About twelve thousand men, my lord."
"Are the Guard among them?"
"No, sir; the Guard are in reserve above La Belle Alliance."
"In what part of the field is Bonaparte?"
"Nearly opposite to where we stand."
"I told you, gentlemen, Hougoumont never was the great attack. The battle
must be decided here," pointing as he spoke to the plain beneath us, where
Ney still poured on his devoted columns, where yet the French cavalry rode
down upon our firm squares.
As he spoke, an aide-de-camp rode up from the valley.
"The Ninety-second requires support, my lord. They cannot maintain their
position half an hour longer with out it."
"Have they given way, sir?"
"No--"
"Well, then, they must stand where they are. I hear cannon towards the
left; yonder, near Frischermont."
At this moment the light cavalry swept past the base of the hill on which
we stood, hotly followed by the French heavy cuirassier brigade. Three
of our guns were taken; and the cheering of the French infantry, as they
advanced to the charge, presaged their hope of victory.
"Do it, then," said the duke, in reply to some whispered question of Lord
Uxbridge; and shortly after the heavy trot of advancing squadrons was heard
behind.
They were the Life Guards and the Blues, who, with the 1st Dragoon Guards
and the Enniskilleners, were formed into close column.
"I know the ground, my lord," said I to Lord Uxbridge.
"Come along, sir, come along," said he, as he threw his hussar jacket
loosely behind him to give freedom to his sword arm. "Forward, my men,
forward; but steady, hold your horses in hand, threes about, and together,
charge!
"Charge!" he shouted; while as the word flew from squadron to squadron,
each horseman bent upon his saddle, and that mighty mass, as though
instinct with but one spirit, dashed like a thunderbolt upon the column
beneath them. The French, blown and exhausted, inferior besides in weight,
both of man and horse, offered but a short resistance. As the tall corn
bends beneath the sweeping hurricane, wave succeeding wave, so did the
steel-clad squadrons of France fall before the nervous arm of Britain's
cavalry. Onward they went, carrying death and ruin before them, and never
stayed their course until the guns were recaptured, and the cuirassiers,
repulsed, disordered, and broken, had retired beneath the protection of
their artillery.
There was, as a brilliant and eloquent writer on the subject mentions, a
terrible sameness in the whole of this battle. Incessant charges of cavalry
upon the squares of our infantry, whose sole manoeuvre consisted in either
deploying into line to resist the attack of the infantry, or falling back
into square when the cavalry advanced; performing those two evolutions
under the devastating fire of artillery, before the unflinching heroism of
that veteran infantry whose glories have been reaped upon the blood-stained
fields of Austerlitz, Marengo, and Wagram, or opposing an unbroken front
to the whirlwind swoop of infuriated cavalry. Such were the enduring and
devoted services demanded from the English troops; and such they failed not
to render. Once or twice had temper nearly failed them, and the cry ran
through the ranks, "Are we never to move forward? Only let us at them!" But
the word was not yet spoken which was to undam the pent-up torrent, and
bear down with unrelenting vengeance upon the now exulting columns of the
enemy.
It was six o'clock; the battle had continued with unchanged fortune for
three hours. The French, masters of La Haye Sainte, could never advance
farther into our position. They had gained the orchard of Hougoumont; but
the chteau was still held by the British Guards, although its blazing
roof and crumbling walls made its occupation rather the desperate stand of
unflinching valor than the maintenance of an important position. The smoke
which hung upon the field rolled in slow and heavy masses back upon the
French lines, and gradually discovered to our view the entire of the army.
We quickly perceived that a change was taking place in their position. The
troops, which on their left stretched far beyond Hougoumont, were now moved
nearer to the centre. The attack upon the chteau seemed less vigorously
supported, while the oblique direction of their right wing, which, pivoting
upon Planchenoit, opposed a face to the Prussians, all denoted a change in
their order of battle. It was now the hour when Napoleon, at last convinced
that nothing but the carnage he could no longer support could destroy the
unyielding ranks of British infantry; that although Hougoumont had been
partially, La Haye Sainte completely won; that upon the right of the road
the farm-houses Papolotte and La Haye were nearly surrounded by his troops,
which with any other army must prove the forerunner of defeat,--yet still
the victory was beyond his grasp. The bold stratagems, whose success the
experience of a life had proved, were here to be found powerless. The
decisive manoeuvre of carrying one important point of the enemy's lines, of
turning him upon the flank, or piercing him through the centre, were here
found impracticable. He might launch his avalanche of grape-shot, he might
pour down his crashing columns of cavalry, he might send forth the iron
storm of his brave infantry; but though death in every shape heralded their
approach, still were others found to fill the fallen ranks, and feed with
their hearts' blood the unslaked thirst for slaughter. Well might the
gallant leader of this gallant host, as he watched the reckless onslaught
of the untiring enemy, and looked upon the unflinching few who, bearing the
proud badge of Britain, alone sustained the fight, well might he exclaim,
"Night or Blucher!"
It was now seven o'clock, when a dark mass was seen to form upon the
heights above the French centre, and divide into three gigantic columns,
of which the right occupied the Brussels road. These were the reserves,
consisting of the Old and Young Guards, and amounting to twelve
thousand,--the lite of the French army,--reserved by the Emperor for
a great coup-de-main. These veterans of a hundred battles had been
stationed from the beginning of the day, inactive spectators of the fight;
their hour was now come, and with a shout of "Vive l'Empereur!" which rose
triumphantly over the din and crash of battle, they began their march.
Meanwhile aides-de-camp galloped along the lines announcing the arrival of
Grouchy, to reanimate the drooping spirits of the men; for at last a doubt
of victory was breaking upon the minds of those who never before, in the
most adverse hour of fortune, deemed his star could be set that led them
on to glory.
"They are coming; the attack will be made on the centre, my lord," said
Lord Fitzroy Somerset, as he directed his glass upon the column. Scarcely
had he spoken when the telescope fell from his hand, as his arm, shattered
by a French bullet, fell motionless to his side.
"I see it," was the cool reply of the duke, as he ordered the Guards to
deploy into line and lie down behind the ridge, which now the French
artillery had found the range of, and were laboring at their guns. In front
of them the Fifty-second, Seventy-first, and Ninety-fifth were formed; the
artillery stationed above and partly upon the road, loaded with grape, and
waited but the word to open.
It was an awful, a dreadful moment. The Prussian cannon thundered on our
left; but so desperate was the French resistance, they made but little
progress. The dark columns of the Guard had now commenced the ascent, and
the artillery ceased their fire as the bayonets of the grenadiers showed
themselves upon the slope. Then began that tremendous cheer from right
to left of our line, which those who heard never can forget. It was the
impatient, long-restrained burst of unslaked vengeance. With the instinct
which valor teaches, they knew the hour of trial was come; and that wild
cry flew from rank to rank, echoing from the blood-stained walls of
Hougoumont to the far-off valley of La Papelotte. "They come! they come!"
was the cry; and the shout of "Vive l'Empereur!" mingled with the out-burst
of the British line.
Under an overwhelming shower of grape, to which succeeded a charge of
cavalry of the Imperial Guard, the head of Ney's column fired its volley
and advanced with the bayonet. The British artillery now opened at half
range, and although the plunging fire scathed and devasted the dark ranks
of the Guard, on they came, Ney himself on foot at their head. Twice the
leading division of that gallant column turned completely round, as the
withering fire wasted and consumed them; but they were resolved to win.
Already they gained the crest of the hill, and the first line of the
British were falling back before them. The artillery closes up; the
flanking fire from the guns upon the road opens upon them; the head of
their column breaks like a shell; the duke seizes the moment, and advances
on foot towards the ridge.
"Up, Guards, and at them!" he cried.
The hour of triumph and vengeance had arrived. In a moment the Guards were
on their feet; one volley was poured in; the bayonets were brought to
the charge; they closed upon the enemy; then was seen the most dreadful
struggle that the history of all war can present. Furious with
long-restrained passion, the Guards rushed upon the leading divisions; the
Seventy-first and Ninety-fifth and Twenty-sixth overlapped them on the
flanks. Their generals fell thickly on every side; Michel, Jamier, and
Mallet are killed; Friant lies wounded upon the ground; Ney, his dress
pierced and ragged with balls, shouts still to advance; but the leading
files waver; they fall back; the supporting divisions thicken; confusion,
panic succeeds. The British press down; the cavalry come galloping up to
their assistance; and at last, pell-mell, overwhelmed and beaten, the
French fell back upon the Old Guard. This was the decisive moment of the
day; the duke closed his glass, as he said,--
"The field is won. Order the whole line to advance."
On they came, four deep, and poured like a torrent from the height.
"Let the Life Guards charge them," said the duke; but every aide-de-camp on
his staff was wounded, and I myself brought the order to Lord Uxbridge.
Lord Uxbridge had already anticipated his orders, and bore down with four
regiments of heavy cavalry upon the French centre. The Prussian artillery
thundered upon their flank and at their rear. The British bayonet was in
their front; while a panic fear spread through their ranks, and the cry of
"Sauve qui peut!" resounded on all sides. In vain Ney, the bravest of the
brave, in vain Soult, Bertrand, Gourgaud, and Labedoyre, burst from the
broken, disorganized mass, and called on them to stand fast. A battalion
of the Old Guard, with Cambronne at their head, alone obeyed the summons;
forming into square, they stood between the pursuers and their prey,
offering themselves a sacrifice to the tarnished honor of their arms. To
the order to surrender they answered with a cry of defiance; and as our
cavalry, flushed and elated with victory, rode round their bristling
ranks, no quailing look, no craven spirit was there. The Emperor himself
endeavored to repair the disaster; he rode with lightning speed hither and
thither, commanding, ordering, nay, imploring, too; but already the night
was falling, the confusion became each moment more inextricable, and the
effort was a fruitless one. A regiment of the Guards, and two batteries
were in reserve behind Planchenoit. He threw them rapidly into position;
but the overwhelming impulse of flight drove the mass upon them, and they
were carried away upon the torrent of the beaten army. No sooner did the
Emperor see this his last hope desert him, than he dismounted from his
horse, and drawing his sword, threw himself into a square, which the first
regiment of Chasseurs of the Old Guard had formed with a remnant of the
battalion. Jerome followed him, as he called out,--
"You are right, brother; here should perish all who bear the name of
Bonaparte."
The same moment the Prussian light artillery rend the ranks asunder, and
the cavalry charge down upon the scattered fragments. A few of his staff,
who never left him, place the Emperor upon a horse and fly through the
death-dealing artillery and musketry. A squadron of the Life Guards, to
which I had attached myself, came up at the moment, and as Blucher's
hussars rode madly here and there, where so lately the crowd of staff
officers had denoted the presence of Napoleon, expressed their rage and
disappointment in curses and cries of vengeance.
Cambronne's battalion stood yet unbroken, and seemed to defy every attack
that was brought against them. To the second summons to surrender they
replied as indignantly as at first; and Vivian's Brigade was ordered to
charge them. A cloud of British horse bore down on every face of the
devoted square; but firm as in their hour of victory, the heroes of Marengo
never quailed; and twice the bravest blood of Britian recoiled, baffled and
dismayed. There was a pause for some minutes, and even then, as we surveyed
our broken and blood-stained squadrons, a cry of admiration burst from our
ranks at the gallant bearing of that glorious infantry. Suddenly the tramp
of approaching cavalry was heard; I turned my head and saw two squadrons of
the Second Life Guards. The officer who led them on was bare-headed; his
long dark hair streaming wildly behind him, and upon his pale features,
to which not even the headlong enthusiasm of battle had lent one touch of
color. He rode straight to where I was standing, his dark eyes fixed upon
me with a look so fierce, so penetrating, that I could not look away.
The features, save in this respect, had almost a look of idiocy. It was
Hammersley.
"Ha!" he cried at last, "I have sought you out the entire day, but in vain.
It is not yet too late. Give me your hand, boy. You once called on me to
follow you, and I did not refuse; I trust you'll do the like by me. Is
it not so?"
[Illustration: DEATH OF HAMMERSLEY.]
A terrible perception of his meaning shot through my mind as I clasped his
clay-cold hand in mine, and for a moment I did not speak.
"I hoped for better than this," said he, bitterly, and as a glance of
withering scorn flashed from his eye. "I did trust that he who was
preferred before me was at least not a coward."
As the word fell from his lips I nearly leaped from my saddle, and
mechanically raised my sabre to cleave him on the spot.
"Then follow me!" shouted he, pointing with his sword to the glistening
ranks before us.
"Come on!" said I, with a voice hoarse with passion, while burying my spurs
in my horse's flanks, I sprang on a full length before him, and bore down
upon the enemy. A loud shout, a deafening volley, the agonizing cry of the
wounded and the dying, were all I heard, as my horse, rearing madly upward,
plunged twice into the air, and then fell dead upon the earth, crushing me
beneath his cumbrous weight, lifeless and insensible.
The day was breaking; the cold, gray light of morning was struggling
through the misty darkness, when I once more recovered my consciousness.
There are moments in life when memory can so suddenly conjure up the whole
past before us, that there is scarcely time for a doubt ere the disputed
reality is palpable to our senses. Such was this to me. One hurried glance
upon the wide, bleak plain before me, and every circumstance of the
battle-field was present to my recollection. The dismounted guns, the
broken wagons, the heaps of dead or dying, the straggling parties who on
foot or horseback traversed the field, and the dark litters which carried
the wounded, all betokened the sad evidences of the preceding day's battle.
Close around me where I lay the ground was marked with the bodies of our
cavalry, intermixed with the soldiers of the Old Guard. The broad brow and
stalwart chest of the Saxon lay bleaching beside the bronzed and bearded
warrior of Gaul, while the torn-up ground attested the desperation of that
struggle which closed the day.
As my eye ranged over this harrowing spectacle, a dreadful anxiety shot
through me as I asked myself whose had been the victory. A certain confused
impression of flight and of pursuit remained in my mind; but at the moment,
the circumstances of my own position in the early part of the day increased
the difficulty of reflection, and left me in a state of intense and
agonizing uncertainty. Although not wounded, I had been so crushed by my
fall that it was not without pain I got upon my legs. I soon perceived
that the spot around me had not yet been visited by those vultures of the
battle-field who strip alike the dead and dying. The distance of the place
from where the great conflict of the battle had occurred was probably the
reason; and now, as the straggling sunbeams fell upon the earth, I could
trace the helmet of the Enniskilleners, or the tall bearskin of the Scotch
Greys, lying in thick confusion where the steel cuirass and long sword of
the French dragoons showed the fight had been hottest. As I turned my eyes
hither and thither I could see no living thing near me. In every attitude
of struggling agony they lay around; some buried beneath their horses, some
bathed in blood, some, with clinched hands and darting eyeballs, seemed
struggling even in death; but all was still,--not a word, not a sigh, not a
groan was there. I was turning to leave the spot, and uncertain which way
to direct my steps, looked once more around, when my glance rested upon
the pale and marble features of one who, even in that moment of doubt and
difficulty, there was no mistaking. His coat, torn widely open, was grasped
in either hand, while his breast was shattered with balls and bathed in
gore. Gashed and mutilated as he lay, still the features wore no trace of
suffering; cold, pale, motionless, but with the tranquil look of sleep, his
eyelids were closed, and his half-parted lips seemed still to quiver in
life. I knelt down beside him; I took his hand in mine; I bent over and
whispered his name; I placed my hand upon his heart, where even still the
life blood was warm,--but he was dead. Poor Hammersley! His was a gallant
soul; and as I looked upon his blood-stained corpse, my tears fell fast and
hot upon his brow to think how far I had myself been the cause of a life
blighted in its hope, and a death like his.
CHAPTER LIV.
BRUSSELS.
Once more I would entreat my reader's indulgence for the prolixity of
a narrative which has grown beneath my hands to a length I had never
intended. This shall, however, be the last time for either the offence or
the apology. My story is now soon concluded.
After wandering about for some time, uncertain which way to take, I at
length reached the Charleroi road, now blocked by carriages and wagons
conveying the wounded towards Brussels. Here I learned, for the first time,
that we had gained the battle, and heard of the total annihilation of the
French army, and the downfall of the Emperor. On arriving at the farm-house
of Mont St. Jean, I found a number of officers, whose wounds prevented
their accompanying the army in its forward movement. One of them, with whom
I was slightly acquainted, informed me that General Dashwood had spent
the greater part of the night upon the field in search of me and that my
servant Mike was in a state of distraction at my absence that bordered on
insanity. While he was speaking, a burst of laughter and the tones of a
well-remembered voice behind attracted my attention.
"Made a very good thing of it, upon my life. A dressing-case,--not gold,
you know, but silver-gilt,--a dozen knives with blood-stone handles, and a
little coffee-pot, with the imperial arms,--not to speak of three hundred
Naps in a green silk purse--Lord! it reminds me of the Peninsula. Do you
know those Prussians are mere barbarians, haven't a notion of civilized
war. Bless your heart, my fellows in the Legion would have ransacked the
whole coach, from the boot to the sword-case, in half the time they took to
cut down the coachman."
"The major, as I live!" said I. "How goes it, Major?"
"Eh, Charley! when did you turn up? Delighted see you. They told me you
were badly wounded or killed or something of that kind. But I should have
paid the little debt to your executors all the same."
"All the same, no doubt, Major; but where, in Heaven's name, did you fall
upon that mine of pillage you have just been talking of?"
"In the Emperor's carriage, to be sure, boy. While the duke was watching
all day the advance of Ney's column and keeping an anxious look-out for the
Prussians, I sat in a window in this old farm-house, and never took my eye
off the garden at Planchenoit. I saw the imperial carriage there in the
morning; it was there also at noon; and they never put the horses to it
till past seven in the evening. The roads were very heavy, and the crowd
was great. I judged the pace couldn't be a fast one; and with four of the
Enniskilleners I charged it like a man. The Prussians, however, had the
start of us; and if they hadn't thought, from my seat on horseback and
my general appearance, that I was Lord Uxbridge, I should have got but a
younger son's portion. However, I got in first, filled my pockets with a
few little souvenirs of the Emperor, and then laying my hands upon what
was readiest, got out in time to escape being shot; for two of Blucher's
hussars, thinking I must be the Emperor, fired at me through the window."
"What an escape you had!"
"Hadn't I though? Fortunate, too, my Enniskilleners saw the whole thing;
for I intend to make the circumstance the ground of an application for a
pension. Hark ye, Charley, don't say anything about the coffee-pot and
the knives. The duke, you know, has strange notions of his own on these
matters. But isn't that your fellow fighting his way yonder?"
"Tear and ages! don't howld me--that's himself,--devil a one else!"
This exclamation came from Mickey Free, who, with his dress torn and
dishevelled, his eyes bloodshot and strained, was upsetting and elbowing
all before him, as he made his way towards me through the crowd.
"Take that fellow to the guard-house! Lay hold of him, Sergeant! Knock him
down! Who is the scoundrel?"
Such were the greetings he met with on every side. Regardless of everything
and everybody, he burst his way through the dense mass.
"Oh, murther! oh, Mary! oh, Moses! Is he safe here after all?"
The poor fellow could say no more, but burst into a torrent of tears.
A roar of laughter around him soon, however, turned the current of his
emotions; when, dashing the scalding drops from his eyelids, he glared
fiercely like a tiger on every side.
"Ye're laughing at me, are ye," cried he, "bekase I love the hand that fed
me, and the master that stood to me? But let us see now which of us two has
the stoutest heart,--you with your grin on you, or myself with the salt
tears on my face."
As he spoke, he sprang upon them like a madman, striking right and left at
everything before him. Down they went beneath his blows, levelled with the
united strength of energy and passion, till at length, rushing upon him
in numbers, he was overpowered and thrown to the ground. It was with some
difficulty I accomplished his rescue; for his enemies felt by no means
assured how far his amicable propensities for the future could be relied
upon; and, indeed, Mike himself had a most constitutional antipathy to
binding himself by any pledge. With some persuasion, however, I reconciled
all parties; and having, by the kindness of a brother officer, provided
myself with a couple of troop horses, I mounted, and set out for Brussels,
followed by Mickey, who had effectually cured his auditory of any tendency
to laughter at his cost.
As I rode up to the Belle Vue, I saw Sir George Dashwood in the window. He
was speaking to the ambassador, Lord Clancarty, but the moment he caught my
eye, he hurried down to meet me.
"Charley, safe,--safe, my boy! Now am I really happy. The glorious day had
been one of sorrow to me for the rest of my life had anything happened to
you. Come up with me at once; I have more than one friend here who longs to
thank you."
So saying, he hurried me along; and before I could well remember where I
was, introduced me to a number of persons in the saloon.
"Ah, very happy to know you, sir," said Lord Clancarty. "Perhaps we had
better walk this way. My friend Dashwood has explained to me the very
pressing reasons there are for this step; and I, for my part, see no
objection."
"What, in Heaven's name, can he mean?" thought I, as he stopped short,
expecting me to say something, while, in utter confusion, I smiled,
simpered, and muttered some common-places.
"Love and war, sir," resumed the ambassador, "very admirable associates,
and you certainly have contrived to couple them most closely together. A
long attachment, I believe?"
"Yes, sir, a very long attachment," stammered I, not knowing which of us
was about to become insane.
"A very charming person, indeed; I have seen the lady," replied his
lordship, as he opened the door of a small room, and beckoned me to follow.
The table was covered with paper and materials for writing; but before
I had time to ask for any explanation of this unaccountable mystery, he
added, "Oh, I was forgetting; this must be witnessed. Wait one moment."
With these words he left the room, while I, amazed and thunderstruck,
vacillating between fear and hope, trembling lest the delusive glimmering
of happiness should give way at every moment, and yet totally unable to
explain by any possible supposition how fortune could so far have favored
me.
While yet I stood hesitating and uncertain, the door opened, and the
senhora entered. She looked a little pale though not less beautiful than
ever; and her features wore a slight trace of seriousness, which rather
heightened than took from the character of her loveliness.
"I heard you had come, Chevalier," said she, "and so I ran down to shake
hands with you. We may not meet again for some time."
"How so, Senhora? You are not going to leave us, I trust?"
"Then you have not seen Fred. Oh, I forgot; you know nothing of our plans."
"Here we are at last," said the ambassador, as he came in followed by Sir
George, Power, and two other officers. "Ah, ma belle, how fortunate to
find you here! I assure you, it is a matter of no small difficulty to get
people together at such a time as this."
"Charley, my dear friend," cried Power, "I scarcely hoped to have had a
shake hands with you ere I left."
"Do, Fred, tell me what all this means? I am in a perfect maze of doubt and
difficulty, and cannot comprehend a word I hear about me."
"Faith, my boy, I have little time for explanation. The man who was at
Waterloo yesterday, is to be married to-morrow, and to sail for India in a
week, has quite enough upon his hands."
"Colonel Power, you will please to put your signature here," said Lord
Clancarty, addressing himself to me.
"If you will allow me," said Fred, "I had rather represent myself."
"Is not this the colonel, then? Why, confound it, I have been wishing him
joy the last quarter of an hour!"
A burst of laughter from the whole party, in which it was pretty evident I
took no part, followed this announcement.
"And so you are not Colonel Power? Nor going to be married, either?"
I stammered out something, while, overwhelmed with confusion, I stooped
down to sign the paper. Scarcely had I done so, when a renewed burst of
laughter broke from the party.
"Nothing but blunders, upon my soul," said the ambassador, as he handed the
paper from one to another.
What was my confusion to discover that instead of Charles O'Malley, I had
written the name of Lucy Dashwood. I could bear no more. The laughing and
raillery of my friends came upon my wounded and irritated feelings like the
most poignant sarcasm. I seized my cap and rushed from the room. Desirous
of escaping from all that knew me, anxious to bury my agitated and
distracted thoughts in solitude and quiet, I opened the first door before
me, and seeing it an empty and unoccupied room, throw myself upon a sofa,
and buried my head within my hands. Oh, how often had the phantom of
happiness passed within my reach, but still glided from my grasp! How often
had I beheld the goal I aimed at, as it were before me, and the next moment
all the bleak reality of my evil fortune was lowering around me!
"Oh, Lucy, Lucy!" I exclaimed aloud, "but for you and a few words
carelessly spoken, I had never trod that path of ambition whose end has
been the wreck of all my happiness. But for you, I had never loved so
fondly; I had never filled my mind with one image which, excluding every
other thought, leaves no pleasure but in it alone. Yes, Lucy, but for you I
should have gone tranquilly down the stream of life with naught of grief or
care, save such as are inseparable from the passing chances of mortality;
loved, perhaps, and cared for by some one who would have deemed it no
disgrace to have linked her fortune to my own. But for you, and I had never
been--"
"A soldier, you would say," whispered a soft voice, as a light hand gently
touched my shoulder. "I had come," continued she, "to thank you for a gift
no gratitude can repay,--my father's life; but truly, I did not think to
hear the words you have spoken; nor having heard them, can I feel their
justice. No, Mr. O'Malley, deeply grateful as I am to you for the service
you once rendered myself, bound as I am by every tie of thankfulness, by
the greater one to my father, yet do I feel that in the impulse I had given
to your life, if so be that to me you owe it, I have done more to repay
my debt to you, than by all the friendship, all the esteem I owe you; if,
indeed, by my means, you became a soldier, if my few and random words
raised within your breast that fire of ambition which has been your
beacon-light to honor and to glory, then am I indeed proud."
"Alas, alas, Lucy!--Miss Dashwood, I would say,--forgive me, if I know not
the very words I utter. How has my career fulfilled the promise that gave
it birth? For you, and you only, to gain your affection, to win your heart,
I became a soldier; hardship, danger, even death itself were courted by me,
supported by the one thought that you had cared for or had pitied me; and
now, and now--"
"And now," said she, while her eyes beamed upon me with a very flood of
tenderness, "is it nothing that in my woman's heart I have glowed with
pride at triumphs I could read of, but dared not share in? Is it nothing
that you have lent to my hours of solitude and of musing the fervor of that
career, the maddening enthusiasm of that glorious path my sex denied me?
I have followed you in my thoughts across the burning plains of the
Peninsula, through the long hours of the march in the dreary nights, even
to the battle-field. I have thought of you; I have dreamed of you; I have
prayed for you."
"Alas, Lucy, but not loved me!"
The very words, as I spoke them, sank with a despairing cadence upon my
heart. Her hand, which had fallen upon mine, trembled violently; I pressed
my lips upon it, but she moved it not. I dared to look up; her head was
turned away, but her heaving bosom betrayed her emotion.
"No, no, Lucy," cried I, passionately, "I will not deceive myself; I ask
for more than you can give me. Farewell!"
Now, and for the last time, I pressed her hand once more to my lips; my hot
tears fell fast upon it. I turned to go, and threw one last look upon her.
Our eyes met; I cannot say what it was, but in a moment the whole current
of my thoughts was changed; her look was bent upon me beaming with softness
and affection, her hand gently pressed my own, and her lips murmured my
name.
The door burst open at this moment, and Sir George Dashwood appeared. Lucy
turned one fleeting look upon her father, and fell fainting into my arms.
"God bless you, my boy!" said the old general, as he hurriedly wiped a tear
from his eye; "I am now, indeed, a happy father."
[Illustration: THE WELCOME HOME.]
CHAPTER LV.
CONCLUSION.
*       *       *       *       *
The sun had set about half an hour. Already were the dusky shadows blending
with the faint twilight, as on a lovely July evening we entered the little
village of Portumna,--we, I say; for Lucy was beside me. For the last few
miles of the way I had spoken little; thoughts of the many times I had
travelled that same road, in how many moods, occupied my mind; and
although, as we flew rapidly along, some well-known face would every now
and then present itself, I had but time for the recognition ere we were
past. Arousing myself from my revery, I was pointing out to Lucy certain
well-known spots in the landscape, and directing her attention to places
with the names of which she had been for some time familiar, when suddenly
a loud shout rent the air, and the next moment the carriage was surrounded
by hundreds of country people, some of whom brandished blazing pine
torches; others carried rude banners in their hands,--but all testified
the most fervent joy as they bade us welcome. The horses were speedily
unharnessed, and their places occupied by a crowd of every age and sex,
who hurried us along through the straggling street of the village, now a
perfect blaze of bonfires.
Mounds of turf, bog-fir, and tar-barrels sent up their ruddy blaze, while
hundreds of wild, but happy faces, flitted around and through them,--now
dancing merrily in chorus; now plunging madly into the midst of the fire,
and scattering the red embers on every side. Pipers were there too, mounted
upon cars or turf-kishes; even the very roof-tops rang out their merry
notes; the ensigns of the little fishing-craft waved in the breeze, and
seemed to feel the general joy around them; while over the door of the
village inn stood a brilliantly lighted transparency, representing the head
of the O'Malleys holding a very scantily-robed young lady by the tips of
the fingers; but whether this damsel was intended to represent the genius
of the west, or my wife, I did not venture to inquire.
If the welcome were rude, assuredly it was a hearty one. Kind wishes and
blessings poured in on every side, and even our own happiness took a
brighter coloring from the beaming looks around us. The scene was wild;
the lurid glare of the red torchlight, the frantic gestures, the maddening
shouts, the forked flames rising amidst the dark shadows of the little
hamlet, had something strange and almost unearthly in their effect; but
Lucy showed no touch of fear. It is true she grasped my hand a little
closer, but her fair cheek glowed with pleasure, and her eye brightened as
she looked; and as the rich light fell upon her beauteous features, how
many a blessing, heart-felt and deep, how many a word of fervent praise was
spoken.
"Ah, then, the Lord be good to you; it's yourself has the darling blue
eyes! Look at them, Mary; ain't they like the blossoms on a peacock's tail?
Musha, may sorrow never put a crease in that beautiful cheek! The saints
watch over you, for your mouth is like a moss-rose! Be good to her, yer
honor, for she's a raal gem: devil fear you, Mr. Charles, but you'd have a
beauty!"
We wended our way slowly, the crowd ever thickening around us, until we
reached the market-place. Here the procession came to a stand, and I could
perceive, by certain efforts around me, that some endeavor was making to
enforce silence.
"Whisht, there! Hould your prate! Be still, Paddy! Tear an' ages, Molly
Blake, don't be holding me that way; let us hear his reverence. Put him up
on the barrel. Haven't you got a chair for the priest? Run, and bring a
table out of Mat Haley's. Here, Father--here, your reverence; take care,
will you,--you'll have the holy man in the blaze!"
By this time I could perceive that my worthy old friend Father Rush was in
the midst of the mob with what appeared to be a written oration, as long as
the tail of a kite, between his hands.
"Be aisy, there, ye savages! Who's tearing the back of my neck? Howld me up
straight! Steady, now--hem!"
"Take the laste taste in life to wet your lips, your riverence," said a
kind voice, while at the same moment a smoking tumbler of what seemed to be
punch appeared on the heads of the crowd.
"Thank ye, Judy," said the father, as he drained the cup. "Howld the light
up higher; I can't read my speech. There now, be quiet, will ye! Here goes.
Peter, stand to me now and give me the word."
This admonition was addressed to a figure on a barrel behind the priest,
who, as well as the imperfect light would permit me to descry, was the
coadjutor of the parish, Peter Nolan. Silence being perfectly established,
Father Rush began:--
"When Mars, the god of war, on high,
Of battles first did think,
He girt his sword upon his thigh,
And--
and--what is't, Peter?"
"And mixed a drop of drink."
"And mixed a drop of drink," quoth Father Rush, with great emphasis; when
scarcely were the spoken words than a loud shout of laughter showed him his
mistake, and he overturned upon the luckless curate the full vial of his
wrath.
"What is it you mean, Father Peter? I'm ashamed of ye; faith, it's may be
yourself, not Mars, you are speaking of."
The roar of merriment around prevented me hearing what passed; but I could
see by Peter's gestures--for it was too dark to see his face--that he was
expressing deep sorrow for the mistake. After a little time, order was
again established, and Father Rush resumed:--
"But love drove battles from his head,
And sick of wounds and scars,
To Venus bright he knelt, and said--
and said--and said; what the blazes did he say?"
"I'll make you Mrs. Mars,"
shouted Peter, loud enough to be heard.
"Bad luck to you, Peter Nolan, it's yourself's the ruin of me this blessed
night! Here have I come four miles with my speech in my pocket, per imbres
et ignes." Here the crowd crossed themselves devoutly. "Ay, just so; and
he spoiled it for me entirely." At the earnest entreaty, however, of the
crowd, Father Rush, with renewed caution to his unhappy prompter, again
returned to the charge:
"Thus love compelled the god to yield
And seek for purer joys;
He laid aside his helm and shield,
And took--took--took--"
"And took to corduroys,"
cried Father Nolan.
This time, however, the good priest's patience could endure no more, and he
levelled a blow at his luckless colleague, which, missing his aim, lost him
his own balance, and brought him down from his eminence upon the heads of
the mob.
Scarcely had I recovered the perfect convulsion of laughter into which this
scene had thrown me, when the broad brim of Father Nolan's hat appeared at
the window of the carriage. Before I had time to address him, he took it
reverently from his head, disclosing in the act the ever-memorable features
of Master Frank Webber!
"What! Eh! Can it be?" said I.
"It is surely not--" said Lucy, hesitating at the name.
"Your aunt, Miss Judy Macan, no more than the Rev. Peter Nolan, I assure
you; though, I confess, it has cost me much more to personate the latter
character than the former, and the reward by no means so tempting."
Here poor Lucy blushed deeply at the remembrance of the scene alluded to;
and anxious to turn the conversation, I asked by what stratagem he had
succeeded to the functions of the worthy Peter.
"At the cost of twelve tumblers of the strongest punch ever brewed at the
O'Malley Arms. The good father gave in only ten minutes before the oration
began, and I had barely time to change my dress and mount the barrel,
without a moment's preparation."
The procession once more resumed its march; and hurried along through the
town, we soon reached the avenue. Here fresh preparations for welcoming us
had also been made; but regardless of blazing tar-barrels and burning logs,
the reckless crowd pressed madly on, their wild cheers waking the echoes as
they went. We soon reached the house; but with a courtesy which even
the humblest and poorest native of this country is never devoid of, the
preparations of noise and festivity had not extended to the precincts of
the dwelling. With a tact which those of higher birth and older blood might
be proud of, they limited the excesses of their reckless and careless
merriment to their own village; so that as we approached the terrace, all
was peaceful, still, and quiet.
I lifted Lucy from the carriage, and passing my arm around her, was
assisting her to mount the steps, when a bright gleam of moonlight burst
forth and lit up the whole scene. It was, indeed, an impressive one. Among
the assembled hundreds there who stood bare-headed, beneath the cold
moonlight, not a word was now spoken, not a whisper heard. I turned from
the lawn, where the tall beech-trees were throwing their gigantic shadows,
to where the river, peering at intervals through the foliage, was flowing
on its silvery track, plashing amidst the tall flaggers that lined its
banks,--all were familiar, all were dear to me from childhood. How doubly
were they so now! I lifted up my eyes towards the door, and what was my
surprise at the object before them! Seated in a large chair was an old man,
whose white hair, flowing in straggling masses upon his neck and shoulders,
stirred with the night air; his hands rested upon his knees, and his eyes,
turned slightly upward, seemed to seek for some one he found it difficult
to recognize. Changed as he was by time, heavily as years had done their
work upon him, the stern features were not to be mistaken; but as I looked,
he called out in a voice whose unshaken firmness seemed to defy the touch
of time,--
"Charley O'Malley, come here, my boy! Bring her to me, till I bless you
both. Come here, Lucy,--I may call you so. Come here, my children. I have
tried to live on to see this day, when the head of an old house comes back
with honor, with fame, and with fortune, to dwell amidst his own people in
the old home of his fathers."
The old man bent above us, his white hair falling upon the fair locks of
her who knelt beside him, and pressed his cold and quivering hand within
her own.
"Yes, Lucy," said I, as I led her within the house, "this is home."
Here now ends my story. The patient reader who has followed me so far
deserves at my hands that I should not trespass upon his kindness one
moment beyond the necessity; if, however, any lurking interest may remain
for some of those who have accompanied me through this my history, it
may be as well that I should say a few words farther, ere they disappear
forever.
Power went to India immediately after his marriage, distinguished himself
repeatedly in the Burmese war, and finally rose to a high command that he
this moment holds, with honor to himself and advantage to his country.
O'Shaughnessy, on half-pay, wanders about the Continent, passing his
summers on the Rhine, his winters at Florence or Geneva. Known to and by
everybody, his interest in the service keeps him au courant to every
change and regulation, rendering him an invaluable companion to all to whom
an army list is inaccessible. He is the same good fellow he ever was, and
adds to his many excellent qualities the additional one of being the only
man who can make a bull in French!
Monsoon, the major, when last I saw him, was standing on the pier at
Calais, endeavoring, with a cheap telescope, to make out the Dover cliffs,
from a nearer prospect of which certain little family circumstances might
possibly debar him. He recognized me in a moment, and held out his hand,
while his eye twinkled with its ancient drollery.
"Charley, my son, how goes it? Delighted to see you. What a pity I did not
meet you yesterday! Had a little dinner at Crillon's. Harding, Vivian, and
a few others. They all wished for you; 'pon my life they did."
"Civil, certainly," thought I, "as I have not the honor of being known to
them."
"You are at Meurice's," resumed he; "a very good house, but give you bad
wine, if they don't know you. They know me," added he, in a whisper; "never
try any tricks upon me. I'll just drop in upon you at six."
"It is most unfortunate, Major; I can't have the pleasure you speak of; we
start in half an hour."
"Never mind, Charley, never mind; another time. By-the-bye, now I think of
it, don't you remember something of a ten-pound note you owe me?"
"As well as I remember, Major, the circumstance was reversed. You are the
debtor."
"Upon my life, you are right; how droll. No matter; let me have the ten,
and I'll give you a check for the whole."
The major thrust his tongue into his cheek as he spoke, gave another leer,
pocketed the note, and sauntered down the pier, muttering something to
himself about King David and greenhorns; but how they were connected I
could not precisely overhear.
Baby Blake, or Mrs. Sparks,--to call her by her more fitting
appellation,--is as handsome as ever, and not less good-humored and
light-hearted, her severest trials being her ineffectual efforts to convert
Sparks into something like a man for Galway.
Last of all, Mickey Free. Mike remains attached to our fortune firmly, as
at first he opened his career; the same gay, rollicksome Irishman, making
songs, making love, and occasionally making punch, he spends his days and
his nights pretty much as he was wont to do some thirty years ago. He
obtains an occasional leave of absence for a week or so, but for what
precise purpose, or with what exact object, I have never been completely
able to ascertain. I have heard, it as true, that a very fascinating
companion and a most agreeable gentleman frequents a certain oyster-house
in Dublin called Burton Bindon's. I have also been told of a distinguished
foreigner, whose black mustache and broken English were the admiration of
Cheltenham for the last two winters. I greatly fear from the high tone of
the conversation in the former, and for the taste in continental characters
in the latter resort, that I could fix upon the individual whose convivial
and social gifts have won so much of their esteem and admiration; but were
I to run on thus, I should recur to every character of my story, with each
and all of whom you have, doubtless, grown well wearied. So here for the
last time, and with every kind wish, I say, adieu!
L'ENVOI.
Kind friends,--It is somewhat unfortunate that the record of the happiest
portion of my friend's life should prove the saddest part of my duty as
his editor, and for this reason, that it brings me to that spot where my
acquaintance with you must close, and sounds the hour when I must say,
good-bye.
They, who have never felt the mysterious link that binds the solitary
scribe in his lonely study, to the circle of his readers, can form no
adequate estimate of what his feelings are when that chain is about to be
broken; they know not how often, in the fictitious garb of his narrative,
he has clothed the inmost workings of his heart; they know not how
frequently he has spoken aloud his secret thoughts, revealing, as though to
a dearest friend, the springs of his action, the causes of his sorrow, the
sources of his hope; they cannot believe by what a sympathy he is bound to
those who bow their heads above his pages; they do not think how the ideal
creations of his brain are like mutual friends between him and the world,
through whom he is known and felt and thought of, and by whom he reaps in
his own heart the rich harvest of flattery and kindness that are rarely
refused to any effort to please, however poor, however humble. They know
not this, nor can they feel the hopes, the fears, that stir within him, to
earn some passing word of praise; nor think they, when won, what brightness
around his humble hearth it may be shedding. These are the rewards for
nights of toil and days of thought; these are the recompenses which pay the
haggard cheek, the sunken eye, the racked and tired head. These are the
stakes for which one plays his health, his leisure, and his life, yet not
regrets the game.
Nearly three years have now elapsed since I first made my bow before you.
How many events have crowded into that brief space! How many things of
vast moment have occurred! Only think that in the last few months you've
frightened the French; terrified M. Thiers; worried the Chinese; and are,
at this very moment, putting the Yankees into a "most uncommon fix;" not
to mention the minor occupations of ousting the Whigs; reinstating the
Tories, and making O'Connell Lord Mayor,--and yet, with all these and a
thousand other minor cares, you have not forgotten your poor friend, the
Irish Dragoon. Now this was really kind of you, and in my heart I thank you
for it.
Do not, I entreat you, construe my gratitude into any sense of future
favors,--no such thing; for whatever may be my success with you hereafter,
I am truly deeply grateful for the past. Circumstances, into which I
need not enter, have made me for some years past a resident in a foreign
country, and as my lot has thrown me into a land where the reputation of
writing a book is pretty much on a par with that of picking a pocket, it
may readily be conceived with what warm thankfulness I have caught at any
little testimonies of your approval which chance may have thrown in my way.
Like the reduced gentlewoman who, compelled by poverty to cry fresh eggs
through the streets, added after every call, "I hope nobody hears me;" so
I, finding it convenient, for a not very dissimilar reason, to write books,
keep my authorship as quietly to myself as need be, and comfort me with the
assurance that nobody knows me.
A word now to my critics. Never had any man more reason to be satisfied
with that class than myself. As if you knew and cared for the temperament
of the man you were reviewing; as if you were aware of the fact that it was
at any moment in your power, by a single article of severe censure, to have
extinguished in him forever all effort, all ambition for success,--you have
mercifully extended to him the mildest treatment, and meted out even your
disparagement, with a careful measure.
While I have studied your advice with attention, and read your criticisms
with care, I confess I have trembled more than once before your more
palpable praise; for I thought you might be hoaxing me.
Now and then, to be sure, I have been accused of impressing real
individuals, and compelling them to serve in my book; that this reproach
was unjust, they who know me can best vouch for, while I myself can
honestly aver, that I never took a portrait without the consent of the
sitter.
Others again have fallen foul of me, for treating of things, places, and
people with which I had no opportunity of becoming personally acquainted.
Thus one of my critics has showed that I could not have been a Trinity
College man; and another has denied my military matriculation. Now,
although both my Latin and my learning are on the peace establishment, and
if examined in the movements for cavalry, it is perfectly possible I should
be cautioned, yet as I have both a degree and a commission I might have
been spared this reproach.
"Of coorse," says Father Malachi Brennan, who leans over my shoulder while
I write,--"of coorse you ought to know all about these things as well as
the Duke of Wellington or Marshal Soult himself. UNDE DERYVATUR MILES.
Ain't you in the Derry militia?" I hope the Latin and the translation will
satisfy every objection.
While, then, I have nothing but thankfulness in my heart respecting the
entire press of my own country, I have a small grudge with my friends of
the far west; and as this is a season of complaint against the Yankees,
"Why shouldn't I roll my tub also?" A certain New York paper, called the
"Sunday Times," has thought fit for some time past to fill its columns with
a story of the Peninsular war, announcing it as "by the author of Charles
O'Malley." Heaven knows that injured individual has sins enough of his own
to answer for, without fathering a whole foundling hospital of American
balderdash; but this kidnapping spirit of brother Jonathan would seem to be
the fashion of the day! Not content with capturing Macleod, who unhappily
ventured within his frontier, he must come over to Ireland and lay hands
on Harry Lorrequer. Thus difficulties are thickening every day. When they
dispose of the colonel, then comes the boundary question; after that there
is Grogan's affair, then me. They may liberate Macleod; [3] they may
abandon the State of Maine,--but what recompense can be made to me for this
foul attack on my literary character? It has been suggested to me from the
Foreign Office that the editor might be hanged. I confess I should like
this; but after all it would be poor satisfaction for the injury done me.
Meanwhile, as Macleod has the pas of me, I'll wait patiently, and think
the matter over.
[Footnote 3: I have just read that Macleod and Grogan have been liberated.
May I indulge a hope that my case will engage the sympathies of the
world during the Christmas holidays. H. L.]
It was my intention, before taking leave of you, to have apologized
separately for many blunders in my book; but the errors of the press are
too palpable to be attributed to me. I have written letters without end,
begged, prayed, and entreated that more care might be bestowed; but
somehow, after all, they have crept in in spite of me. Indeed, latterly I
began to think I had found out the secret of it. My publisher, excellent
man, has a kind of pride about printing in Ireland, and he thinks the
blunders, like the green cover to the volume, give the thing a national
look. I think it was a countryman of mine of whom the story is told, that
he apologized for his spelling by the badness of his pen. This excuse, a
little extended, may explain away anacronisms, and if it won't I am sorry
for it, for I have no other.
Here then I conclude: I must say, adieu! Yet can I not do so before I
again assure you that if perchance I may have lightened an hour of your
solitude, you, my kind friends, have made happy whole weeks and days of
mine; and if happily I have called up a passing smile upon your lip,
your favor has spoken joy and gladness to many a heart around my board.
Is it, then, strange that I should be grateful for the past; be sorrowful
for the present?
To one and all, then, a happy Christmas; and if before the new year, you
have not forgotten me, I shall be delighted to have your company at OUR
MESS.
Meanwhile believe me most respectfully and faithfully yours,
HARRY LORREQUER.
BRUSSELS, November, 1841.
THE END.
