The Project Gutenberg eBook of May; vol. I, by Mrs. Margaret OliphantThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online atwww.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, youwill have to check the laws of the country where you are located beforeusing this eBook.Title: May; vol. IAuthor: Mrs. Margaret OliphantRelease Date: June 17, 2021 [eBook #65631]Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team athttp://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from imagesavailable at The Internet Archive)*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAY; VOL. I ***EACH VOLUME SOLD SEPARATELY.COLLECTIONOFBRITISH AUTHORSTAUCHNITZ EDITION.VOL. 1323.MAY BY MRS. OLIPHANTIN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LEIPZIG: BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ.PARIS: C. REINWALD, 15, RUE DES SAINTS PRES.PARIS: THE GALIGNANI LIBRARY, 224, RUE DE RIVOLI,AND AT NICE, 15, QUAI MASSENA.This Collectionis published with copyright for Continental circulation, but allpurchasers are earnestly requested not to introduce the volumesinto England or into any British Colony.COLLECTIONOFBRITISH AUTHORSTAUCHNITZ EDITION.VOL. 1323.MAY BY MRS. OLIPHANT.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I"MaggioNon ha paraggio."ITALIAN PROVERB.MAY.BYMRS. OLIPHANT,AUTHOR OF"THE MINISTER'S WIFE," ETC.COPYRIGHT EDITION.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LEIPZIGBERNHARD TAUCHNITZ1873.The Right of Translation is reserved.TOTHE HONOURABLE CAPTAINANDMEMBERS OF THE ROYAL AND ANCIENT GOLF CLUB OF ST. ANDREWS(Especially to those among that noble Company whom the Authorventures to call Friends)THIS BOOKISREVERENTIALLY, AND ADMIRINGLY INSCRIBED.MAY.CHAPTER I.The house of Hay-Heriot had been established at Pitcomlie for morecenturies than could easily be reckoned. It was neither very rich norvery great, but it was well connected, and had held itself sturdilyabove the waves of fate like one of the rocks along its wild coast line,often threatened by rising tides, but never submerged. There had neverbeen any great personages in the family to raise it above its naturallevel, but neither had there been any distinguished profligates orspendthrifts to pull it down. Most of the lairds had been respectable,and those who were not had never been more than moderately wicked,keeping clear of ruinous vices. The history of the house had been verymonotonous, without ups or downs to speak of. In the vicissitudes of therebellions they had kept clear, being too far south to be seriouslycompromised; and though a younger son was out in the '45, that did notaffect either the character or the circumstances of the family. Inshort, this was the Hay-Heriot way of sowing its wild oats. Its youngersons were its safety-valve; all that was eccentric in the race ran intothose stray branches, leaving the elder son always steady andrespectable, a most wise arrangement of nature.Thus the house itself derived even profit and glory from the adventurousirregularity of its younger members, while its stability was uninjured.Indian curiosities of all kinds, warlike trophies, and the splendidfruit of those pilferings which are not supposed to be picking andstealing when they are the accompaniments of war, decorated the oldmansion on every side. A curiously decorated scimitar, which had beentaken from Tippoo Saib, hung over the mantelpiece in the library alongwith a French sabre from Waterloo, and the shield of a Red Indianbarbarically gay with beads and fringes. These were all contributionsfrom the heroic ne'er-do-weels who linked the staidest of households tothe tumult and commotion of distant worlds. Sometimes the ne'er-do-weelswould cost the head of the house some money, but on the whole thebalance was kept tolerably even, and the younger Hay-Heriotsconscientiously forbore from leaving orphan children, or otherincumbrances, to burden the old house--a considerateness quite unlikethe habit of younger sons, which was applauded and envied by manyfamilies in the country who had no such exemption.The present family differed, however, in many respects from thetraditions of the race. Thomas Hay-Heriot of Pitcomlie was indeed allthat his ancestors had been, an excellent country gentleman, homely inhis manners and thrifty in his habits, but hospitable, charitable, andnot ungenerous--a man of blameless life and high character. His brotherCharles, however, who, according to all the family rules ought to havebeen a scapegrace, was not so in the smallest degree, but, on thecontrary, as respectable as his elder brother; a man who had never beenfurther than Paris in his life, a Writer to the Signet in Edinburgh; aman of method and order, who had done exactly the same thing at the samehour every day for thirty years, and who was as good as a clock to hisservants and neighbours. This is not in general an attractivedescription of a man, but there was a great deal to be said in UncleCharles' favour, as the reader who has patience to follow out thishistory will learn.The fact that he was Uncle Charles will at once reveal one importantpart of his life. He had never married, he had always been more or lessa member of his brother's household, and now, when age began to creepupon both, lived almost continually in the home of his youth. It was hewho sat in the triangular corner of a settee by the fire with anewspaper in his hand, which he was not reading, in the Pitcomliedrawing-room, on a bright March day not very many years ago, in the halfhour which preceded luncheon in that orderly house. We are aware that weought to have afforded a glimpse of Pitcomlie House, before thusdragging the reader head and shoulders into its domestic centre--butafter all it is the interior which is the most important, and this ishow it looked.A long room with three large windows opening upon a lawn, beyond whichsurged and swelled an often angry and boisterous sea. The fireplace wasopposite the central window, and the room had been handsomely furnishedforty years before, and bore that air of continuance and use which initself gives a charm to all human habitations.It had, however, as all such rooms have, various points of contact withthe immediate present, in the shape of low chintz-covered easy-chairsand other modern vanities. Uncle Charles' chimney-corner was formed byplacing an arm across the long settee fitted to the wall, thus leavinghim a roomy triangular seat at the end, where his lean limbs got all thebenefit of the warmth. He was a man of nearly sixty, with scanty fairhair, scarcely touched with grey, a forehead which wrinkled up in foldsor smoothed itself miraculously out according to his moods as he talked,and a pair of light yellowish grey eyes with scanty eyelashes, alsolight in colour, over which he puckered his brows continually, beingshortsighted. He was one of the thinnest of men, as light and agile asmany a boy, and sat with his long legs crossed in the acutest of angles.His brother stood with his back to the fire, older by two years, andheavier by at least six stone. He was dressed in grey morning clothes,with boots and leather gaiters, and an atmosphere of the fields and freeair about him. Indeed, he had just come in from his home-farm, which hemanaged very carefully, and by which he proudly declared he had neverlost a penny. There was no one else in the room. The walls were paintedgray-green and hung with family portraits. The round table at the eastend--for in this part of Scotland everything is spoken ofgeographically--was laden with books; and in the west end the roomblossomed out into a deeply recessed bay window, half veiled with lacecurtains, within which stood one easy-chair and small table. Thisrecess, and indeed the air of the place generally, betrayed thehabitation of a woman, and one whose tastes and "ways" were veryinfluential--but no woman was present. The aspect of the room was southand west, so that the sharp east wind then blowing outside did notaffect so much as might have been feared the temperature within. An eastwind in Fife is not always the grey and withering misery it is in otherplaces; under some peculiar modifications of the atmosphere it makes thesea blue and the sky clear, and such was the effect on this particularmorning. This it may be imagined was an effect most deeply to be desiredat Pitcomlie, which so far, at least, as the drawing-room was concerned,was like a ship at sea, seeing little besides the water; but as theHay-Heriots had all been, so to speak, born and bred in an east wind,they were more indifferent than most people to its penetrating power."I have another letter from Tom," said Mr. Heriot, sighing and raisinghis arms with his coat tails under them."Always wanting something?" said Uncle Charles, with a shrug."Well, when all's done and said, he is the first to be considered,"said the laird, with a faint glimmer as of incipient resentment. "It isto him that everything must come; he must carry on the name like hisfathers before him. Being a younger son yourself, Charlie, you have yourprejudices, as is but natural. Your word is always for the others--neverfor Tom."Uncle Charles gave another shrug of his lean shoulders. "Tom careslittle for my good word," he said, "and has little need of it. You'requite capable of spoiling your son yourself, so far as I can see,without me to help. The girls are my thought; young men can shift forthemselves, and it was always the way of our family to let them; but thegirls, Thomas--there's two of them. There's my niece Marjory, as fine ayoung woman as any in the county--""Oh, ay, May; she's the first in your thoughts. But girls are neitherhere nor there," said Mr. Heriot, "they have their pickle money, more orless, and there's an end of them. What's Marjory to do with money? Whatcan she do at her age--""Marry, I suppose, like the rest," said Uncle Charles."Marry!" said the father. "I don't see any necessity for my part; she'sa great deal better as she is, with you and me.""That may be or mayn't be," said Uncle Charles; "but at least you arenot the man to say so; you married twice yourself.""And a great deal I have made by it," said Mr. Heriot, with a mixture ofcomplaint and discontent. "My first wife was an excellent creature, anexcellent creature, as you know; but she was taken away from me justwhen I and the bairns wanted her most. Providence is very queer in somethings. Just when May was a growing girl, and Tom at the age when awoman is of use, their mother was taken away. It is not for us tocomplain, but it's a strange way of acting, a very strange way ofacting. I could not take the responsibility of guiding my hinds in sucha manner. Well, and then I married poor Jeanie, hoping she would keepeverything in order, and set the house to rights--and what does she dobut slip away too, poor thing, leaving me with a helpless bit baby on myhands? A great deal I have made by it that you should quote my example.What would Marjory do to marry? She is far better as she is, mistressand more of this house, petted as no husband would ever pet her, gettingher own way in everything. Bless my soul, man, what would you like forher more?""Well, a house of her own," said Uncle Charles, no way daunted, "and agood man. I have not your experience, Thomas, but I suppose that's thebest for a woman. She is more of your way of thinking than mine, butit's our duty to think for her, you know. We're old now, and Tom'sextravagant--and she's not precisely growing younger herself.""Toots, she's young enough," said the laird; and then he began to walkup and down the room, still with his coat-tails under his arms. "Totell the truth," he said, "Marjory's marriage would be the worst thingthat could happen for us. I would not stand in her way if it was for hergood. When there's a family of daughters, of course it becomes ofconsequence; what else can they do, poor things? but Marjory is in avery different position. Poor little Milly is not ten, and what wouldyou and I do, left in a house like this, with a bit creature of tenyears old? Her sister is her natural guardian; and what can be morenatural than that May should take care of her father's house and keepeverything going? What can a woman want more? A house of her own! isn'tthis house her own? and as nice a house as any in Fife; and as for aman--if she knew as much about men as I do, Charlie, or you either forthat matter--"Uncle Charles gave a half-stifled, chuckling laugh. The humour of thisremonstrance overcame his graver sense; and that Marjory's marriagewould have been as great a drawback--perhaps a greater misfortune--tohimself than even to her father there could be no doubt."I don't say but what that's an indisputable argument," he replied; "shemight get a bonny bargain, and repent it all her days. But there's theluncheon bell, and where is she? I don't think I ever knew her to belate before.""Are you not going to wait?" said the laird.Mr. Charles had hoisted himself up at the sound of the bell; he hadfolded his newspaper and laid it down upon his seat. He had picked uphis shortsighted spectacles, which lay as they always did, when he wasreading, on the edge of the wainscot, which was high and served him as astand; and he had lifted the poker to administer, as he invariably didat this hour, a farewell poke to the fire before leaving it. He turnedround upon his brother, looking at him over his shoulder with the pokerin his hand."Wait!" he said. It was altogether a new idea. Marjory was punctualityitself, trained to it from her earliest years, and time was inexorableat Pitcomlie, waiting for no man or woman either."Wait?" he repeated, laying down the poker. "Thomas, my man, you're notwell.""Bah!" said the laird, taking up the poker which his brother haddropped, and applying such a blow to the coal as sent blazing sparks allover the hearth-rug. It was exactly what might have been expected, buthis brother stood helplessly and looked at him, feeling that chaositself had come, until the smell of the burning wool startled them both.Mr. Heriot stooped down, which did not agree with him, to pick up thesmouldering sparks with his hands, out of which the morsels of firetumbled again, sprinkling little pin-points of destruction all over theTurkey rug. Mr. Charles ran and opened the window, which let in a steadystrong blast from the Firth, enough to wither up the very soul of anyman not to the manner born. "Bless my soul!" they both said, between thefire and the cold, in confusion and discouragement. It was entirelyMarjory's fault. Why was not Marjory at home? What did she mean bystaying out at an hour when she was so much wanted? Mr. Heriot spokequite sharply when old Fleming, the butler, came to answer the bell."Where is Miss Marjory?" he said. "Come and pick up these cinders, anddon't stand and stare at me. Where is Miss Marjory, I ask you? What doyou mean by ringing the bell when she's not here?""Lord bless us, Sir," said old Fleming, gazing at his master with aconsternation beyond words. "What for should I no ring the bell? I'verung it night and morning, midday and dinner-time, in a' times andseasons, even when there was death in the house; and what for should wehold our peace now?""Confound you!" said the laird; and then he recollected himself, and puton that peculiar politeness which is with some men a symptom of wrath."Be so good as to leave the room at once, and bring me word if MissMarjory has come in," he said.Mr. Charles by this time had closed the window, subdued by his brother'sunusual fractiousness. "Tom's letter must have been more trying thanordinary," he said to himself, and then in the curious pause thatfollowed he looked at his watch. A quarter to two o'clock! In the memoryof man it had not been known that the Pitcomlie household should belater than half-past one, in sitting down to its luncheon. Mr. Charlesdid not know what to do with himself. In his scheme of existence thishalf hour, and no other, was filled with lunch. He had other duties forall the other half hours, and every one of them must be pushed out ofits proper place by May's singular error. This fretted him more than hecould say. He walked about the room with his hands in his pockets and inmuch bewilderment of soul. "If you will not come, I will go by myself,"he said at length to his brother, "I can't afford to lose all myafternoon. May must have stayed in Comlie with old Aunt Jean for lunch.""Lose your afternoon!" said Mr. Heriot. "Bless my soul, what's yourafternoon, an idle man! If it had been me that had complained"--"There's Scotch collops," said old Fleming, suddenly appearing at thedoor, "and chicken with cucumber. They'll both spoil if they're noeaten; and Miss Marjory's not to be seen, no even from the towerheadwhere I sent little James to look. You'll do her little good waiting, ifI may make so bold to say so, and the good meat will be spoiled.""I told you so," said Mr. Charles, who profited by this interruption tomarch briskly past Fleming and hasten to the dining-room. Mr. Heriotfollowed him with a less satisfied air; and the two gentlemen placedthemselves at table, and being hungry eat a hearty meal and said no moreabout Marjory. Her absence indeed was nothing to be anxious about, andthe chicken and cucumber was very good, as were also the Scotch collops,a dish for which Mrs. Simpson, the cook, was famous. Mrs. Simpson,indeed, was famous for a great many things; she was partly the creationand partly the instructress of Mr. Charles Hay-Heriot himself, to whomshe had been solemnly bequeathed by one of his old friends inEdinburgh, who had bragged of her greatly in his life-time, and hadmeant to survive her, and publish her lore in a book. But it was she whohad survived instead, and Mr. Charles was of opinion that he himself hadimmensely improved her. She was supposed to be the last depositary ofmany old Scotch recipes, the only person who knew how to send up Friar'schicken, and a howtowdie with drappit eggs. The Scotch collops werebrown and fragrant, sending a delicious flavour through all the house,and the little momentary annoyance of the past half hour sank intoinsignificance before them. The two gentlemen made a hearty meal, bothof them having had fresh air enough to make it acceptable, and talked ofother things. With Fleming behind his master's chair, even Tom's letterbecame no matter for discussion, and though the table with its twovacant places looked somewhat dreary, there was no further remark madeon that subject. "They are dining with old Aunt Jean," Mr. Charles saidto himself; and as for his brother he was a little ashamed of the fusshe had made. That fuss had not been, as he very well knew, for Marjory'sabsence, but because Tom's letter was such a one as irritates a parent;and Mr. Charles' readiness to side against Tom in all domesticcontroversies irritated the father still further, who did not choosethat any one but himself should blame his heir. Indeed one of Mr.Heriot's chief grievances against his eldest son was this way he had oflaying himself open to animadversion. He felt it was against thedignity of all eldest sons and heads of houses that this should bepossible. The Charlies of life, the younger sons, the girls, were opento reasonable discussion; but when the heir thus exposed himself, allfamily discipline and subordination was in danger. It was almost as badas if he himself, Thomas Hay-Heriot of Pitcomlie, had been openlycriticised by his family. And Tom was a young man who continually laidhimself open to animadversion. Even Fleming had been known to have hisfling at him, and the only one of Marjory's revolutionary qualitieswhich really annoyed her father, was her want of proper respect for herbrother's position. He had been the eldest son himself, and had alwaysbeen treated with the highest consideration; and the head of the houseentertained very strongly this esprit de corps. He made no furtherallusion therefore to the subject which really engrossed all histhoughts.CHAPTER II.While her father and uncle were thus fuming over her absence, MarjoryHay-Heriot, with her little sister, had been making her way quietlyabout the little town of Comlie, whither they had ridden down in themorning, tempted by the sunshine, after some days of rainy weather.Comlie was a little old clean and quaint place, an old-fashioned Fifeborough, devoted to fishing in its lower parts, but possessing such aHigh Street as not one of all its sister-towns possessed. This HighStreet had a wide causeway, clean and straight, and a broad footpathinto which many old-fashioned large houses stepped forward with theirwhite gables, in a true picturesque old Scotch way, telling of bettertimes and characteristics more decided than our own. A quaint littlesemi-metropolitan air was about this silent street, through which thebroad sunshine fell with few shadows to obstruct it. A little town-hallwith a quaint ancient steeple stood in the middle of the street, withone square unglazed window protected by iron rails, the window of thetown Bridewell, raised just above the heads of the passers-by, andlooking as like the little town prison of an Italian mountain village astwo similar things could look in places so unlike. At the west end wasan old inn, a little hostel which, no doubt, was doing a good trade inthe days when queens and courts were at Falkland Palace, and archbishopsreigned in St. Andrews. The houses on the south side of the street withtheir projecting gables, whitewashed and many-windowed, looked out uponthe sea to the back, over the fringe of fisher cottages which lay lower,close to the beach. At the east end of the town stood the church, an oldchurch cobbled into mediocrity, but still displaying to instructed eyesthe lines of its original structure, and tempting archologists withhopes of restoration. It was surrounded by a churchyard full ofmonuments of the sixteenth century, with skulls and cross-bones and urnsand puffing cherubs. It is astonishing how many dead people belonging tothat century could afford to leave behind them those cumbrous masses ofstone. The Manse, a solid, and in its way, spacious square stone house,stood at a little distance overlooking the sea; and outside the churchgates, where the broad street had widened into a kind of triangularplace, there were several "genteel" houses--one decorated with irongates and trees in front, but the rest old, of characteristic Fifearchitecture, each with its white gable. The sea is the background toeverything in this country, and to-day it was blue, a keen and chill,but brilliant tone of colour, throwing up the whitewashed houses andlight grey stone with a brightness almost worthy of Italy; though noItalian wind, unless, indeed, a Tramontana fresh from the snowy hills,ever penetrated human bones like that steady blast from the east, whichcame natural to the people of Comlie.Marjory had left her horse and little Milly her tiny pony at JohnHorsburgh's inn, and they were now going up and down the silent streetin the sunshine about their various businesses, holding up theirriding-skirts, the little girl keeping very close by her sister's sidelike a little shadow, and communicating with the outer world almostexclusively by means of a large pair of limpid blue eyes, clear asheaven, and wide open, which said almost all that Milly had to say, andlearned a great deal more than Milly ever betrayed. Wherever Marjorywent, this little shade went with her, sometimes holding by her dress,always treading in her very footsteps, a creature with no independentexistence of her own, any more than if she had been part of Marjory'sgown, or an ornament she wore. As for Marjory herself, she went alongthe street of Comlie with the free yet measured step of a princess,aware that every eye in the place (there were not many visible), wasturned to her; but so used to that homage that it gave her only a finebacking of moral strength and support, and made her neither vain norproud. Vain! why should Marjory Hay-Heriot be vain? She knew herposition exactly and accepted it, and was aware of all its duties, andconsidered it natural. She was like a princess in Comlie; she would havetold you so simply without more ado, as calm in the consciousness as anyyoung grand-duchess in her hereditary dominions. She had been going overher kingdom that morning, and had found a great many things to do.At this moment when, if the reader pleases, we shall join ourselveslike little Milly to her train, she was coming up from "the shore" as itwas called, the fisher-region, where she had been paying a sorrowfulvisit. One of the boats had gone down in the last gale, a too frequentaccident, and a young widow with a three months old baby, a poor youngcreature who not two years before had left Pitcomlie House to marry herJamie, was sitting rocking herself and her child in the first stupor ofgrief, and replying by monosyllables to all the kindly attempts toconsole her."Oh ay, Miss Marjory," "I ken that," "Yes, Mem, its a'true," poor Jeanhad said, with the weary assent which means so little. Marjory came backto the High Street with a grave face, and her own mind full of thedreariness of that inevitable assent. What could any woman answer moreto the kind voices that bid her bear her trial and have patience, andremember that it is God's will? "Its a' true." May was not of amelancholy mind; but that pitiful assent to everything she had said wentto her heart. She walked on with her light step that did no more thaneffleurer the ground, stopping sometimes to nod and smile to somewoman at her door."All well to-day, Mary?""Oh, ay, Miss Marjory, just about our ordinary, nae mair to complain o'than maist puir folk; if thae weary cauld winds would bide away that gieus a' our death.""This is the first east wind we've had for a fortnight," said Marjory."I think we have very little reason to complain.""Ye see I'm frae the south," said the woman; "and my man has a hoastthat drives ye wild to hear; and when we havena the east wind in Comliewe have the rain, and the bairns canna gang to the school, and there'snaething but dirt and wet, and misery and quarrelling. It's a wearyworld, as our grannie says. Whatever the Almighty sends, there's ayesomething folk would like better.""But perhaps that might be the folk's fault, and not the Almighty's,"suggested Marjory."Maybe; I'm no saying," answered Mary Baxter, cautiously. "I hope's a'weel at Pitcomlie, and good news o' the young gentlemen. They tell meMr. Charles's wife out in India yonder, has another son. Bless us! and Imind himself so well, a curly-headed laddie! It would have been mairlike the thing if Mr. Tammas would settle down, and bring hame somebonnie young leddy and gie Mr. Heriot childhers' childher, as it's inthe Bible. But there's nae word o' that that I can hear?""No, there is no word of that. I hope Nancy is doing well in her newplace," said Miss Heriot, changing the subject with the same unconsciousartifice which had prompted her humble interlocutor to carry the warinto the enemy's country by introducing Charles's marriage and Tom'sbacherlorhood. These two subjects were not pleasing to the house ofHeriot; for Tom, the heir, unfortunately, showed no inclination to marryat all, and Charlie in India had become a husband and a father much toosoon, contrary to all traditions. Marjory passed on when she had beensatisfied on the subject of Nancy, but was stopped a few steps furtheron by a bareheaded girl in a pretty pink short-gown, the costume of thecountry, who ran after her with her fair locks falling loose in thewind."Eh, Miss Marjory, would you come in and speak to my mither?" cried thisnew applicant. This was Jenny Patterson, who lived up a stair justbehind the Tolbooth, and a little out of Miss Heriot's way. How Jennyadmired the young lady as she gathered up her heavy cloth skirts, andwith a smile and a nod went on to the well-known door! If Jenny had everheard of goddesses, just so would she have impersonified a femininedivinity; that mixture of splendid superiority and familiar kindnessbeing of all things the most captivating to the unsophisticated soul.Jenny's brother, who was a watchmaker in Dundee, and held very advancedpolitical opinions, considered her devotion servile, but blushed to feelthat he himself shared it whenever he was brought under the sameinfluence. "But it's no the leddy, it's the woman I think of," RadicalJock explained to himself--an explanation as false as most suchexplanations are."Jenny says you want me, Mrs. Patterson," said Marjory, sitting down onthe chair which Jenny carefully dusted and placed in front of the fire.It was a small room, with but a little space between the bed and thefire, and with one window veiled by an immense geranium stretched upon afan-like frame, which was the pride of its mistress's heart, consumedhalf the air and light in the little place, and curiously enoughcondescended to grow with splendid luxuriance. Jenny's mother was aninvalid, but a good needlewoman, who got through a great deal of"white-seam" in her chair by the fire, and lived, she, her daughter, andher geranium on the earnings thus acquired, supplemented by help fromher sons. Jenny stood by smiling and open-mouthed, twisting up the hairwhich invariably came down when she flew out into the street on anyerrand; and little Milly, familiar to the place, actually took theindependent step of going to the window, and chirruping to the canarywhich hung above that geranium forest, and was the best singer in allComlie, not even excepting the Minister's bullfinch, a strange andforeign bird."Dinna think I'm wanting anything from you, Miss Marjory. The worst o'puir folk is that they're aye wanting. Na, na, it was only for a sighto' your face, which does a poor body good, and to read ye my Willie'sletter. Jenny, ye taupie, bring me Willie's letter. I can maistly say itoff by heart, but Miss Heriot will like to see it, and I might forgetsomething. Eh, I'm a happy woman! The captain o' the 'William andMary's' dead out yonder (pointing her thumb over her shoulder, which wasthe way or indicating distance in Comlie), and Willie's to bring theboat home. It's as good as a ship to him; for ance a captain aye acaptain, and his owners are no the men to put him back in a mate'splace.""I am very glad to hear of Willie's promotion," said Marjory; "was thecaptain a Comlie man?""Eh, you'll think me awfu' hard-hearted," said Mrs. Patterson, struckwith compunction, and pausing with her large horn spectacles in herhand; "but you canna suppose I would have spoke as free and been asthankfu' if he had been a Comlie man. Na, na, if another house in thetown had been mourning I would have held my peace. I've had troubleenough myself to have mair feeling; but he's no frae Comlie nornearhand. He's a Dundee man, and I ken naething about him. His name wasBrown, like mony mair, and he's no even married that I ever heard tellof, and it's to be hoped he's in a better place."With this the new captain's mother dismissed the old one, and put on herbig spectacles. "It's dated Riga, the fourteenth February, for that'sthe port where they were bound. 'My dear mother, I hope you and Jenny'sin good health as this leaves me. Many and many a time I think of youand the cosy little room, and the flower, and the canary-bird--' Blessthe laddie," said Mrs. Patterson, stopping abruptly, "he had aye thekindest heart!"The reader probably, however, will not be so much interested in thisletter as Marjory was, who listened and made her comments with thoroughsympathy, feeling quite relieved, as was Willie's mother, by the factthat the dead captain was not a Comlie man. Dundee was large and vague,and far away, and was able enough to mourn her own dead. But as theywent down the stairs after their visit was over, Marjory said to herlittle sister, "We shall be too late for luncheon at home; are youhungry, dear? I think we might go and dine with Aunt Jean.""I am a little hungry," Milly confessed, not without a blush."Then run and tell Betty we are coming, and I will go on to the Manse;you can come after me or stay at Aunt Jean's, as you like.""Walk slow, May, and I will make up to you," cried little Milly, who ranoff instantly like a gleam of sunshine, her long fair hair fluttering inthe breeze, anxious to be absent as short a time as possible from hersister's side. Marjory went on slowly making her royal progress throughher dominions, casting a smile now and then through the low windows onthe ground floor, stopping to nod and say a passing word to some one onan outside stair. The doctor, setting out in his gig on some distantvisit, jumped down and crossed the street to speak to her, to ask forMr. Heriot and Mr. Charles, and tell her how his patients were, of manyof whom she had a secondary charge, if not as consulting physician, yetwith a responsibility almost as great. "James Tod, poor lad, would bethe better of some books," the doctor said, "and you're a betterdeceiver than I am, Miss Heriot; you might persuade old Mrs. Little thatyour father has some rare wine in his cellar, wine she could not get tobuy.""You pay me a charming compliment," said Marjory. "Could you not cheather yourself with all your powers?""She laughed in my face," said the doctor, who was young, and not veryrich, "and asked me how I could get finer wines than other folk? Shewas sure I might spend my siller better. And poor little Agnes dyingbefore my eyes!""Will she die?""Don't ask me," said the too tender-hearted doctor, springing into hisgig again. He was too sensitive to be a doctor, his wife said. As thegig drove away, some one else came up taking off his hat with profoundrespect. This was young Mr. Hepburn who lived in the house with the irongates, and was the only unemployed person in Comlie. He was a young mantolerably well off, and more than tolerably good-looking, who had beenbrought up in a desultory way, was more accomplished than any otherindividual within twenty miles, did not in the least know what to dowith himself, and was treated by Marjory with mingled kindness andcondescension, as a clever schoolboy is sometimes treated by a younglady. For his part, Hepburn admired Marjory as he had never admiredanyone else in his life. He was three or four years her junior, and hethought he was in love with, nay, adored her. The sight of her he saidwas as sunshine in the dreary silent place; and he had said this sooften that it had come to Marjory's ears. It was not very original, andshe had thought it impertinent, and treated him with more loftycondescension than ever."Oh, Mr. Hepburn," she said holding out her hand to him; "I did not knowyou were here. Some one told me you had gone abroad. I should have askedyou to come to us sometimes at Pitcomlie, and bring your music, had Iknown. Not that we are very lively--""Pitcomlie is a great deal better than lively," said the young man. "Iam not of such a frivolous mind as to be always looking for amusement.You know, Miss Heriot, how glad I am always to be there.""But amusement is a very good thing," said Marjory. "Indeed, it is badfor young people to be without it. When Milly is a little older, Iintend to make papa give balls and be very lively. I have always thoughtit a most essential part of training. I hope you go on with your music,and practice as much as you used to do?""I don't practice at all in the ordinary sense of the word," said youngHepburn, with an annoyance he could not conceal. Marjory had Scotchprejudices and many old-fashioned notions, and it was her convictionthat a man with an immortal soul who "practised" three or four hours aday was a phenomenon to be looked on with something like contempt. Girlsdid it, poor things! not being able to help themselves--but a man! Thisyoung woman, though she thought herself enlightened, was a tissue ofprejudices, and we do not in the least defend her old world ways ofthinking. She sang very sweetly herself, with a voice which was veryflexible and true, but only moderately cultivated; and she thought ofmusic as a pleasant thing to fill up stray corners, but not as aninspiration or occupation of life. And when she kindly asked Mr. Hepburnto come and bring his music, what she meant was undoubtedly contempt."I don't mean to use any word I ought not to use," said Marjory, withher gracious smile, "but I hope you keep it up, that and your drawing.It is good to have such resources when one has only a quiet life to lookforward to. Of course a gentleman has many ways of occupying himself;but I am so sorry my education has been neglected. When I am dull, thereis scarcely anything I can do but read.""I should not think you were ever dull," said Hepburn, with adoringlooks."Not very often, just now; but some time probably I shall be, and then Ishall envy you your resources. Will you dine with us at Pitcomlieto-morrow, Mr. Hepburn? I fear we shall be quite alone; but if you willtake the trouble to come--and bring your--""I will come with the greatest pleasure," said the young man,precipitately, drowning that last objectionable request. He would takeno music, he vowed, for any inducement which might be offered him. Hisright hand would make an effort to forget its cunning. He would givehimself up to riding and shooting, and trudge about the ploughed fieldsin leather gaiters, like her father, and make a boor of himself, by wayof proving to her that he was not a schoolboy nor a dilettante. This hevowed to himself as she went on smiling, and little Milly passed himlike a gleam of light, rushing after her sister. How unlike these twowere to anything else far or near! Marjory, with her little sister, waslike a deep-hearted rose, not full blown, yet perfect--one of thoseroses which you can look down into, as into a lovely nest of colour andfragrance--with a tiny little bud just showing the pink on the samestem. Young Hepburn had a great deal of superficial poetry about him,and this was the image which came into his mind. Not full blown--keepingthe form of a bud, deep, many-folded, odorous as the very soul ofSummer. That was the similitude which best expressed Marjory Heriot tohis mind.And she, laughing softly at him, wondering to herself what God couldmean by making such men, deciding within herself that he would have madea nice sort of girl, pleasant and rather loveable, went on to the Manse,which indeed had been her destination all along.CHAPTER III.The minister of Comlie was an old man who had held that appointment fora great many years. In many respects he was like a traditional Scotchminister, but in others he did not come up to that ideal. He hadbaptized the entire body of his parishioners, and married a great manyof them, but he was not the genial, kindly old soul who is ordinarilyconceived of as filling that position. When he walked through the townthe children did not run after him, nor seek sweetmeats in his pockets.Any boy or girl in Comlie who had entertained that fond delusion wouldhave been fixed to the earth by the Doctor's frown, and repented, allhis or her life after, the profane thought and word. Dr. Murray was aman addicted to literature, full of Biblical criticism, great inexegesis--a man who had been Moderator of the Assembly, and thus reachedthe highest honour of which the incumbent of a Scottish parish iscapable. After this a great calm in respect to distinctions and worldlyadvantages had been visible in him--he had contemned them gently with abenevolent superiority. His spirit had been, as indeed it ought to havebeen, in a professional point of view, rather that of Solomon than ofAlexander; no new world to conquer had occupied his thoughts, but only asense of that completion and fulness which must always be more or lesssad. The thing that hath been is that which shall be, he said. He hadeverything the world could give him, and now there was no more to wishfor. But this sense of having attained the highest honour that earthcould afford, if somewhat depressing, had also a great deal ofsatisfaction in it. No doubt his career was over, and all its splendourand majesties were among the things that had been; but yet he had theprofound and tranquillizing conviction that he had not lived in vain.Not in any way had he lived in vain. He had written the article onHyssop in the Encyclopdia Britannica, and he had had a large share inthe Popular Commentary on the Bible, which was considered the very bestauthority upon Eastern customs and geography, and the localpeculiarities which throw light upon the sacred text. His name was oneof those which had been connected from the very first with the"Christian Herald," and it was he who wrote all the articles, signedAlpha, in that well-conducted magazine. Therefore it will be at onceperceived that his life had been well worth living, that he was not inany respect an unsuccessful man, and that the evening of his days mightwell breathe forth a certain gentle satisfaction. Comlie was very proudof the doctor, and even Fife was proud of him. When he heard thatMarjory was in the drawing-room, he laid down the book he was readingand put a marker in it, and after five minutes or so had elapsed--for itdid not suit his dignity to make any hasty movements--he left hislibrary to see the young lady whom he felt a great interest in, as healways said. "She has too much imagination and a hasty mind that runsaway with her sometimes; but she has fine instincts," he would say. TheManse stood on a knoll, and the drawing-room faced the sea. It was anold-fashioned room, with small windows set in the deep walls, andfurniture which was somewhat dark and solemn. "You'll stay and take abit of dinner with us, May, now you're here," Mrs. Murray was saying asthe doctor came in. "It's no often we get a sight of you, and there'snobody the Minister likes so well to see. Milly, my dear, take off yourhat, and tell Margaret, the table-maid, to get out some of theapple-puffs you're aye so fond of. Marjory likes them too.""But, dear Mrs. Murray, we are going to Aunt Jean," said Marjory. "Iwill come back another day. Now the weather is mending, I shall be oftenin Comlie. We are all very well, Doctor, thank you, but wondering not tosee you. Uncle Charles has some great argument, which, he says, he keepsin his pocket ready for you. I don't know what it is about. I thoughtperhaps you would come up quietly to dinner to-morrow, and then youcould have it out?""We'll do that, my dear," said Mrs. Murray briskly; but the doctor wasmore formal in his ways."Mr. Charles is no contemptible antagonist," he said; "it will be ourold question about mortifications. I know I am on the unpopular side,but a man who has convictions must make up his mind to that sometimes.Did you say to-morrow? I do not remember what engagements I have, but ifMrs. Murray says so----""Hoots, doctor, you've no engagements," said lively little Mrs. Murray;"you forget you're at home in Comlie, and no in Edinburgh, where, to mytribulation, we go out to our dinner every night. You may laugh, butit's no laughing matter, May, my dear, and a destruction to my bestgown--no to say to all my habits. You may wear point lace when it'sdirty, but point lace is too good for a poor Minister's wife, and mysuit of Mechlin is as black as if I had swept the chimney in it; and asfor working a stocking, or doing any rational thing after one of theirlate dinners! But we'll come to you, my dear.""I am afraid we are going to have a storm," said the doctor; "the windis blowing strong up the Firth, and I doubt we'll have a dirty night.Nothing will teach these fishers to be careful when they're getting whatthey think a good haul. I have a great mind, when I see the glassfalling and the wind rising, to send old Tammas to ring the church bellsand warn their boats.""And why not do it?" said Marjory, with a slight start which waspeculiar to her when she heard anything that roused her interest. "Therecould not be a better use for church bells. Do it, doctor! If the menknew, it might save some of these poor fellows. Poor Jamie Horsburgh,for instance; I saw Jean to-day, and it almost broke my heart.""Her that was laundry-maid at Pitcomlie?" said Mrs. Murray. "Ah, poorthing! and what she is to do to gain her bread with that bit infant ofhers? But I do not advise you, doctor, to set any newfangled plan agoingfor ringing the bells. Nobody would pay any attention. They would say:'What does the minister know about the weather? Let him bide at hisbooks, and leave the winds to us.' That's what they would say. And ifyou take my opinion, I cannot but think they would have justice on theirside.""I will not risk it, my dear," said the doctor; "they are a pig-headedrace, like all the partially educated. I wish there was a higherstandard of education in our schools. Reading and writing are very well,but a little attention to the common phenomena of the elements would bea great matter--as I said to Mr. Tom the last time he was here--""Speaking of your brother Tom," said Mrs. Murray briskly; "what is thisI hear about Charlie? A second boy, and him not above two years anda-half married! My certy, but they're losing no time; and I hope bothdoing well?""Oh yes," said Marjory, with a shade of indifference stealing over herface; "people always do well in those circumstances, don't they? Fancyour Charlie with a family of children about him! I think it spoils ayoung man. It makes them grand-fatherly--not to say grandmotherly--andknowing about domestic matters. Charlie, of all people in the world!but it cannot be helped, or put a stop to, I suppose?""Whisht, my dear, whisht; that's a strange thing for a woman to say.""Is it?" said Marjory, with a sudden blush. "What I meant was that thethought of Charlie turned into an old wife--Charlie knowing all aboutnurseries, and what to give a baby when it has a cold--is so very queer.I don't like it; Charlie was always my pet brother. Poor fellow! and heso far away!""I have no doubt he's very happy--as he ought to be with a nice wife andtwo bonnie bairns," said Mrs. Murray, a little annoyed at Marjory'santi-matrimonial views; but this remark passed unnoticed in the doctor'squestion about what she was reading, which changed the character of theconversation. Mrs. Murray was not booky, as she herself said; she wastoo old for anything but novels; and though she had great enjoyment ofthese on a wet afternoon, by the fireside, or when the doctor was busywith his sermon, she did not say much about them, and kept them in thebackground with a certain sense of weakness. Marjory, on the contrary,discussed her reading with some eagerness, while the old lady and littleMilly cooed and whispered to each other in the background; the child'sfair hair pressed lovingly against the net border--white and softlyplaited--of Mrs. Murray's cap. And so long was the discussion carried onthat Marjory at last sprang up suddenly and held out her hand in alarmto take leave, when the bell rang for the early dinner, which remindedher how time was passing."Aunt Jean will be waiting for us," she cried, with a compunction whichwas quickened by the well-known tradition of punctuality whichdistinguished the Hay-Heriots."Well, well, my dear, it will do her no harm for once," said Mrs.Murray, going to the door with the visitors, and opening it for themwith her own hands. She came out to the step to see them on their way,while her husband stood behind. "Be sure you don't sit too long withMiss Jean--for there's a storm coming up, as the doctor says; and comesoon back again," said the old lady, smiling and waving her hand, whileher cap-strings wantoned in front of her in the rising wind. "Thatlassie has strange notions," she said, as she came in and shut the door."I wish I saw her with a good man and bairns of her own.""She's a fine girl," said the doctor, turning along the passage to hisdressing-room, to wash his hands before dinner. These words did not atall resemble in sense the other expression of applause, "a finewoman"--which they resemble in sound. Dr. Murray did not mean to implythat he found May "fine" in physical development--belle femme, as theFrench say, with a similar signification. He meant that she wasdelightful, charming, the best specimen he knew of everything a youngwoman should be.We are obliged to confess, however, that it was with a somewhatundignified precipitation that the two sisters crossed the wide streetto the dwelling-place of their old aunt. Miss Jean Hay-Heriot wasgrand-aunt to the younger generation. Her father, the Laird ofPitcomlie, was grandfather of the present Laird: but as she had been theyoungest of her family, she was scarcely ten years older than hernephew. She had lived in this gabled house for five and forty years,since the time when, still a young woman, she had given up the world indisgust, after five or six years of wandering in places where loneladies resort to--Bath, and Cheltenham, and Harrowgate--for in thosedays it had not become the custom to go abroad. Five and forty years!What a waste of time to look back upon, and what a monotonous,unfeatured expanse, May thought, who sometimes pondered over her oldaunt's fate as one chapter among many of the phenomena of feminineexistence. But to Miss Jean this waste of years was not so unfeatured asto her young relative. There seemed no reason why she should not go onfor ever in the same active yet tranquil way. From her window in thegable she superintended all that Comlie did, every stranger who cameinto it (they were not many), all the mild visiting that took placeamong the higher classes, and the family movements of the lower,quarrels, flirtations, marriages, catastrophes of all kinds. She wasseated in this same window, when Marjory, a little flushed with haste,hurriedly gathering up her riding-habit, and finding it much in the way,became visible running over from the Manse, Milly close behind, with herlong hair streaming. Miss Jean quietly smiled to herself, and preparedfor tempest. It roused her up sometimes, and gave her a pleasantexhilaration, to get an opportunity of setting "that girl of Thomas's"right."Quick, quick, Miss Marjory," said Betty, at the door. The door was inthe gable, and opened into a square hall, which was underneath thedrawing-room. "Quick, like good bairns, and dinna keep your auntywaiting. The broth's ready to come up, and Jessie making a terrible fykein the kitchen--and Miss Jean's no pleased."She threw open the door of a little bedroom at the end of the passage asshe spoke--it was thought convenient in that region to have sleepingrooms on the ground-floor--and began instantly to take off Milly's outerjacket, which was worn over her long riding-skirt. May smoothed her ownhair with a trepidation which was quite unusual to her. It was brightbrown hair, not so blond as Milly's, but still full of soft colour,though not red, nor even golden. Her eyes were brown too, large andserious, but capable of lighting up with searching golden gleams. Shewas softly coloured in every way, with an evanescent bloom that came andwent, and the most changeable of faces. Sometimes strangers thought heralmost plain, when her upper lip fixed on her lower with the resolutelook she sometimes had, and her eyes looked straight before her full ofsilent thought. But most people who knew Marjory held it impossible thatshe could ever be plain. She smoothed her hair as best she could, inher hurry, for those were the days when young ladies were expected tohave smooth and shining hair--and put her tall hat and her riding gloveson the table, and pulled out her handkerchief from her bodice. "Am Itidy, Betty; shall I do?" asked, with tremulous accents, the young womanwho half an hour before had felt herself princess of Comlie. All thesepleasant pretensions failed before the tribunal of Miss Jean."Oh, ay, Miss Marjory, you'll do," cried anxious Betty; and attended asever closely by her little sister, Marjory ran upstairs. Miss Jean satin the end window, her favourite seat of inspection--and all her"borders," which were of blonde, not so closely put together as those ofMrs. Murray, were quivering round her old face. "So you've come at last,Miss May," she said. "It's a great honour to my humble house, and folkthat are gratified with the visits of their betters must be content towait.""Oh, Aunt Jean, I am very sorry! We ought to have come here at once,instead of going to the Manse--""Far be it from me to say what a young lady like you should do. I'mnothing but an old-fashioned person myself. In my days the young werebrought up to obedience and consideration of other folks' ways. But I'mnot a learned man like the doctor, nor a whillie-wha like the doctor'swife. I'm of the old Hay-Heriot stock, that always spoke their mind.Betty, bring ben the broth--if our young ladies can sup broth. Theytell me my nephew Charlie has brought a grand cook to the house, farabove our old-fashioned Scots dishes.""Indeed, Aunt Jean, it is the old dishes she is famous for," said May,very conciliatory. "She says she knows nothing about kickshaws, and oneof the things I specially wanted was to ask you for the old familyreceipt for shortbread, which you always promised me, and yourparticular fish and sauce, which Uncle Charles says is the best he evertasted.""I suppose you think you can win me over with your nonsense about fishand sauce," said Miss Jean. "Set Charlie up with his cooks and hisnewfangled ways! In my days a man ate what was set before him, and saidhis grace, and was thankful. The mistress of a house, with all herfamily to provide for, might be excused for giving her mind to it; but,ugh! a man studying what he's to put into his vile stomach! If there's athing I cannot abide--Dinner's ready! You need not tell me that; it'sbeen ready any time this twenty minutes. You may say to Jess I'm trulysorry for her, but it's our young ladies' way. Go first, bairn, and goquick, for I'll not wait another moment, if it was for the Queenherself."Thus adjured, Milly ran downstairs, followed by her sister. The old ladybrought up the rear, with her big cane. She was a little old woman overseventy, in a large cap with many ribbons and borders of broad blonde,which waved about her withered face as she moved. It was a small face,much shrivelled up, but lighted with two blazing sparks of light, deeplysunk within the eaves and folds of her eyelids--eyes which could seewhat happened a mile off, and burn through and through any unfortunatewho was subjected to their gaze. She wore a red China crape shawl, veryold, but once very richly embroidered and handsome, on her thinshoulders, and her short footstep and the tap of her cane rang throughthe house as she moved. Everybody within her range increased theirexertions, and moved with doubled activity when the tap of Miss Jean'scane became audible.As for Milly, running on before, her aunt was to her as the exacting,but, on the whole, benevolent fairy who appears in all the tales, whoscolded Cinderella, yet gave her the pumpkin coach, and who had drawersupon drawers full of shreds and patches, strings of beads, bright bitsof silk, everything that was necessary for the dressing of dolls andmaking of needlebooks. The pat-pat of the cane seemed part of the oldlady to Milly's ear, and she was by no means sure that the cane was nota third leg upon which Aunt Jean moved as ordinary mortals did on themore usual complement. No one except Miss Jean said a word as they satdown to table, and Betty, with a speed and noiselessness, which wereborn at once of terror and of long practice, served the broth. Millysaid they were very good, and asked for a little more of them, withoutany perception that she was ungrammatical, and as they were hot andsavoury Miss Jean mollified by degrees."There's one good thing," she said, "that you cannot spoil broth bywaiting. That and porridge should always be well boiled. I hope yourgrand cook knows that among her other accomplishments. But, maybe Millyis above porridge, though her father was brought up upon them, and hisfather before him, and all the best Scots gentry from the days of RobertBruce.""I have a few porridge in a saucer every morning," said Milly, proudly,"and May gives me the rest of the cream after papa's last cup of tea.""A few in a saucer!" Miss Jean retorted, with renewed vehemence. (N.B.The Scotch reader does not need to be informed that porridge is pluralas well as broth.) "I hope, Marjory Hay-Heriot, that you may never haveto give a severe account of the way you've brought up that motherlessbairn.""Cream is not immoral, I hope, aunty?" said Marjory, with rising spirit."Immoral! Luxury's immoral, indulgence is immoral, and they're immoralthat say a word to the contrary," cried the old lady. "Will you tell methat to bring up a fellow-creature to self-indulgence is no a sinfulact? But I never understood the ways of this generation, nor do I wantto understand them. You're all alike--all alike! from Tom's horse-racingto Milly's saucer of parritch--it is the same thing over again. What youplease! and not what's your duty, and the best thing for you in thisworld and the next. Betty, the boiled beef is too plain for these youngladies. Bring it to me, and put the chicken before Miss Marjory. Aqueen may eat a bit of chicken, but the boiled beef's aye good enoughfor me."The fact was that the chicken had been added to the meal, expressly forthe benefit of Marjory and Milly."Bairns are brought up different to what they were in my time," MissJean had said to her cook, benevolently, an hour before. "That chucky'syoung and tender, and they'll like it better than the beef."But all this kindness had been turned to gall by the unfortunate delay.Milly took this as a simple necessity of nature--rustled a little in herchair, and ate her chicken; but Marjory resented the ungraciousreception."I am sorry we have come to trouble you, aunt," she said. "I wouldrather not have anything, thank you; I'm not hungry. The wind is cold,and it has given me a headache. If I might go and sit quiet in thedrawing-room, while you finish your dinner, I should get well again.""The thing for a headache is to eat a meal," said Miss Jean, alarmed."Bring me the chicken, Betty, till I cut Miss Marjory a bit of thebreast. You cannot carve; that's why you want to go away. In my day,carving was part of a lady's education--and cooking too, for thatmatter. My own mother, as good a woman as ever stepped, took lessonsfrom Mrs. Glass in Edinburgh. I had not that advantage myself, but Iknow how to divide a chicken. And, Betty, bring in the apple-tart.We'll all go up to the drawing-room by-and-bye, and before ye go yeshall have a cup of tea."Thus the storm fell a little, but still continued to growl at intervals;however, when the dinner was over, and May took her place in the squaregable, her headache--if she had one--had disappeared. Miss Jean'sdrawing-room was a curious room, stretching the whole width of thehouse, and wider at the back than at the other end. The narrower partwas the gable. It had an end window looking out upon the street, and oneon the east side, from which you could see the line of reddish rocksrounding off towards the point on which stood Pitcomlie; the whitemansion-house of the present day shining in the sunshine; the old house,with its high, peaked roof and half-ruined tourelles standing up on thetop of the cliff hard by, and the sea breaking in a white lineunderneath upon the rocks. Though she professed no sentiment, thatwindow which commanded Pitcomlie was dear to Miss Jean's heart.On the south side of the room was another window, looking straight outupon the sea, from which you could see far off the dim lion couchant ofArthur's Seat, and sometimes a ghostly vision of the Calton Hill, withits pillars, and all kinds of cloudy pageants and phantasmagoria of theelements. It was a grand view, Miss Jean allowed; but she preferred thegable window looking down upon the High Street of Comlie; and here, too,Marjory betook herself instinctively. The Firth, with its splendours,was at her command any day, but so was not this little centre ofhumanity. That curiosity about her neighbours and their doings, whichwas sharp and bitter in Miss Jean, had a warmer development in Marjory,who was young, and thought well of humanity in general; but probably itwas the same sentiment. She placed herself on the old-fashionedwindow-seat, and looked out while she answered all the old lady'squestions.Comlie High Street was very quiet, especially at this tranquilafter-dinner hour, when the little world rested after its meal. Thechildren had returned to the school, and such men as had any business todo had gone back to it till the evening. Marjory watched young Hepburnwalking up and down slowly, something between a spy and a sentinel,keeping watch, as she very well knew, for her own re-appearance. Shesmiled with a certain gentle contempt as she watched him, moving slowlyacross the unbroken light in the still street. What odd fancies boystake into their heads! What good could it do him to wait for her?When Hepburn disappeared, another figure became visible coming the otherway--a man with a clump of his own shadow about his feet, whichgradually disengaged itself as he "came east," and stalked along by hisside in a portentous lengthened line. The changes of this shadowdiverted her as she sat talking to Aunt Jean. "Yes, there had beenanother letter about Charlie's second baby--a note from Mrs. Charlesherself--well, no, not a very nice letter--a consequential littlepersonage, I think, aunty; as proud of her baby as if it was any virtueof hers." And here Marjory gave a little laugh, not at Mrs. Charles, butat the dark shadow of the man approaching, which lay along the causeway,and moved so, as if it pushed itself along, lying on its side. After shehad laughed, Marjory, half ashamed of herself, looked at the man, andsaw he was one of the porters from the nearest railway station, and thenthat he was approaching the house. She raised herself up with a littlethrill of--something--yes, surprise, and more than surprise--thoughprobably it was only some parcel for Aunt Jean arrived by the railway,which was ten miles off. By the time he had reached the door, and hadknocked heavily with his hand, May was sure that it was a parcel for heraunt, but nevertheless was aware of a little fluttering at her heart."Do you often get things by the railway, aunty?" she asked."Me get things by the railway? You forget I'm a lone old woman, and noacquainted with all your new-fangled ways. Not me. When I want anythingnot to be had in Comlie, which is not often, it comes in the boat toAnstruther, as was always our way, and then by the road, or private handwhen there's an opportunity. Railway! said she?--What's a' this,Betty?--what's a' this? A letter? Give it to me, you taupie, and make nofuss. Oh! for Miss Marjory! My certy! Miss Marjory's in great requestwhen her letters come following her here.""Eh, Miss Jean! it's what they call a telegraph--it's come from therailway at Kinnucher, wi' a man and horse. Eh, I'm awfu' feared it's illnews!"A telegram is always alarming to those who are unfamiliar with suchstartling messages; and even in these accustomed days there are fewwomen who open one without a tremor. But at the time of which we write,they were unusual and inevitably meant something tragical. Betty stoodgaping with excitement and terror, looking on, and Miss Jean let herknitting drop on her knee, and turned her sharp eyes towards her niece,while little Milly, pressing close to her sister, interposed her blondhead almost between Marjory and the brief, fated letter. Somehow, as sheread it, she felt in the suddenness of the shock a conviction that shehad known it all along, mingled with a curious confused self-reproachfor the levity of her thoughts about that man's shadow. She read it, andher head seemed to buzz and shoot as if a hundred wheels had startedinto motion, and then stood still. She looked round at her aunt, as ifacross a sudden distance at once of time and of space; all the colourfled from her cheeks, and her voice changed like her feelings. "Tom hashad a bad accident," she said."God bless us! Marjory, you're trying to break it to me quietly; theboy's dead.""No!" said Marjory, with a slight shiver. "A bad accident; read it,aunty. And, Milly, run quick and get on your things."Miss Jean, sobered too in a moment, took the terrible missive, which, toher ignorant eyes, looked something diabolical. It was from somebody inEngland she made out, and was worded with what she felt to be cruelconciseness. "Tom has had a bad accident; thrown from his horse;symptoms dangerous. He wishes you to tell his father; and to come to himat once.""It may be a lie," said Miss Jean in a low voice, and trembling; "verylikely it's a lie. There's no beginning and no ending; and the man, ifit is a man, has not signed his name.""Oh, I know his, name; he is one of Tom's friends. It is no lie!" saidMarjory. And then she added, trembling too: "Aunt Jean, don't you feel,like me, that you always knew this would be the end?""The end! Who's speaking of the end?" cried Miss Jean impatiently; andthen, all at once, she fell crying and sobbing. "Oh, poor Thomas, poorThomas; that was so very proud of his boy! Who's to tell him?""Will I run for the Minister?" said Betty, who had come back withMarjory's hat in her hand, the tears streaming down her cheeks, and allthe excitement of a great family event in her mind."The Minister is the right person to tell the father such ill news,"said Miss Jean; "and it's best to have him at hand, whatever happens.Betty, you can run--"Marjory put up her hand to stop the eager messenger. In spite ofherself, even at that moment of excitement, a vision of Dr. Murrayclearing his throat, and preparing his way by a little speech about thevicissitudes of life gleamed before her. She could see him hemming andtaking out his handkerchief with a look as tragically important as if hewere the chief actor in the scene."No!" she said; "not the Minister; send down to John Horsburgh's to getout our horses, Betty. I will tell him myself.""You're not equal to it, my poor bairn.""He will take it best from me; and it's Tom's wish," said Marjory,putting on her hat. She felt the tears rising to her eyes; but this wasnot a moment to let them fall."I doubt if Thomas will take it as he ought to take it," said Miss Jean;"he's a good man, but he's always had his own way. Perhaps, as you say,Marjory, it is best to keep it all in the family, for a man's apt to saywhat he should not say in a sudden trouble. And I'm sorry I was so illto you about keeping me waiting; what was ten minutes, here or there? OhMay, my bonnie lamb! the eldest son!"And with this Miss Jean, melted by the bad news into use of the pet namewhich had scarcely passed her lips since Marjory was a child, gave herniece a sudden embrace, by putting her thin hands on May's two arms, andtouching her chin with her own withered cheek. Very seldom was she movedto such an outburst of affection. The wave of her blonde borders acrossMarjory's face was the most passionate demonstration she was capable of;but when her nieces had gone, Miss Jean sat down at the window whichlooked to Pitcomlie, with a genuine ache in her old heart. "Eh, thebonnie laddie he was!" she said to herself; "eh, the stout and strongyoung man! There never was an heir cut off that I mind of in our familybefore. But Thomas was aye foolish, very foolish; and many a time I'vetold him what indulgence would come to. Lord help us all, both livingand dying! It's aye a special blessing of Providence, whatever happens,that Marjory's a courageous creature; and that Charlie's babies are bothsons."Thus the old woman comforted herself, who was near the ending of allmortal vicissitude; and Pitcomlie lay fair and calm in the sun, greatlyindifferent who might come or go--one or another, what did it matter tothe old house, which had outlasted so many generations? what did itmatter to the calm world, which takes all individual sorrows so easily?But to some atoms of humanity what a difference it made! How dark theheavens had grown all at once, and how clouded the sun!Marjory said not a word all the way home, as she rode with her littlesister by her side. How they had chattered as they came; and how Millyhad called "May! May!" a dozen times in a minute; the prelude of everysentence. Milly kept as close to her sister now as she could, andsometimes stroked her skirt with her little hand and the whip in it, intoken of silent sympathy. There was urgent need to reach home; butMarjory did not go fast. It was no easy task she had before her. Herfather was fond of her she knew; perhaps more fond than of either ofhis sons; but his heir, with all his extravagances, with all his follyand wildness, had been his delight and pride. There are some women whoare saved from all the shocks and pains of life; everyone around theminstinctively standing forth to protect them, and shield off the blow;but there are some, on the other hand, to whom it comes natural toreceive the sharpest and first thrusts of adversity, and blunt the spearin their own bosoms before it penetrates any other. Marjory was one ofthis class,--a class instantly recognized and put to use by the instinctof humanity. It had seemed natural to Tom to put this duty upon her;natural to Tom's friend to communicate it to her, without any attempt atbreaking the news. And she herself accepted her office, simply, feelingit natural too.CHAPTER IV.The house of Pitcomlie lay very still and quiet in the fitful sunshine,when the daughters of the family reached its open door. The door stoodalways open, unsuspicious, disclosing the way into its most privatecorners to any comers. It had nothing to conceal. At this hour in theafternoon, it was exceptionally still. The gentlemen were out, theservants all absorbed into their own part of the house, and not a stirnor sound announced the presence of a large household. The brightness ofthe day was clouded, but yet held its own by moments, the sun coming outnow and then with double brilliancy from the edge of the clouds whichwere driven over its face one by one. As Marjory and her little sisterrode up the avenue, one of those great masses of cloud had floated up,and threw a heavy shadow over the house, and the blue broad sea beyond;but as they alighted at the door, the sun burst forth again, blazingupon the wide open doorway."Is my father at home, Rob?" asked Marjory of the groom who came to takeher horse."The laird's out, ma'am, and so's Mr. Charles. They're baith away wast,"said Rob, jerking his thumb over his shoulder.Marjory stood musing on the steps before she would go in; she did notknow whether to seek her father "away wast," or to wait for him. Howstill the house was, so unsuspecting, so serene and peaceful! It seemedtreacherous to go into it with a secret so deeply affecting itsexistence in her hands. Somehow it seemed to Marjory's excited fancythat she was about to give a blow without warning, without preparation,to some one whose smiling unalarmed countenance looked trustfully up ather. It seemed a treachery even to know it, and above all to go onknowing it, keeping the secret, into the old gentle family house thatfeared nothing. When she went upstairs she changed her dress, and gaveher maid instructions to pack a few necessaries for her."My brother has met with an accident," she said, as calmly as she could.To say it even in this form relieved her mind. She did not feel such atraitor to the kindly old house.Mr. Heriot fortunately came back as soon as her preparations were made,and now the worst part of her duty was to come. She ran down and met himat the door."What made you so late, May?" he said, his face brighteninginvoluntarily at sight of her."I was detained," she said; and came out and loitered in front of thedoor, playing with the dogs, who always accompanied him. He was asunsuspicious as his house. If he had been anxious in the morning, he hadthrown his anxieties off. He pointed out to his daughter the good pointsof a pointer puppy, which, large-limbed and imbecile, came roving roundfrom the stables, scenting the arrival of the others."He'll make a grand dog before September," he said, "when he's grown andtrained. Tom will be delighted with him."May interrupted him hastily, for she was choking with the news."Come round to the cliff, papa, there is a storm brewing," she said.Unsuspicious, he went with her. They took what Mr. Heriot called "aturn" round the soft lawn which surrounded that side of the house. Itwas too much exposed for flowers or even shrubs, but green and smooth asvelvet. The sea dashed with a muttering suppressed roar on the beachbeneath. It was of a steely blue, sometimes flashing in the gleams ofsunshine, sometimes leaden under the shadow. Towards the east, on thevery angle of the coast, stood the old mansion house, tall and narrow,with its tourelles--all but one tower, which adjoined the present house,was ruinous and roofless--but it was draped by branches which burst outfrom the broken walls, and a wild luxuriance of ivy. The existing housestood lower, and looked warm, and peaceful, and safe, like the presentunder the protection of the past. Marjory and her father made their turnround and round, she talking against time, not knowing how to introduceher subject. At last, as they turned to come back, she pointed out tohim one of those sudden dramatic changes of the clouds."Look, papa, how quickly the lights change. It was in sunshine just now,and how black everything is already! It makes one feel eerie. It is likea cloud of misfortune enveloping the old house."She was foolishly in hopes that he would have taken up this metaphoricalstrain, and thus given her an opening to say what she had to say."Nothing more natural, my dear," said Mr. Heriot. "The clouds aredriving up from the mouth of the Firth. It's an ill sign when they comeand go so fast. I hope those foolish fellows from Comlie shore will bewarned in time.""Oh, papa," cried Marjory, seizing this opening. "It is dreadful tothink how seldom we are warned in time! How we go on to the very edge ofa precipice, and then--""Phoo!" said Mr. Heriot, "if a man does not keep a look-out before him,it's nobody's fault but his own."Thus the door was shut upon her again. She looked at him with a kind ofdespair, and put both her hands round his arm."Papa," she said, "I think we have had a very tolerably happylife--nothing very much to find fault with. Everything has gone oncomfortably. We have had no great troubles, no misfortunes to speakof--""I don't know what you call misfortunes," said her father. "That affairof the Western Bank was anything but pleasant.""It was only money, papa.""Only money! What would you have, I should like to know? Only money!May, my dear, to be a sensible girl as you are, you sometimes speak verylike a haverel. Loss of money is as great a misfortune as can befall afamily. It brings a hundred other things in its train--loss ofconsideration, troubles of all kinds. Personal losses may hurt more forthe moment, but so far as the family is concerned--""Oh, don't say so," cried Marjory. "Papa, I am afraid there are thingsthat hurt a great deal more. I have heard--something about Tom--""What about Tom?" he said, turning upon her with an eagerness muchunlike his former calm."It may not perhaps be so bad as appears. He has had--an accident," shesaid, breathless and terrified.To her surprise, the anxiety in her father's face calmed down."An accident! is that all?" he said, with a long-drawn breath of relief."All! papa!""Well, well," said Mr. Heriot, half-impatiently, "you think I've nofeeling. You are mistaken, May. But that boy, that brother of yours, hasbeen in worse scrapes--scrapes that no doctor could mend. However,that's not the question. How did you hear? and when did it happen? andwhat is it? Arm, or leg, or collar-bone? I know how lads lamethemselves. Hunting is all very well in moderation, but these young menpay dear for it. They think no more of breaking a limb than if it wasthe branch of a rotten tree.""But, papa, I am afraid it is, perhaps, more serious than you think,"faltered Marjory, half rendered hopeful by his ease, half frightened byindifference."Never fear," said Mr. Heriot; "women always think worse of such thingsthan they deserve. Tom's not the lad to come to harm that way. It's longor the de'il dee at a dykeside."Then a moment of silence followed. She felt as if her tongue clove tothe roof of her mouth. She was bewildered by her father's strangelevity. She strolled round the cliff slowly, as if she were in a dream,not feeling sure for one dizzy moment whether her senses might not havedeceived her, whether the telegram might not be some mere delusion andher father right. He was so confident and easy in his confidence--andsurely on these kind of subjects, at least, he must know better than shedid. But then, to be sure, it was not on her judgment the matter rested.It was Tom's friend who had communicated news which nobody's opinioncould change; and already the lights were lengthening and the afternoonpassing away."Papa, you will not mind my going to him," she said, hurriedly. "Hewishes it; he has sent for me. And I wish very much to go at once.""He has sent for you?""For all of us. He says, 'Tell my father--' I fear, I fear, he must bevery bad. Oh! my poor Tom, my poor Tom!""You are talking nonsense," said her father, letting her hand drop fromhis arm with a certain impatience. "Tom might have known better than tomake such an appeal to you. Where is he? And if he were so very bad howcould he have written? Phoo, phoo, May; this fuss and nonsense is notlike you.""It is not my doing," she cried. "Oh! papa, look, the afternoon isflying away, and we shall lose the train."He looked up at the sky as she did, and somehow this practical referenceseemed to alarm him more than all she had said. In the bright, slantingsunshine which suddenly burst upon him at this moment, his face paled assuddenly as if some evil breath had passed over it."The train! I did not think of that. You can order the carriage if youlike," he said. "It is nonsense; but I will put some things into a bag,if I must be foolish and go with you on a fool's errand--""Your things are all ready, papa; I have seen to everything. If we donot miss the train--""I will go round to the stables myself," he said; and then he turnedupon her with a forced smile. "Mind, I think it a fool's errand--afool's errand; but to please you, May--"Marjory stood motionless, as with a harsh little laugh he strode awayfrom her. She could not have borne any more; but when Uncle Charles camesuddenly round the corner of the old house, blown so suddenly round bythe wind, which seemed to sway his long legs and slight, stoopingfigure, there burst from her, too, a little hysterical laugh, whichsomehow seemed to relieve her as tears might have done."What a wind!" said Mr. Charles. "You may laugh, but a slim person hashard ado to stand before it; and rising every moment, May. I should notlike to be on the Firth to-night.""I hope we shall get across," said May, eagerly, "before it is quitedark.""Get across?" said Uncle Charles, in consternation. "Who is going toEdinburgh to-night?""Oh! Uncle Charles, my heart is breaking! Tom has had a terribleaccident. Perhaps he is dying. We must go to him at once. And papa willnot believe me; he will not understand how serious it is.""God bless me!" said Mr. Charles. He made a few sudden steps towards thehouse, and then he came back. "My dear May, there's you to think of.What is it? I'll go myself.""No, no, no," she said. "It was me he sent for. Oh, uncle, quick! bidthem make haste with the carriage; we shall lose the train."When the carriage came round to the door ten minutes after, Mr. Charlesput aside the two travelling bags which had been placed inside, and tookhis place opposite the father and daughter on the front seat."I'm coming too," he said.Mr. Heriot gave vent to another strange little laugh."We had better have Milly in, and Mrs. Simpson, and all the rest," hecried; but he made no further remark or objection. His ruddy, ruralcountenance had paled somehow. It looked as Marjory had seen it after aperiod of confinement in town (town meant Edinburgh more than London tothe Hay-Heriots, though sometimes they went to London too), when thesun-burnt brownness had worn off. He leant back in his corner and didnot speak; he had not even asked where they were going. He seemed eagerto keep up his appearance of indifference; but his heart had failed him.Mr. Charles, however, on the contrary, seemed to feel that all theamusement of the party depended upon him. He kept up a perpetual streamof talk, till the very sound of his voice made Marjory sick."We'll find him drinking beer, like the man in Thackeray's book," saidMr. Charles; "a ruffianly sort of hero in my way of thinking; but that'swhat you like, you young folk. We'll find him drinking beer, I'm saying,May, as well as ever he was. I think I can hear the great laugh he willgive when he sees the whole procession of us coming in."Mr. Heriot was nettled by his brother's interference, yet not disposedto depart from his own rle of indifference."It's a fool's errand," he said; "but you may diminish the procession,Charles, if you like. It will be no procession, if there is only May andme."Mr. Charles made no reply to this; he continued his cheerful talk."It's the penalty of all violent sports," he said; "even your cricketthat such a fuss is made about. There's no risks of that kind with golf,now, for instance; and in my way of thinking, a far nobler game; but asfor horses and hounds, they're simple destruction--in the first place toa man's living, and in the second to his bones.""You never were great across country," said Mr. Heriot, satirically. "Itwas never one of the sins you were inclined to commit. That must betaken into account.""And the consequence is I never had a broken limb," said Mr. Charles;"no surgeon has ever been needed for me; whereas the rest of you havespent, let us say three weeks in the year on an average, in your beds--"With intervals, this kind of talk went on until the travellers hadreached the edge of the stormy Firth, which spread like some hugeboiling cauldron in black and white between them and the misty heightsof Edinburgh. It was late twilight failing into night; but as there wasa moon somewhere, the stormy landscape was held between light and darkin a pale visibleness which had something unearthly in it. Arthur's Seatappeared through the mist like a giant, with huge sullen shouldersturned upon them, and head averted. The boiling Firth was black andcovered with foam.While Marjory sat wrapping her cloak close round her in the mostsheltered corner, her uncle, with the fierce wind catching at his slimlegs, came and leaned over her, and tried what he could, in gaspsbetween the gusts of the storm, to keep up his consolatory remarks."This is nothing, Marjory, my dear; nothing to what it used to be," hesaid in snatches, blown about, now by the wind, now by the lurches ofthe steamer, "when we used to have to go, in a sailingboat, fromKinghorn to Leith. This is nothing, nothing; I have seen the day--"But here being driven first into her lap, and then forced to retreatviolently backwards, in obedience to the next wave, Mr. Charles for themoment succumbed.What a strange tragi-comedy it was! The boats from Comlie shore were outin that merciless storm, and the poor fisher-wives at their windows, ormarching with bare feet on the sharp rocks, were looking out upon thestruggles of their "men" to reach the harbour, which that wildsuppressed light permitted them the additional misery of seeing. On theother hand, far away in the peaceful inland depths of England, TomHeriot was lying tragically gay with fever; sometimes delirious,shouting out all kinds of strange follies in the ear of his friend, whowas no better than himself. While yet between the two the wind made ajest and plaything of Mr. Charles Heriot, seizing him by his legs andtossing him about as in a rough game of ball, taking the words out ofhis mouth, though they were words of wisdom, and dispersing his axiomsto the merciless waves. Even Marjory could not but laugh as she wrappedherself closer in her cloak. She laughed, and then felt the sobsstruggle upward choking into her throat.Then came the long night journey, silent, yet loud, with the perpetualplunging and jarring of the railway, that strange, harsh, prosaicjar--which yet, to those who listen to it all through an anxious nightas May did--is an awful sound. Ordinary wheels and hoofs make a verydifferent impression on the mind; but there is something in themonotonous clang of a railway which sounds unearthly to an excited mind,thus whirled through the darkness. How fast the colourless hedgerows,the dark spectres of trees, the black stretches of country fly past,with now and then a flitting phantasmagoria of lights from some town orvillage; and yet how slow, how lingering, how dreary are the minuteswhich tick themselves out one by one with a desperate persistence andsteadiness! In the faint and uncertain lamplight the face of her fatherdozing uneasily in the corner opposite to her, seemed to Marjory soblanched and worn, that she could scarcely keep herself from watchinghim in alarm, to make sure that he was living and well. Uncle Charleswas at the other end of the carriage, shifting his long legs uneasily,sometimes uttering a dismal groan as he awoke, with a twinge of cramp,to which he was subject. He had filled the carriage with newspapers andrailway books, by way of amusing Marjory."I don't pretend that I can read myself by this unsteady light," hesaid; "but you're young, May, and they'll keep you from thinking."Poor Marjory! it was her youth (she thought) which made her so capableof thinking, and kept from her eyes the broken sleep which broughtmomentary rest to her companions. Thus passed the lingering wearynight.CHAPTER V.After this long journey, to step out into the bright daylight of a Marchmorning--cold, but sunshiny; and into the unfamiliar clean littlestreets of an English country-town, gave the most curious sensation tothe travellers. Marjory stepped out of the carriage like one in a dream.The long sleepless night, the fatigue of the journey, the ache ofanxiety in her mind, seemed to wrap a kind of painful mist about her,through which she saw vaguely the circumstances of the arrival, theunknown figures moving about; the strange houses--some still shutteredand closed up as for the night, while the cheerful stir of early morninghad begun with others. Was it possible that all these unknown people hadslept softly and soundly all that long night through; and knew ofnothing to pluck away their rest from them, or pull their life asunder?The simplest things startled this little weary group as they hurriedalong the quiet sunshiny street. A cheerful red and whitemaid-of-all-work opening the windows, looking out with fresh vacant faceupon them as they passed, looked as if she must have something to tellthem. And so did the milkman clashing with his pails; and the earlyerrandboy stopping in the midst of his whistle to contemplate the twotall old men--Mr. Heriot, with that strangely blanched hue strugglingthrough his brownness--Mr. Charles long and thin, and shaky withfatigue."A clean little place; a clean little place!" the latter was sayingencouragingly to Marjory, as if there was some faint consolation to bedrawn from that fact. It was very unlike Comlie. Some of the houses wereold, with peaked gables and lattice windows, but the line of flat brickbuildings, such as the Scottish mind regards with disdain, with thecleanest of curtains and shutters, and tidy ugly orderliness, filled upthe greater part of the street. The inn to which they were bound had aprojecting sign, upon which the sun shone--a white horse, which swung,and pranced, and creaked in the morning air, over the low deep gatewayby which the house was approached. The travellers were met by a littleblear-eyed ostler, who peered at them anxiously from under the shelterof his hand."For Mr. 'Eriot?" he said, putting up his disengaged hand to hisforehead, by way of salutation."How is he?" cried Marjory, a sudden sickness coming over her; thesickness of suspense which is never so tremendous as when it is about tobe satisfied.The little ostler shrugged his shoulders, and shook his ragged, shaggyhead."I don't know as he's worse nor better," he said. "Much the same, theytell me. He's in the hands o' them doctors, as is enough to kill twentymen. That's why I've come to meet ye, my lady and gentlemen. There's abone-setter in this place as 'ud set him right in a jiffy; you take myword. He's a nice gentleman; he gave me ten bob jist for nothing at all.You make 'em send for Job Turner, my lady. I know him. That's your sortfor broken bones. What am I doing, master? Party for Mr. 'Eriot! nothin'in the world but showing the lady the way."The ostler's speech had been interrupted by the master of the hotel, whocame to the door bowing solemnly, endeavouring to combine the usualsmiling benignity with which he received new guests with the gravitybefitting the occasion."Walk in, gentlemen," he said. "I think I may make bold to say that thenews is good, so far as it goes. We've spent a pretty comfortable night,sir, on the whole--a pretty comfortable night. Perhaps the lady wouldlike to rest a bit afore breakfast. Mr. Fanshawe, Sir, as is with Mr.'Eriot, made sure as you'd come. Your rooms are all ready, and I hope asI'll be able to make you and the lady as comfortable--as comfortable asis to be expected under the circumstances.""Cheer up, May," said Mr. Heriot. It was the first time he had spokensince their arrival. "I told you it would turn out a trifle. You see theboy's better already. Cheer up," said the old man, faltering, andlooking at her with glassy eyes. "We've had a fright, but, thank God,it's over. Cheer up, my bonny May!"For Marjory, so far from cheering up, had sunk down on the first chair,altogether overcome by the suspense and the information, and the senseof still more sickening suspense until she should see with her own eyesand judge how it was.Tom Heriot had been far from passing, as the landlord said, acomfortable night; but he had slept for some hours towards the morning,and had awoke feeling, as he said, better, and in high spirits."After all I'll cheat the doctors yet," he had said to his friend. "I amhalf sorry now you sent for May. It will frighten them all to death athome. Odd as it may seem to you, the old boy's fond of me in his way.And, by Jove, Fanshawe, I'll try if I can't make a change somehow, andbe a comfort to him, and all that. Life's a queer sort of business afterall," said the prodigal, raising his shoulders from the pillows, andsupporting himself on his hands. "It isn't the straightforward thing afellow thinks when he's beginning. Have your swing, that's all verywell--and God knows I've had mine, and done some things I can't undo;but when one goes in for having one's swing, one expects to have asteady time after, and settle to work and put all straight. Look here,Fanshawe--if I had died, as I thought I should last night! By Jove, tohave nothing but your swing and end there, it isn't much, is it, for aman's life?""No, it isn't much," said his friend; "but don't get on thinking, Tom,it's bad for your back.""I don't believe it's my back," said Tom; "it's my legs or something.I'm as light as a bird, all here." And he struck himself some playfulblows across the chest. "When the doctor comes, you'll see he'll saythere's a difference. Get me some breakfast, there's a good fellow. Iwonder if they've come. You've heard me talk of May, Fanshawe? She's notthe sort of girl every fellow likes, and I've thought she was hard on mesometimes. Superior, you know--that sort of thing. Looking down, byJove, upon her brother." And here Tom laughed loudly, with an exquisiteenjoyment of the joke. "But it would be pleasant to see her all thesame. Who is that at the door? What! My sister! By George, May, this isbeing a thorough brick, and no mistake.""Oh, Tom, you are better!" cried Marjory, struck with a sudden weaknessof delight as she saw the colour in his face and his sparkling eyes."Almost well," he said, cheerfully, while she stooped over him; "wellenough to be sorry I sent for you, and glad you've come. So you thoughtyour poor wicked old brother worth looking after? You're a good girl,May; you're a dear girl. It's a pleasure to see you. And you're abeauty, too, by Jove, that can stand the morning light.""Tom!" said Marjory, gently.She was struck to the heart by the sight she saw. His countenance hadmelted into soft lines like a child's; the tears were standing in hisover-bright eyes. Who does not know that human sentiment which tremblesto see a sick man look too amiable, too angelical, too good? Thissudden dread came over Marjory. She stood gazing at him and at themoisture in his eyes with a feeling that blanched all the morningfreshness out of her face."All right," said Tom. "I won't praise you to your face,--especially asFanshawe's there; though he's as good a fellow as ever was. I'll tellyou after, all I owe to him. But who came with you, May? and how did youpersuade the two old boys to let you go? and how's my father and littleMilly, and all the rest of them? Sit down here, where I can reach you.Fanshawe, she wants a cup of tea or something.""I want to hear about you, Tom," said Marjory, mastering, as well as shecould, the impression made upon her by her brother's emotion, and by thedark uncheering looks of Fanshawe, his previous nurse, who had shakenhands with her, but who avoided her eye. "But first I must tell you, thetwo old boys, as you call them, came with me. My father is here.""My father--here!" said the prodigal, once more raising his head fromthe pillow. A crimson flush came over his face, and his eyes filled withtears. "I told you they were fond of me at home," he said, turningfaltering to his friend, "and by Jove, May--no, I won't say that--ByGod, as you're both witnesses, I'll turn over a new leaf, and be acomfort to him from this day!"By an impulse which she could scarcely define, Marjory turned from herbrother's flushed and excited face to Fanshawe, who had retired to theother side of the room, and whom she had seen joining his hands togetherwith a sudden movement of pain. When he caught her eye he shook hishead gently. Then she knew what was before them.Mr. Heriot, however, suspected nothing; he came in, still with somethingof the paleness which had come upon him when he first realized the news;but in five minutes had recovered his colour, and composure, and washimself."Your sister was anxious, my boy!" he said. "It is a woman's fault; and,for my part, I don't blame them. Rather that than man's indifference,Tom. May would go through fire and water for anybody belonging to her.It makes them troublesome to steady-going folks, now and then; but it'sa good fault--a good fault."And Mr. Heriot, after a few minutes, cheerfully invited Mr. Fanshawe--towhom he made many old-fashioned acknowledgments--to go downstairs withhim to breakfast, leaving Marjory with her brother."We'll send her something upstairs," he said; "I know she'll like bestto be with Tom.""She should get a rest first," said Mr. Charles, grumbling momentarilyin behalf of his favourite; but finally they all left the sick-room,going down to breakfast in high spirits. Tom, by this time, somewhatpale, lay back on his pillows, and looked admiringly and gratefully athis sister. A certain calm of well-being seemed to have fallen over him,which, in spite of herself, gave Marjory hope."And to think," he said softly, "that last night--only last night, I hadgiven everything up, and never hoped to see one of you again. May, giveme your hand; you're a good girl. It's true what my father said: youwould go through fire and water. That's the old Scotch way; not so muchfor other people as women are now-a-days; but through fire andwater--through fire and water, for your own! If you had been here lastnight I might have told you something--""Tell it to me now, Tom.""No; I don't want you to think worse of me than you do. Please God, Iwill live and mend, and take up all my tangled threads, as Aunt Jeansays. How is old Aunt Jean? Cankered body! but I suppose she would havedone it too--through fire and water. Do you know, May, there's a greatdeal of meaning, sometimes, in what these old boys say.""I wish you would not call them old boys, Tom.""Well, well--they are not young boys, are they? There is one thing tho'about women--or, so I've always heard, at least. They say you're hard onother women. If you were called on now to help a woman that was not yourflesh and blood?--for the sake of those who were your flesh and blood--"Marjory's face was covered with a deep blush; there was but one ideathat could be connected with such a speech; she had to conquer amomentary repugnance, an impulse of indignation and shame. But she didconquer it."Tom!" she said anxiously; "I hope I could be faithful to my trust. Tellme what it is?""Not I!" said Tom, laughing. "No, no, Miss May; I am not going to giveyou the whiphand over me. I can trust myself best. I am getting well,thank Heaven; and I'll pick up my tangled threads. It is not a badphrase that, either. Lord, what a lot of tangled threads I seemed to beleaving last night!"What could Marjory say? She held his hand between hers and patted itsoftly, and kissed it with her heart full. It was not like a sick man'shand, white and wasted. It was brown and muscular, and strong, capableof crushing hers, had he wished; and yet lay somewhat passively embracedby her slender fingers, as if--like the tide ebbing slowly from theshore, the strength had begun to ebb away."However, it's well to be warned," said Tom. "And, after all, I havedone less harm than you would think; nobody's enemy but my own--aspeople say. There's no sensation I ever felt so curious as that one--ofthinking you're dying. What an awful fool you've been, you say toyourself; and now it's no good. Struggle as you like, you can't mend it;you must just lie still and take what's coming. I say, May," he added,with a sudden start. "Say something and be cheery, or I'll get into thedumps again.""Here's the doctor, Tom," said Fanshawe at the door.Marjory rose and left the room quickly; she could not bear to meet theeye of that final authority, whose glance seems to convey life or death.She went and stood by her brother's friend outside on the landing. Itwas an old-fashioned winding oak staircase; and looking down they couldsee the movements of the house; the waiters carrying in dishes to theroom where the father and uncle were breakfasting; and sometimes, whenthe door opened, could hear the roll of their vigorous Northern voices.Marjory stood with her hand on the oak balustrade, and looked wistfullyinto Fanshawe's face."Do you mean," she said, "that there is no hope?"He made a little gesture of pain and shook his head; his eyes lookedhollow, as if with tears. It was watching that had done it, but theeffect was the same."Then he ought to know; he must know!" said Marjory."To what good, Miss Heriot? Do you think God takes a man unawares likethat, to exact everything from him the same as if he had had longwarning? I am not so good as you; but I think better of my Maker thanthat.""Mr. Fanshawe, this is no time to argue," said Marjory, shivering; "butmy poor Tom ought to know.""It would kill him in a moment," said Fanshawe, "the shock would be toogreat; he has few enough moments to live. Go and pray for him, MissHeriot; that's better than telling him. You are far more likely to bepaid attention to up yonder than fellows like poor Tom or me."And all the while fresh dishes were being carried in from the kitchen,and Mr. Heriot's laugh, a large sound of ease and relief--the gaiety ofa man just delivered from deadly anxiety--rang like a certainty ofwell-being all through the house. The breakfast was still going on whenthe doctor went downstairs; his grave face startled Tom's father."You find your patient better, doctor?" he said."I cannot say I do," the doctor answered, somewhat solemnly. "Though hisstrength has held out better than I thought.""But I assure you--the boy is looking as well as I ever saw him. Hiscolour is good, and his eyes bright; and no suffering to speak of.""The explanation of that is but too easy," said the doctor. "I supposeno one has told you the particulars. So long as there was pain there wasa little hope. It is a hard thing to say to a father, but I must say it.Your son's injury, Sir, is in the spine.""My God!"Mr. Heriot stumbled up blindly from his chair; he put his hand out togrope his way to the door, and with the other thrust away from him thetable at which he had been seated. The doctor rushed after and seizedhim by the arm."If you go into his room with that face, you will kill him on the spot!"he cried."And when will you--or nature, as you call it--kill him?" cried Mr.Charles, coming forward in his turn. "Thomas, my man, Thomas! you'vestill the others left.""He may last a few hours longer--not more," said the doctor. "I shallcome back presently;" and he rushed away, glad to escape from such ascene, and left those whom it most concerned to bear it as they could.The two old brothers had taken each other by the hand. They stoodtogether as they had done when they were boys; but one had his facehidden on the wall, against which he leant and heard the words of theother vaguely through his anguish, as if they were uttered miles away."Thomas! think. He is not your only child! there are others well worthyof your love. We must grieve--it's God's will; but for God's sake dinnadespair!"What mockery the words seemed; merest commonplaces, easy to say, buthard, impossible to give an ear to. Despair? what else was there leftfor the man who was about to see his son die?CHAPTER VI.He lingered the greater part of the day. Marjory took her placepermanently by his bedside, where Fanshawe had been seated when shefirst appeared. She had allowed herself to be entreated to say nothingto him; but a certain fixed awe and pain in her look communicatedthemselves to Tom's mind without a word said. He noticed this at firstwith an uneasy laugh."Ah, I see you think badly of me, May. You think I am going, though Ideceive myself. Don't deny it. If I was not so sure by my feelings thatyou are wrong, you would make me think so too.""I am anxious," she said. "You know what papa says, Tom, it is a woman'sfault.""Ay, so he did," said her brother; "he has sense enough forhalf-a-dozen. I wish I had minded him more. May, you needn't be sofrightened. If I am going, as you think--well, well! there would benothing to be so dismal about. It has to be one time or another. If itwere not for all those tangled threads, and things done that shouldn'thave been done, and left undone that should have been done, like thePrayer-book. I suppose it's the common way. Good and bad would not sayit every Sunday, if it were not the common way.""It is the very commonest way of all, Tom.""I thought so. Then I'll be forgiven, too, like the rest, if that's all.The old doctor at Comlie would be harder on a fellow than thePrayer-book is. You're great for the Kirk, May, and I suppose, as we'reScotch, you're right; but if I were a religious fellow, which I'm not, Iwould go in for the Prayer-book, mind you; it's kinder; it asks fewerquestions. We have done what we ought not to have done; we have leftundone--If I had time just now, and felt up to it, I would like to tellyou something, May.""Tell me, Tom," she said, eagerly. "We are quiet now; there's nobodyhere.""Presently," he said; and then fell into a musing state, from which shecould not rouse him. Now and then he would brighten up, and call herattention to a fly on the ceiling; to the pattern of the paper on thewalls; to an old picture over the mantel-piece; smiling and commentingupon them."The walls should not be papered in a room where a man is to lie ill,"he said. "If you knew what strange figures they turn into. There's anold witch in that corner with a red nose and a red cap; don't you seeher? Last night she kept sailing about the room on a broomstick, orsomething; and, by Jove! there is that unhappy fly astride on her rednose!"At this idea he laughed feebly, yet loudly. How that laugh echoed downinto May's heart! He would not allow anything more serious to be spokenof."I am too tired to be sensible," he said. "Don't disturb my fly, May.He's numb, poor fellow, after the Winter. I only hope if the witch takesto riding about again, to-night, she won't disturb him. I don't see herbroomstick to-day. Trifling talk, eh? To be sure, it's nonsense; but ifa man may not indulge in a little nonsense when he's laid by the heelslike this, and has a nice sister smiling at him--"Here the poor fellow put out his hand to her, which Marjory took withinher own, doing her best to keep up the smile which pleased him, thoughthere were few exertions of strength which would not have been easier toher at the moment."I like nonsense," she said, softly. "But, Tom, somebody will come inpresently and disturb us. Tell me, dear, first what you wanted to say.""Presently," said Tom. "I have not quite made up my mind about it.There's time enough--time enough. Show Uncle Charles that print when hecomes up. I think it's a good one. I thought of him as soon as I saw it.What quiet steady-going lives now, these old fellows live! It's strangefor a man to think of settling down into that sort of thing, you know,but I suppose I shall come to it in time like the rest. Farming, like myfather, or prints, and books, and coins, and so forth. May, you womenhave other kind of ideas; but fancy giving up youth, and stir, andmovement, and all that makes life pleasant--for that.""I suppose when one is old it is the quietness that makes lifepleasant," said poor Marjory, aching to her very finger-points with asense that this life was ebbing away while they thus talked."By Jove, I don't think it would ever make life pleasant to me," saidTom. And then with a curious consciousness, he looked up at her, halfdefiant, half inquiring. "You think, I suppose," he said, "that I willnever give myself the chance to try if I go on in this way. Never youfear, May; I know when to pull up as well as you do. Fun first, sobrietyafterwards--never you fear. I may have had about my swing by this time.Mind, I make no rash promises, but if I keep in the same mind when I getbetter---- I suppose the old boy would give me a house somewhere, when I'mmarried and settled. Married and settled!" he repeated, with a somewhatwild laugh; and then stopped abruptly, and added, "that's the worst ofit--there's the rub."Marjory did not follow this lead; she had grown confused with misery,feeling that she sinned against him, trying to think of something shecould say to him which should lead his mind to other thoughts. She sawnothing but levity in what he said, and her own mind seemed paralysed.She could have thrown herself upon him and begged him in so many wordsto think that he was dying; but nothing less direct than this seemedpossible. She sat by him, holding his hand between hers, gazingwistfully at him, but with her mind far from what he was saying,labouring and struggling to think of something that would warn withoutalarming him. He, for his part, looked at her somewhat wistfully too.Certain words seemed on his very lips, which one syllable from her, hadshe but comprehended, would have drawn forth; but, in the inscrutableisolation of humanity, the two pair of eyes met, both overbrimming withmeaning, but with a meaning incommunicable. What a pitiful gaze it wason both sides!At last Marjory, feeling the silence insupportable, burst forth into afew faltering words, from which she tried hard to keep all appearance ofstrong emotion."Tom, we used to say our prayers in the nursery together when you wereill, don't you remember? 'Pray God take away Tom's fever,' I used tosay. And this is so like old times. Tom--I don't think I said my prayersthis morning--"He put up his hand to stop her, and then his countenance changed andmelted, and some moisture came into his bright eyes. He gave a strangelittle laugh."I was a better boy in those days than I am now.""You never made yourself out to be good," said Marjory, with tears; "butyou were always good to me. Oh, God bless you, dear Tom! if we were onlyto say, 'Our Father'--after being up all night--don't you think it woulddo us good?""Say what you like, May."The words were common-place, but not the tone; and Marjory, with hishand clasped tighter within hers, was kneeling down by the bed, when thedoor opened, and their father came in. Mr. Heriot had grown ten yearsolder in that half hour. He came in with a miserable smile, put on atthe door as a woman might have put on a veil."Well, Tom, my man, and how are we getting on now?" he said, with anattempt at hearty jocularity, most pitifully unlike his natural tone.Tom looked from his father's ghostly pretence at ease to his sister'sface, as she knelt by the bed, with his hand pressed between hers, nowand then softly kissing it, and smiling at him with an effort whichbecame more and more painful. A change came over his own countenance.With a sudden scared look, he thrust his other hand into his father's,and grasped him tight, like a frightened child."Don't let me go!" he cried, with one momentary unspeakable pang.Then swiftly as the mind moves at moments in which a whole life-timeseems concentrated, he recovered his mental balance. How few fail atthat grand crisis! He recovered himself with one of those strangerallyings of mental courage which make all sorts of men die bravely withfortitude and calm. The whole revolution of feeling--enlightenment,despair, self-command--passed so quickly that only spectators equallyabsorbed and concentrated could have followed them."Well!" he said, finally, "if it is to be so, we must bear it, father.We must bear it as well as we can."Meanwhile Mr. Charles, not knowing what to do with himself, had examinedeverything in the sitting-room downstairs, not because there wasanything to interest him, but because, while he suffered as much as theothers, he had not, like the others, a primary claim to be with thechief sufferer of all."Best leave them alone, best leave them alone," he had said to himself adozen times over. "They're better alone with him--better alone."But his mind was full of malaise, anxiety, and pain. And after a whilehe wandered out into the yard of the inn, where still there was a greatcommotion, horses and dogs about, and a floating population of grooms.Mr. Charles went and looked at one or two of the slim glossy hunterswhich were being taken out for exercise, or which were being prepared todepart, as the hunting season approached its end. He was a man of verydifferent tastes; yet he was country-born and country-bred, and knew thepoints of a horse. Poor man, this new investigation chimed in strangelywith the very different thoughts in his mind. He looked at the animalswith an eye that could not help seeing, but an aching heart whoseattention was directed elsewhere. While he was thus standing in themiddle of the yard, vaguely examining everything around him, thedeformed old ostler came up to him once more."Beg your pardon, Sir, but do you know if they've sent for thebone-setter, Sir, as I spoke to you and the lady about? T'other oldgentleman won't listen to me, not on no consideration. He's awful cutup, he is; and I ask you, Sir, as a gentleman and a scholar, is this atime to be standing on p's and q's, and thinking what's most genteel andthat? Job Turner ain't genteel, but he'll save Mr. 'Eriot's life, soonas look at 'im. Do'ee have him, now; do'ee have 'im;" cried the old man,with tears in the strange little blear eyes which shone out of his facefrom among the dark puckers of his cheeks and brow like diamonds. "Thembrutes would have had the breath out o' me years and years since, if ithadn't a-been for Job. Every bone in my body, Sir, he's put to rights,and joined together sometime. Now, do'ee have him; do'ee now, mygentleman! he'll mend Mr. 'Eriot like he mended me. Men is alike, justas 'osses is alike; they've the same bones, and flesh and blood. Naturemakes no account o' one being a gentleman and one in the stables. Oh,Lord bless you, Sir, do'ee have him, or you'll never forgive yourself.You all know Job Turner, mates; speak up for him, for God's sake, andlet the gentleman hear what he is.""He's a rare 'un for bones!" cried one of the grooms."He'll work your joint back into its socket, like as it was a strayedbabby!" cried another."Ain't he now; don't he now, boys!" cried the old ostler; "speak up forhim, for God's sake; it's for young Mr. 'Eriot, as always was thepleasantest gentleman I ever see in a 'unting field, or out on't; hegave me ten bob just for nothing at all, the last blessed morning asever he rode out o' this yere yard. Lord bless you, Sir, we'll have himup and well in a week if you won't mind his not being genteel, and sendfor Job.""Hold your nonsense!" said another man, interfering. "Job ain't the Lordto kill and make alive. The young gentleman's broken his back; send youfor the clergyman, or some one as'll give him good advice, Sir. Theyain't fit to die at a moment's notice, no more nor the likes of us. Sendfor the clergyman, Sir, if you'll take my advice."Mr. Charles stood and looked from one to the other with a certain wearybewilderment; he felt as if the family misfortune, which had thus fallenupon the Hay-Heriots, out of all precedent, a thing that never hadhappened before, had made him a mark at which every kind of arrow mightbe shot. He shook his head as he went away, pursued by the old ostler'sentreaties."One thing is certain, that these bone-setting bodies learn a great dealabout the human frame," he said to himself; "not scientific information,but something that's like inspiration sometimes. It might be too late;or it might be nonsense altogether. Perhaps he could do nothing for poorTom, perhaps--should I go back and speak to Thomas, and try? But what'sthe good of disturbing the poor fellow for nothing? It could not come toanything; you may mend legs and arms, but you cannot mend the spine. Godbless us all; this is what it comes to, to give a lad his own way, andlet him take his swing! And it will kill his father. Never was it knownyet, in all the records, that a Hay-Heriot died like this--the heirwithout an heir; leaving it all to go in the second line. If I couldbut know whether this Job what-do-you-call-him would be of any use! Itwould worry Thomas to ask him; but what of that if it saved the lad? Mymind's in a terrible swither, whether to try or not. Job! Job! It's anuncanny kind of name. Oh, my bonnie May, if I could but have fiveminutes speech of you to say ay or no! And there's no time, if anythingcan be done. I think I'll risk it. God help us! He knows; but we do not;it can do no harm. Hey! hi! hem! you crooked old body! That's uncivil;he'll pay no attention. I want the other man, a bit little withered up,crooked--Hi! my good man; come here and tell me where your Job--what doyou call him--is to be found. I don't know if he can do anything; but ifyou'll show me where he lives, I'll try.""Lord bless you, Sir, I knew as you were a reasonable gentleman," saidthe ostler, limping up. "It's but a poor place, but what o' that? andmaster and groom we're all much the same. Leastways, so far as bones go,as is the foundation like. This way, Sir; it ain't above ten minutesfrom here--if Job's in; which he ain't always, at this time of the day.Gentlefolks thinks little of him; but poor folks think much; and he'sout and about over all the country, wherever there is a leg out, or abone broken. It is a chance if we find 'im; but a man can but do hisbest, when all's said; and it ain't not more than ten, or say fifteenminutes walk.""Quick, man, quick!" said Mr. Charles; but the road to Job's house wasthrough the back streets of the little town, which were swarming withchildren, and full of wandering provision merchants selling vegetablesand earthenware, and a great many other descriptions of merchandize; forit was Saturday, and market-day. To the stranger, with his sick heartand his brain buzzing with pain and suspense, the twistings and turningsof the narrow lanes, the streets they had to cross, the passages theythreaded through, the corners they turned seemed endless. What a fool'serrand it was, after all, he thought! and then something seemed to callhim, which sounded now like Marjory's appealing voice--now like poorTom's cry of pain. What was he doing here, astray, in a strange place?seeking out some unknown quack; leaving his own people perhaps to bear"the worst that could happen," without such support as he could give? Hesuddenly turned round, while his guide was enlarging upon Job's gifts,and upon the unlikelihood of finding him--an argument which was notintended to discourage Mr. Charles, but only to enhance Job'simportance--"Go yourself and find him!" he said; "I'm going back! I'm going back! Imay be wanted. Bring the man, and I'll pay him--and you too." And withthese words Mr. Charles darted across the street, with a vain butconfident endeavour to re-traverse the way he had come. He fell over thechildren; he was all but run down by the wheelbarrows; and as wasnatural, he lost his way. And words could not tell the painful confusionof his mind as he wound in and out, round and round in a circle, neverseeming to approach a step nearer; growing every moment more wretched,more anxious, more confused; figuring to himself what might be passingin the sick-room; how he might be wanted; and how "the worst" might havehappened, while he was about this wild goose chase. When he got back atlast to the door of the hotel, the old ostler had reached it before him,and stood waiting in the yard with a villainous companion, who pulledhis forelock to the confused and tremulous gentleman, and announcedhimself as Job Turner."You mayn't think he's much to look at, Sir," whispered the ostler,under shelter of his hand; "but if you knowed all, as I know--the cureshe's done; the bones he's set; the folk as he's brought up from thegrave--"Mr. Charles waved his hand--he was too breathless to speak--and hurriedupstairs. A dead calm seemed to have fallen on the house. A frightenedwoman-servant met him on the stairs, creeping down on tiptoe. It seemedto be years that he had been wandering about the streets, absent fromhis post. Then the doctor met him, and pointed silently to the closeddoor, shaking his head. Trembling, conscience-stricken, weary and sickwith his suspense, Mr. Charles crept into the sick-room. All was quietand silent there, except some gasps for breath. Mr. Heriot stood at oneside of the bed, Marjory at the other. Fanshawe, Tom's friend, was atthe foot, leaning against the bed, and hiding his face with his hand.Mr. Charles trembled too much to be of use to any one; he stood behindthem all, wiping his forehead, trying to see with his hot and dazzledeyes.Nothing to be done, and nothing to be said! It had come to that. Tom wasout of hearing, though they had so much to say to him. And he, too, hadmuch to say, but had left it all unsaid. Who can tell the anguish ofsuch a moment for those who are called upon to survive? To stand byhelpless, impotent; willing to do everything, capable ofnothing--nothing but to look on. Humanity has no agony so great.At the very last, poor Tom came out of his death-struggle, as by amiracle, and looked at his watchers."I told you, May," he said, faintly. "I told you!" These were his lastwords. He seemed to die repeating them in a whisper, which grew fainterand fainter: "I told her--told her; I told--thank God!"Oh! for what, poor deceived soul? They looked at each other with athrill of terror which overcame even their grief. What did he thank Godfor as he crossed the threshold of the other life?CHAPTER VII.The Manse of Comlie had one window, which looked upon thechurchyard--only one, as Mrs. Murray congratulated herself--and that ina room which was never used but where on occasional moments now and thenthe old lady would go and sit by herself, not rejecting for her own partthe pensive associations which she deprecated for others. On the day ofpoor Tom Heriot's funeral, there were two old faces at this window. Onewas that of Miss Jean Heriot, in new "blacks," as she called hermourning; whose interest in the melancholy ceremony had overcome eventhat strong sense of decorum with which a Scottish woman of her agewould, under other circumstances, have shut herself up on the day of afuneral "in the family."In Scotland, in former days, the attendance of a woman at a funeral wasunknown; and it was partly because it was understood that Marjory was tobe present, that her old grand-aunt stole across in the early morning,before any one was about, in order to witness, with a mixture of grief,interest, and disapproval, the innovations in the simple ceremonial withwhich the heir of Pitcomlie was conducted to his last resting-place."I don't know what we are coming to," said Miss Jean. "You may likethese new-fangled ways, Mrs. Murray; but for my part, I would just assoon take to the Prayer-book for good and a', and be done withcompromises; or even the mass-book, for that matter. When you once beginto pray over a grave, how long do you think it'll be before you pray forthe dead?""It will never be in the doctor's time, that I can answer for," said theMinister's wife, with firmness. "For my part, if it's an innovation, itpleases me. Oh! to hear the thud of the earth, and no' a word said! Itis bad enough--bad enough, even when it's done like baptism, in the nameof the Father, and the Son.""If you had not been there, you would not have heard," interrupted MissJean. "I hate to see women trailing after a funeral; it's no theirplace.""I was not there, and yet I heard," said Mrs. Murray; "there are thingsyou hear with your heart, though you're far away. And why should notwomen go to the grave with those that belong to them? It is us thattakes care of them to their last breath. Why should not May come withthe rest to lay her brother in his grave? after standing by him, poorlad, till his end.""It would fit her best to stay at home," said Aunt Jean; "women arealways best at home, especially when they're young. Thomas has broughtup that girl his own way, not my way. I would have trained her verydifferent. When I was Marjory's age I never dared lift up my face to mymother. What she said should be, it was--no contradiction; no setting upto know better than your elders; whereas it's my devout opinion thatgirl thinks herself wiser than the likes of you or me.""And so she is in some things," said Mrs. Murray; "far wiser than me, atleast, Miss Jean. I've seen her pose the doctor himself, which is notsaying little. And here they are, coming down by the east knoll. Oh!what a black, black procession! And to think it's Tom Heriot! waes me!waes me!--him that should have been bidding us all to his bridal insteadof this cruel grave-side!"Miss Jean said nothing for the moment. She put her aged head close tothe window, and followed with an intent gaze of her bright old eyes thedark line that wound down into the churchyard from the higher groundabove. What strange sense of the wonder of it may have passed throughher mind, who can tell? She was old; her generation was over; not one ofthose who had been with her in her youth was with her now. Alone, aspectator of the works and ways that were not as her ways and works, shehad been keenly looking on and criticising the younger world around formany a day. She had seen the boy born whose remains were now carriedbefore her; she had almost seen his father born. Yet she was here, stilla keen spectator, looking on while that young representative of the racewas laid among their ancestors.She said nothing; her sharp eyes glittered as she gazed; she folded herthin hands, all wrinkled and yellow, like old ivory, on the top of hercane, and nothing escaped her keen observation. She took in the new--orwhat she fancied new--fashion of Marjory's dress, as well as theenormous train of county friends, old family connections, tenants, andneighbours, who had come to do honour to the Heriots. This gave her athrill of pleasure in the chillness of her old age, which felt no verystrenuous emotion. She counted them upon her withered fingers as theypassed down into the grassy churchyard, and ranged themselves againstthe grey old lichened wall which surrounded it on that side, set closewith the grotesque monuments of the last two centuries."I see scarce anybody wanting," she said, with a certain subduedexultation; "scarce anybody on this side of Fife but the Sinclairs, andthey're away. Thomas does not please me in many of his ways; but I'llsay this for him, that he has kept up the credit of the house, and allthe old family friends."Mrs. Murray was crying quietly, with her eyes fixed upon the centralgroup, where stood Mr. Heriot himself, with drooping head, his tallfigure showing among all the other tall men who surrounded him with acertain majesty of weakness which went to the heart of this looker-on.His daughter seemed to be leaning on his arm, but by the way in whichshe clung to him, moving as he moved, Mrs. Murray divined that inreality it was Marjory who supported her father.It was a bright day, perfectly serene and calm; the sun shining, agentle little breeze caressing the waving grass, and breathing softlyover the mourners. There had been rain in the morning, so thateverything was dewy and moist. It was what country people call "agrowing day;" a day on which you could almost see the new buds openingout, and hear the new blades of the grass escape out of their sheaths; aday of life and overbrimming vitality; the kind of day in which it ishardest to think of dying or of death."Eh, waes me, waes me!" said the old lady, who knew what loss was, withthe tears running down her soft old cheeks, as the coffin was loweredinto the grave.Then rose that strangely solemn sound--one voice rising in the open airin the daylight, amidst the hush of a crowd, a sound not to be mistakenfor any other, and which chills the very soul of the chance hearer,while it so often gives a momentary consolation to the mourner. Mrs.Murray bowed down her old head, weeping at the sound of her husband'sprayer, which was too far off to be heard. But Miss Jean kept gazing,her bright little eyes shining out of her head, her cap pressed closelyagainst the window."New-fangled ways--new-fangled ways!" she was saying to herself. "Whatthe better is the poor body for all that praying? The lad's soul isbeyond the power of prayer. He's in his Maker's hand. He was but an illyoung lad, and I'm glad for your sake that the doctor has nothing to sayabout things that can never be known till all's known. I cannot abidethese changes. I approved Marjory when she threw in her lot with the oldKirk, though brought up otherwise; but I do not approve of changing auldforms and ways to make them like anither ritual. No, no; that's not athing I can approve. But half Fife is there," she added, with along-drawn breath of satisfaction, "I am thankful to think that thefamily is not letten down, whatever happens. There's Lord Largo himself,or I'm sore mistaken, and all the family from Magusmoor. It shows greatrespect--great respect. Thomas Heriot may be proud; there's men therethat would not have come so far for King or Commons. I'm thankful myselfto see that real old friendship aye lasts. Marjory being there is theonly eyesore to me. She should have stayed at home. Women should bide athome. It would have set her better to have learned a lesson to her youngsister how life's uncertain and death's sure.""Poor bairn! she will learn that soon enough."Miss Jean made no reply. She leant her chin upon her cane, and keptlooking out, the slight tremulous movement of her head communicating acertain vibration to all the outline of her figure and black drapery.Her mind was intent upon the different groups standing about against thegrey churchyard wall, bareheaded under the sun. One by one sherecognised them, with her keen eyes. She had known them and theirfathers and grandfathers before them, every one. The central group ofall was perhaps that which the old woman noted least. She had beengrieved for "the family" chiefly because Tom was the heir, and theproperty must now go to the second son, a thing which was unknown in theHeriot traditions. But her grief was short and soon exhausted, asperhaps every strong sentiment is at her age. She no longer thought ofTom, nor of his desolate father, for whom at first she had been verysorry. What she was principally concerned with, was to see that all wasdone as it ought to be done, and that nowhere was there any failure of"respect." And on this point she had been fully satisfied, so that theeffect upon her mind, as she sat at the Manse window, was rather one ofdeep and sombre gratification than of grief."Thomas Heriot may be proud," she repeated to herself, and she wassincerely unconscious of any incongruity in the thought."There's a man there I never saw before," she added, after a pause,"standing closer to my nephew Thomas Heriot and that old fool, Charlie,than a stranger should be. If he was a chief mourner he could not benearer. If any of them had any sense they would see that was my LordLargo's place. After the near friends comes the highest rank. I wonderwhat Thomas can be thinking of; and I would like to know who is yonman.""It is Mr. Fanshawe, poor Tom's friend," said Mrs. Murray, with ahalf-restrained sob, "that nursed him when he had the accident, and sentfor them, and has been the kindest friend. It was him that brought Mr.Heriot down, heart-broken as he was. Marjory could never have done itwithout him, as I hear. Mrs. Simpson was over," added the old lady,apologetically, afraid of seeming to know better than "a relation," "tosettle about some of the servants' mourning, and it was from her Iheard.""Marjory could never have done it!" said Miss Jean, with some scorn. "IfMarjory is at the bottom of everything, she should learn better than tomake difficulties. When a woman sets up for being helpless, she can ayeget help; but when she sets up for being the mainspring of everything,she has to give up such pretences. Marjory could not have done withouthim--He's come to help Marjory, has he? I know what that means. For oncein their lives the Heriots are going to show a little judgment and marryMarjory. In that way ye can understand yon stranger being so near.""Oh, Miss Jean, God forgive you!" said Mrs. Murray. "Why should youjudge the worst? It is nothing of the sort.""I'll keep my opinion, and you'll keep yours," said Miss Jean, grimly."Am I blaming them? The girls that have been born Heriots have never hadanything done for them. Every thing for the lads; for the lasses theytook their chance. If a good man came, good and well; if it was but anindifferent man, they did what they liked--took him or not according totheir fancy; as may be well seen, for all the daughters have marriedbadly, everyone, except those that did not marry at all. Na, na, I'm notblaming them. There's even myself; if my father and my brother had takenan interest--if they had put themselves out of their way--I might havehad bairns and grandbairns of my own, and held up my head as high asany. But I was left a motherless thing to do what I liked, to refusegood offers, and act like a fool, and throw away my prospects before Iknew what they meant. If Thomas Heriot is taking more thought for hisgirrl, it's no' from me that he'll have any blame.""Poor man!" said the Minister's wife, "this is not a moment to expecthim to take much thought.""It's a moment when it's very important to do all he can for Marjory,"said Miss Jean tartly. "There's Tom gone, poor lad, that was not steadyenough to marry; and if anything was to happen to Thomas, I ask you whatwould become of that girrl? A girrl always brought up to be mistress andmair? The property goes to young Chairles, and he's married to a strangewoman that nobody knows; and what would become of Marjory? She'll rulethe roost no more as she's done all her life; she'll drop into Mr.Heriot of Pitcomlie's sister, and I know what that means.""She has been Mr. Heriot of Pitcomlie's daughter all her life, anddesired no better," said Mrs. Murray."Oh, ay, but that's very different. She'll want for nothing," said MissJean, reflectively, "she'll have plenty to live on. She'll have her ownlittle money and old Charlie's money, and mine when I go; but she'll beof no more consequence in the countryside--no more consequence than----me," said the old lady. "No' so much, for you're all feared for me. Itwill be a terrible downcome for Marjory. No, no, if her father thinks ofmarrying her to Tom's friend, or anybody's friend, that can give her agood house over her head and a position, it's not from me that he'll getany blame.""Oh, Miss Jean, it's little such thoughts are in any of their heads,"said Mrs. Murray. "Mr. Heriot's heart's broken; he thinks neither ofmarrying nor giving in marriage. Eh, poor man! poor man! he's turningaway now, leaving the grave, leaving his first-born out there in therain and the snow, and the hot sun and winter wind. I've done it myself.I know what it is. God help him! He's thinking neither of marrying norof Marjory. He's thinking but of him that's gone.""He should do his duty to the living whoever's gone," said Miss Jean,watching with her sharp old eyes. "And Thomas Heriot's sore failed," sheadded to herself, eagerly looking out as the melancholy processionturned to the gate close by the Manse where the carriages were waiting."He is sore failed. I should not be surprised if he was not long forthis world; and then what will that girrl do?"CHAPTER VIII.Edward Fanshawe, the individual whose appearance at Tom Heriot's funeralhad excited Miss Jean's curiosity so strongly, was, perhaps, about thelast man in England to whom Mr. Heriot of Pitcomlie, or any otherfather, would have confided his daughter's happiness. Almost all thatcould be said in his favour was negative. There was no harm in him. Hehad never been involved in any discreditable transaction; he had wrongednobody; he had not even bored his friends. A certain fine instinct,indeed, in this respect, possessed the man; he had no high moralqualities, no principles to speak of, no plan of life nor rule ofaction; but he was never a bore. He perceived, with the quickness oflightning, the moment when his friends had had enough of him. Perhapsthat moment arrived simultaneously with the moment in which he felt thathe had enough of them; anyhow, he chose it with the most admirableexactitude. It was the one great quality of his character; he was likethe sun in Hood's poem, which "never came an hour too soon," and henever stayed a moment too late.Mr. Fanshawe was always agreeable, sympathetic, ready to interesthimself in what interested those about him; he was a gentleman of thebest blood and connections--cousin to Lord Strangeways, once removed,and allied by the mother's side to the Duchess of Dimsdale, whose nameis a sufficient guarantee, we trust, for any man's gentility. He hadjust the amount of family and of money which is best adapted todemoralize a man, and turn him away from the natural and wholesomechannels of use. And at the same time he had no land, no localhabitation to keep up, no duties to do. What he had was in money, whicha careful father had so locked up that the poor fellow could not evenruin himself by spending everything, and thus give himself the chance ofa new start. He could only forestall his income, which he didcontinually, with more or less painful consequences to himself, and nogreat harm to anybody else; for he was weak-minded enough to have aprejudice in favour of paying his debts, though he seldom did it untilconsiderably after date. He was not a fool, any more than he was arogue; he was the very best, gentlest, most amiable, kind, and harmlessof good-for-nothings; but a good-for-nothing he was. He had no vices,not even that of active selfishness, which, in such a man, might havebeen the first step to virtue. He was a little over thirty, but felt asif he had never been any younger, and never would be any older. He wasnot appalled by the thought of all the openings in life which he hadthrown aside; or of the men who had passed him on the way, or of theadvantages he had let slip. The past did not upbraid him, neither didthe future alarm him. He never thought of asking himself what was tobecome of him when his active manhood began to droop. "To-morrow shallbe as to-day," he said to himself; or rather he did not say it, for henever went so far as to have any talk with himself on the subject.Fanshawe had rooms in London, where he appeared generally for a portionof the season. He had been in the habit of meeting Tom Heriot inLeicestershire for the hunting, just as he was in the habit of meetingcertain other kinds of men, periodically, in other places. By means ofthus dividing his year, and keeping to the regular routine of change, ofwhich men without any duties make a kind of fantastic duty forthemselves, his acquaintance was simply unlimited. He knew all kinds ofpeople, and most of the people whom he knew, he knew intimately. Thiswas how Tom Heriot and he had become friends--friends by accident as itwere, by the mere fact of meeting year after year in the same place,doing the same thing at the same moment. They had been intimates, but nomore friends than this implies, at the moment when Tom, by Fanshawe'sside, was struck by the stroke of that grim unsuspected Death whichhovers about the hunting-field. It was Fanshawe who helped to lift him,to disengage him from his fallen horse, and carry him to the bed whichturned out to be his death-bed. And the two nights of watching whichfollowed made Fanshawe something like Tom Heriot's brother, made him thebenefactor of Tom Heriot's family, the object of their warmestgratitude, and connected for ever with poor Tom's name and memory.Nothing could be more real than this connexion, and yet nothing couldbe more accidental or arbitrary.The position was quite false, for he knew in reality but little of Tom;and yet it was perfectly natural and true, for he had been to Tom in hishour of need all that a brother could have been; and to Tom's father andsister this stranger was no more a stranger; he was a son, a brother,"Tom's dearest friend." And it seemed only natural to both parties thatFanshawe should accompany the mournful cortge to Pitcomlie--and thathe who had watched Tom so tenderly should help to lay him in his grave,should support his fellow-watchers, and do what he could to console hisfriend's family.This had seemed perfectly natural to Fanshawe, who was ever sympatheticand ready to help. Besides, Scotland was not to him an unknown place. Hehad gone to the North often enough, to shooting boxes and castles amongthe moors. Scotland meant game and deer-stalking, mountains and lochs,and vigorous exercise, according to his understanding. Of course he waswell enough aware that April is not the moment for such delights. Hemust have known too that no delights were possible in the circumstances,and that his goodnature was about to plunge him into a new kind ofexperience, and not a cheerful one. But yet if he ever paused to thinkwhere he was going, he was of opinion that he knew perfectly what themanner of living was. And it may be supposed that to such a man it wasstrange and somewhat overpowering to find himself at the end of a fewdays stranded as it were on the quietest coast, in the midst of themost tranquil rural life, in a sorrowful house where there were novisitors, no amusements, nothing going on, nothing to see.The sombre excitement of the arrival, and of the funeral, had for thefirst moment cast a veil over the gravest aspect of this seclusion. Halfof Fife, as Miss Jean truly said, had shown their "respect" to the heirof Pitcomlie, and this fact had kept the stranger from perceiving thedead calm that awaited him. It was on the Sunday afternoon that he firstdiscovered what it was that he had fallen into. He had gone decorouslyto the parish church in the morning, with that amount of informationrespecting its simple forms and ceremonies which the moors and thegrouse have communicated to the well-meaning and inquisitive Englishsportsman. And though we will not say that Mr. Fanshawe's mind was notvisited by a momentary surprise that no part of the service was inGaelic, he yet got through that part of the day well enough; and then hereturned with the family to luncheon, a meal which was eaten almost insilence and at which he first fully realised the state of affairs.The first Sunday is a painful moment for people in fresh grief. Mr.Heriot sat at the foot of his table, sombre, incapable of speech, withhis head bent upon his breast, answering mechanically, but sometimeswith flashes of painful irritation, when he was addressed. Marjory fromtime to time attempted to talk; but the tears would come into her eyesin the midst of a sentence, her lip would quiver, and the words dieaway. Little Milly, with her hair more golden-bright than ever over herblack frock, sat with great eyes opened upon the visitor, ready to cryevery time that Marjory's voice faltered; and Uncle Charles, who satbeside the child, was checked by some irritable word from his brotherwhenever he began to speak. Thus Mr. Fanshawe found himself sadly out ofplace in the family sitting-room downstairs.He went up into his room after lunch, and took down all the books out ofthe shelves, and looked at them one after another; then he made anexcursion round the room, and looked at all the pictures. There weresome prints of well known pictures which he knew as well as his A B C,and there were some childish portraits of the Heriots, one of poor Tom,which he could recognise, and of another boy, and of a round-faced girlwith curls, who, no doubt, was Marjory. This was very mild fare; he satdown at the window afterwards, with a copy of Milton, which was theliveliest reading he could find, and read a few lines of Comus, andlooked out upon the sea. Soon the monotonous chant of the wavesattracted him, and he made his way through the silence and the sunshinedownstairs, meeting no one, hearing no sound, feeling as if the houseitself was dead or enchanted.The weather was very fine, as warm as it often is in Scotland in June,though it was still only April. The Firth was blue as the sky above it,but of a deepened and darker tone; the rich brown cliffs stood out instrong relief with every inequality defined against that dazzlingbackground. In the distance the opposite coast glimmered in the hazybrightness, marking itself by the white creamy edge of surf upon therocks; and looming to the westward through a haze of mingled smoke andsunshine, stood Arthur's Seat, like a muffled sentinel watching over thehalf-apparent towers and roofs of Edinburgh. The scene was fine enoughto have attracted even a less susceptible gazer; and Fanshawe, though hewas a good-for-nothing, had an eye for beauty. He sat down upon thecliff beyond the old house of Pitcomlie, half-way down, where thesea-side turf was all broken with bits of projecting rock. The saltspray dashed upon the red rocks underneath--whitest white and bluestblue, and russet brown of the richest tone, put in with all nature'sindifference to crudity of colour, made up the foreground; and thedistant line of the opposite coast, the vague shadow of Tantallon, theBass rock, lying like a great pebble on the water, the great hill in thedistance, with its ridges glimmering through the smoke of the unseentown, lent many a suggestion, human fulness of imagery, mystery anddepth to the landscape.Fanshawe was fully capable of appreciating the beauty of the scene; butwhen he had taken in all its beauty, another thought crept upon himwhich was very natural. The broad estuary before him was all butdeserted; only a few distant ships nearer Leith broke the blue as itshaded off into the distance. The Comlie boats were all safe in harbour,the fishermen taking their Sabbath ease; one or two white sails weredropping down the western coast, disappearing round St. Abb's Head intothe grey-blue horizon; but nothing was visible nearer, except the highwhite cliffs of the May, the lighthouse island, which he had alreadywatched from his window. Nothing to do! nothing that could even suggesta passing hope of amusement. After a while he looked upon the scene withdismay; it was as blank to him as a beautiful face in stone. Then heclimbed to the top of the cliff, and looked out across the rich flathomely country. These well-laboured fields were a thousand times betterfor Mr. Heriot's rent-roll than if they had been picturesquelyintersected by green lanes and waving hedgerows; but they were blank,blank to the soul of the strange visitor who found himself stranded inthis noiseless place. Not a sound seemed to exist in that quiet country,except the murmur of the sea. Mr. Fanshawe said to himself spitefullythat it was Scotch Sabbatarianism which prevented the very birds fromsinging, which chased away all rural sights and sounds, which swept theboats from the sea, and which demanded one monotonous level ofdulness--dulness dead as death. And then this horrible question occurredto him: Was he sure it would be any better to-morrow? He was not at allsure; he conjured up before him other scenes of rural life which he hadknown; stray visits to his relatives, which he had paid at longintervals, when he had found the decorations of the church the onlyamusement and a school-feast the only dissipation; and here, in grimScotland, there were not even these simple elements of pleasure. Mr.Fanshawe's heart died within him as he gazed over that rich,well-ploughed country-side.If it should occur to anyone that this mood was very inappropriate tothe really sympathetic nature of one who had watched over Tom Heriot'ssick-bed, and had grieved over, and fully felt the frightful blow whichhis death had given to the family so near at hand, we can but say inreply that even to the most sympathetic the impression produced by deathis the one that is effaced most rapidly. Already Fanshawe had felt, withthat impatience which is natural to humanity, that enough had been givento Tom. He could not and would not have expressed the sentiment inwords; but it was a natural sentiment. Mr. Heriot's heart-brokendespondency, which was partly veiled and partly heightened by theirritability of grief, overawed the young man; but already he had begunto feel it hard upon him that Marjory, for instance, should refuse to becomforted. He himself felt healed of his momentary wound; and why didnot she begin at least to allow herself to be healed also?It seemed to Fanshawe, as it seems to all except the chief sufferers inevery such bereavement, that it is churlish and almost fictitious to"give way"--and that the natural thing is to get better of your grief asyou do of a headache, or, at least, not to annoy and worry other people,by letting them see that it is continually there. He had felt it verymuch at the time, but he had got over it; and it seemed natural to himthat others should get over it also. And when he met Mr. Charles andMilly coming very solemnly hand in hand round the corner of the oldhouse, their gravity seemed almost a personal affront to him."The child is but a child," he said to himself; "and the old fellow isonly his uncle. Much my uncle would care if I were to die! Really thisis making too great a fuss," and a certain air of disapproval came intothe look with which he met them. "Going to take a walk?" he said."We were going down to the foot of the cliff," said Mr. Charles. "Thislittle thing is pale, and wants the air; will you come too? It is notvery high, but the cliff is bold, and I am fond of the place. Noscenery, you know, no scenery," said Mr. Charles, waving his handtowards the rocks with an air of protecting pride. "A poor thing, Sir,but mine own," was the sentiment with which he gazed at the brownheadland, the angle of the coast upon which his paternal house wasplaced; "but to us who were born here, it has a beauty of its own.""It has a great deal of beauty," said Fanshawe; "but of a desolate kind.To look out upon a sea without even a boat--""There are plenty of boats sometimes," said Mr. Charles, somewhathastily; "you would not have the fishers out on the Sunday, unless whenthere's some special necessity?--a great haul of herring, or suchlike--good food that should not be wasted, might excuse it; but withoutthat there's no reason. There are plenty of ships in Leith Harbour, andlying beyond Inchkeith as you would see when we crossed the Firth--"As these words were said, Mr. Charles suddenly recollected how he hadcrossed the Firth last, a mourner bringing poor Tom to his burial; andhe added hastily, "We were not thinking much of what we saw at such asorrowful time; but still the ships were there.""Is Mr. Heriot fond of yachting?" said Fanshawe, taking no notice ofthis dolorous conclusion. "A yacht would be a resource.""The boys had once a boat," said Mr. Charles. "You must pardon us forour uncheerful ways. There is not a thing about but what is connectedwith his memory. They had a boat when they were quite young, beforeCharlie went to India. I am not fond of the sea myself; it's a veryprecarious pleasure; and to run the risk of your life for an hour's sailseems a want of sense and a waste of strength.""Shouldn't you like to go to the May, Milly?" said Fanshawe, pointing tothe white cliffs of the island, which seemed on this clear day to be buta few fathoms off the shore. A sparkle of pleasure came into Milly'slittle face; her big blue eyes lighted up; the corners of her mouth,which had seemed permanently depressed, rose like the corners of anunbent bow."Oh!" she began; and then paused and looked at her uncle, and becamemelancholy once more.Milly was like Fanshawe, she had had enough of the family grief; but shewas too dutiful to break its bond."The May is not so near as it seems," said Mr. Charles. "It's verydangerous in some tides; the landing is bad. Our fishers themselves arefar from fond of the May. And, altogether, our coast is not a coast forpleasure-sailing. There are accidents enough among those who cannot helpthemselves, poor fellows! Many a tragedy I have known on Comlie Shore.""But if there is no yachting," said Fanshawe, with momentaryforgetfulness of his good-breeding, "how do you get through the time--atleast in Summer--if you spend it here?"Mr. Charles looked at him with suppressed offence. A man who foundPitcomlie dull was to the Heriots the concentration of impertinence andbad taste. Little Milly looked up, too, with her wondering eyes. Millydid not know what to make of this man, who was not quite in harmony, shefelt, with the surroundings, yet who made suggestions which were verydelightful, and who had the melancholy and splendid distinction of being"poor Tom's friend." She was afraid he was going to be scolded, and wassympathetic; yet how could Uncle Charles scold a grown up gentleman, whowas Tom's friend? Thus orderly age and dutiful childhood lookedsurprised at one who was beyond all the bonds familiar to them, andwhose time and whose life seemed of so little importance to himself."My time seldom hangs heavy on my hands," said Mr. Charles. "If you liveto my age, you will learn that time is short--far too short for what aman has to do. I am sixty, and the days run through my hands likesea-sand. Many and many is the thing I have to put aside for want oftime; and most likely I'll die with heaps of odds and ends leftincomplete.""I don't see any reason," said Fanshawe, in his levity; "at sixty itappears to me you have much more certainty of life before you than athalf the age. A man who lives till sixty may surely live to a hundred ifhe pleases. By that time all the dangers must be over.""And I suppose," said Mr. Charles, not quite pleased to hear his sixtyyears treated so lightly, "you hope to do as much yourself.""I don't know," said the young man, laughing and shrugging hisshoulders. "Seriously, do you think it's worth the while? I am more thanhalf way, and it has not been so delightful. No; a short life and amerry one must be the best.""That was poor Tom's idea," said Mr. Charles, with the look of a man whois improving the occasion.His own feeling was that no sermon could have pointed a sharper moral.At the sound of Tom's name, little Milly began to cry; not that she knewvery much of Tom, but the vague pain and sorrow which filled the househad made his name the emblem of everything that was melancholy andgrievous to her. Milly's tears gave the last aggravation to Fanshawe'simpatience."Poor Tom!" he cried; "he had a merry life. Better thirty years of thatthan a long, dull blank, with nothing particular in it. He thought so,and so should I. I don't like--forgive me for saying so--to think ofpoor Heriot as a warning. On the whole, I should not object to the samesort of end. Better that than to drink the cup to the dregs--""As I am doing, you mean," said Mr. Charles."No, indeed--far from that. As I should do, if such were to be my fate.It depends, I suppose, upon the groove one gets into," said Fanshawe,with a short, uneasy laugh.And then he began to talk hurriedly to Milly about the chances of avoyage to the May."I do not understand that young man," said Mr. Charles, privately, toMarjory. "May, my dear, you must try your hand. There is good about him.If there had not been good about him, he would never have done what hedid for Tom. But he thinks Pitcomlie dull, and he thinks a long lifeundesirable. I should like to understand the lad; and as we all havecause to be grateful to him, I wish you would try your hand.""If you wish it, uncle," said Marjory.This was in the silence of the evening, when she sat by the window,looking out at the flush of sunset which still dyed all the western sky,and lit up the Firth with crimson and gold. Milly stood close by her,with an arm round her neck. The child had said her hymn, and dischargedall her Sunday duties. She was vaguely sad, because the others weresad--yet satisfied in that she had fulfilled all personal requirements;and over Marjory, too, a sense of quiet had stolen. The dead were intheir graves and at rest; the living remained, with work, and tears, anddying all before them. She talked softly to Uncle Charles as the sunsetlights faded, feeling an indescribable quiet come over her mind as thetwilight came over the earth. Only Mr. Heriot sat alone in the library,with his head bent on his breast, doing nothing, reading nothing;thinking over the same thoughts for hours together. The old father feltthat he had come to an end; but for the others it was not so: the pausein their lives was over, and existence had begun again.CHAPTER IX.Next morning life began as usual for the saddened household. Breakfast,which had once been so lively a meal, passed over in comparativesilence. Mr. Charles, indeed, did what he could to talk to the stranger,making conversation about the news and the newspapers, with a vague hopeof enlivening the party."I daresay, as an Englishman, you don't know much about Scotch affairs,Mr. Fanshawe," he said. "If we were an ill-conditioned people like theIrish now, we might lead Parliament a pretty dance; but as we find itmore to our advantage to keep quiet and mind our own business, nobodyputs themselves out of the way.""And then you are very well off, which Ireland is not," said Fanshawe,who had Irish blood in his veins."I am not so sure about that. We have our grievances like other folk.Our affairs are thrust to the wall for every kind of nonsense. Who caresto come when it's a Scotch night, or when Scotch affairs are to bediscussed? A handful of Scotch members--""It is like everything else," said Mr. Heriot, breaking in harshly;"even, if you come to that, who are our Scotch members? In the verynext county one of our best men was turned out the other day, to makeroom for some English radical or other. They hire our houses, they shootour moors, they clear the fish out of our rivers, they treat us like ahunting-ground. Our old habits are destroyed, our old families dyingout--""Not so bad as that, not so bad as that," said Mr. Charles, soothingly."You see, Mr. Fanshawe, we're proud, and we think a retired Englishtradesman, though an excellent man--a most excellent man, perhaps betterthan half the Lairds about--is out of his proper place in our oldcastles. But still they bring money into the country, no doubt aboutthat, and it's good for trade and all the rest of it. By the way, I seethere's been a great match at St. Andrews--did you notice, Thomas?--withTom Morris in it. We must take you to St. Andrews, Mr. Fanshawe, to seegolf. You cannot say you know Scotland unless you know golf. Bless mylife, what a long time it is since I have been there--not once all lastseason. What did you say, Thomas?--that is a most unusual thing for me.""I said nothing," said Mr. Heriot. "Go to your golf, whatever happens,Charlie. Golf over your best friend's grave, if you like. What does itmatter? He would never feel it, you may be sure."Poor Mr. Charles and his attempts at conversation were thus cut shortwheresoever he turned his steps."I mean no disrespect," he said, with a certain humility, lookinganxiously at his brother, who sat throned in the irritability of hissorrow, strangely pale through the brownness of his country colour, orrather grey--with a veil over his countenance such as had never beenseen on it before. His heavy eyebrows were curved over the eyes, whichshone out fiery and red from under them, red with sleeplessness, andnervous irritation, and unshed tears."It is nothing to me," he said, in a high-pitched unsteady voice,"nothing to me! Let them amuse themselves that can. I am glad of it. HasCharlie been written to yet--that is all I want to know.""I wrote on Friday, papa.""Ah! Before the funeral," said Mr. Heriot, "to let him know what hadhappened. But I mean more than that. I mean that he should be writtento, to come home. I want him home. Why should he stay out there now,risking his health and his children's lives? Write again, and say I wanthim home.""Yes, papa," said Marjory, gently. "I said so then. I gave him all yourmessages. I said to come at once, as soon as Mrs. Charles couldtravel--""Confound Mrs. Charles! What do I care for Mrs. Charles?" cried the oldman. And then he paused, and turned with a curious attempt at a smile toFanshawe. "You'll think I am a hotheaded old Turk, but you see how I ambaffled by my family. I give a simple message, and it's lost in ahundred paraphrases. Mrs. Charles may come when she pleases. I wantCharlie. Do you hear, May? Write again this very day, and say I wanthim home.""Yes, papa, immediately, as soon as breakfast is over.""I knew there would be something to wait for," said Mr. Heriot, risingup, impatiently. He was consumed by his grief as by a fire. The presenceof any other individual, even those most dear to him, the sound ofconversation, seemed to rouse into a kind of fury the smouldering heatin his soul. And when they dropped into silence he was still moreimpatient. "I fear I am a hindrance to conversation," he said, pushingaway his chair from the table after a painful pause. "I'll levol'incomodo, as the Italians say. If anyone wants me, I'm in thelibrary. And mind that Charlie is written to without more delay."So saying, he went out hastily, with a heavy step, which yet soundeduncertain upon the floor, as if it might stumble over anything. He wavedhis hand to Fanshawe, with a forced smile, as he disappeared. He met hisdarling Milly at the door--she whom he had never passed without acaress, and brushed by, taking no notice of her. Then he came back, andlooked into the room sternly."See that there's no mistake about Charlie," he repeated.Marjory made an ineffectual effort to restrain the tears which fellsuddenly, in great drops, upon her sleeve. She, too, turned anxiousapologetic looks upon the stranger."He never was like this before," she said. "Oh, don't think he is rudeor unkind, Mr. Fanshawe. There never was anyone so good or so tender;but his heart is broken. He can think of nothing but poor Tom.""And you'll write to Charlie?" said Mr. Charles. "I don't wonder at himbeing anxious. If you'll think what India is, and what the life is--alife made up of accidents, and fevers, and everything that's deadly. Thelad might be bitten by some venomous creature; some ill beast might fallfoul of him; or he might catch the jungle fever, which they tell me ismost dangerous--""But all this might have happened to him for years past, I suppose,"said Fanshawe; "unless he went to India very recently. These dangers arenot new.""He was not the heir then!" said Mr. Charles very simply; and he toorose from the table. "Would you like to come and see my room, Mr.Fanshawe? There is not much to show, but I have some prints that are notjust what you will see every day, and a curiosity or two; while Marjorywrites her letters." And as he left the room he too looked back to say:"You'll write at once, May; you'll be very urgent? It will be good forus all to have Charlie at home.""Oh, May!" cried little Milly, who did not remember her second brother;"why are they so anxious for Charlie to come home?""Who is anxious, Milly, besides papa and Uncle Charles?""Oh, the whole house!" said Milly. "Mrs. Simpson asks me every time shesees me; and old Fleming. 'Mr. Charlie must come home now!' they say.May, will you tell me why?""To fill Tom's place!" said Marjory, with an outburst of sudden tears."Oh, my little Milly, that is what we do even when we love best. Myfather is breaking his heart for Tom; yet he wants Charlie to fill Tom'splace.""Nobody could ever fill your place, May," cried Milly; "I would neverlet them; dinna cry. I could cry too, for papa never minds me, neverlooks at me; and oh, he's so strange; the house is so strange! but May,so long as there is you--"The little girl's arms clinging round her neck were a comfort toMarjory. Little Milly was wounded too; she had received that firstlesson of her own unimportance, which is hard even for a child; she washalf indignant, half angry even with "poor Tom," though she cried at thesound of his name--and very sore about Charlie, whom everybody wishedfor."They have May, and what do they want more?" this faithful little maidensaid to herself. "When Tom was living we never saw him; and nobody everthought of Charlie. Why do they make such a fuss now? when they haveMay!"Fanshawe went with Mr. Charles to his room. After the scene of themorning he felt sadly out of place, an intruder into the family life. Itseemed to him that he ought to go away; and only the day before he hadfelt the tediousness of the existence so much that any excuse for goingaway would have seemed a godsend; but yet, at the same time, he feltthat he did not want to go. Why, he could not have told; he seemed tohave been caught in the web of this family's life, to be waiting forsome dnouement or for some new turn in the story. He had knownnothing of them two weeks before; yet now he was a member of thehousehold, a spectator of the father's misery, of the effort of thefamily to right itself after this terrible blow. They seemed all to beplaying their parts before him, while he was the judge chance hadappointed to decide how they all fulfilled their rle. With thiscurious sensation in his mind he went over Mr. Charles's treasures--hisprints, his cabinets of coins, his little collection of old jewellery,which he had ranged in boxes under glass covers. "Here is a necklacethat I sometimes lend to May," the old man said, pointing out a delicatecirclet in fine enamel, and the lightest fairy goldsmith's work. "It wasbrought to her great grandmother, Leddy Pitcomlie, from Rome, in thebeginning of last century, and is said to have belonged to a line ofgreat Italian beauties, whom I need not name. They're all written out onthe case. I can recollect seeing it on the old Leddy's withered neck.""Then you had a title in the family in those days?""No, no; no title! Leddy is the feminine of Laird, in old Scots--notLady, mind, which has another meaning. This is a ring that belonged toRobert Hay in the end of the fifteenth century. We bear the yoke stillin our arms, you see. Robert Hay, of the Erroll family, married theheiress of Pitcomlie--who was Marjory, like our Marjory downstairs. It'sa romance in its way. I have put together some of the facts in the shapeof a kind of family history; but whether it will ever see the light ofday--""Then you are an author, as well as an antiquary?" said Fanshawe; "andan art collector; and all sorts of learned things besides. What animpudent wretch I was to speak of dulness here!"Mr. Charles blushed, and waved his hand in gentle deprecation."No more of an author than I am of an antiquary," he said; "a bitsmattering here and there, that's all the knowledge I possess. As for mybits of family notes, I doubt if they would interest any but the familyand connections. We have never had any notabilities among us; good,honest, ordinary folk; some soldiers that have done well in their day,but never very remarkable; and some clever women--that's been ourspeciality. You may see it in Marjory at the present moment. Cleverwomen--I don't mean authoresses, or that kind of cattle, but realcapable mothers of families, that could guide their house and rule theirchildren. We've been great for that. Here are some miniatures that,perhaps, will interest you; some very good, some bad enough, but all thesame character, the same character running through them. There is oneyou would say was done for May, and it's her great-aunt I don't know howmany times removed."Thus the old man chattered, leading the stranger from one corner toanother of his domain. Mr. Charles's rooms were in the habitable cornerof the old house of Pitcomlie, which was connected with the new house bya long corridor, a windy passage, with the garden on one side and thecliff on the other. One wing of the old building had been preserved insufficient repair, and Mr. Charles's study occupied the round of the oldtourelle, as well as part of the ancient front of the house. It was alarge, cheerful room, with many windows, which he had fitted upaccording to his taste, and his taste was good. His writing-table stoodin the round of the little tower commanding views up and down the Firth.All the wonderful panorama on which Fanshawe had gazed with so muchinterest from the cliffs, unfolded itself round the old windows whichwere set in the half-circle of the tower. Between these windows Mr.Charles had placed frames of crimson velvet, set with miniatures, withrare old prints, and with small but exquisite scraps of sketches. Only atrained eye, indeed, could have divined the amount of modest wealthcontained upon these; delightful faces, lovely little scraps of scenery,gems which nothing could replace, though to the ignorant they seemedsimple enough.Fanshawe felt himself grow smaller and smaller as he looked. After all,this was not the dull and level blank of existence he had supposed. Thishomely old man, with his Scotch accent, changed under his eyes; hebecame something a great deal more lofty and elevated than Mr. Charles.In his compunction and shame, the young man went as far too high in hissecond estimate as he had been too low in his first. As for Mr. Charles,this change gave him a simple satisfaction which it was delightful tobehold."You see, after all, there are some things worth looking at inPitcomlie," he said. "It is not such a humdrum house, after all, thoughit stands in a county so little interesting as comfortable Fife.""Nothing could have made it a humdrum house," said the penitent. He wasnot thinking of Mr. Charles's pictures: he was thinking of--somethingelse.Just then an unexpected summons came to the door."Miss Heriot's compliments, and would the gentleman step over to thenorth room?" the maid said, who waited, curtseying, to show the way.Mr. Charles's countenance clouded over."That's poor Tom's room," he said. "I'll go with the gentlemanmyself--and yet, no; on second thoughts I'll not go. You two may havesomething to consult about, that I should not meddle with; or Marjorymay think there is something. Go, as she has sent for you, Mr. Fanshawe;you can come back to me another time."With a curious little thrill of interest, Fanshawe went, threading theturret staircase down from Mr. Charles's rooms, and the windy passages,wondering what she could want with him. Marjory received him in a roomof a very different description. It was in the back of the house,looking across the gardens to the level line of the ploughed land, andthe low hills on the horizon. It was a long, narrow room, with a dooropening from each end; and its decorations were of a kind as differentfrom Mr. Charles's study as was its form. On the walls hung two crossedswords, some old guns carefully arranged according to their antiquity, acollection of whips, fishing-rods, clubs for playing golf--worn outtraces of a boyhood not yet so very long departed. In one corner was abookcase, full of old classics, thumbed and worn, the school-books ofthe two boys whose progress in polite letters Pitcomlie had once been soproud of. The pictures on the walls were of the most heterogeneouscharacter; languishing French "Etudes" in chalk, were mingled withsporting subjects, heads of dogs, portraits of sleek race-horses led bysleeker grooms, and one staring view of Pitcomlie, painted inwater-colours, with very lively greens and blues, and signed "Ch.Hay-Heriot," in bold boyish characters.No contrast could have been greater than this mass of incongruouselements, seen after the careful collection of Mr. Charles; and yetthis, too, was not without its attraction. It looked like the chaos of aboy's mind, a hopeless yet innocent confusion; all sorts of discordantthings connected together by the sweet atmosphere of youth andpossibility, out of which all harmonies might come. In the midst of thisschoolboy chamber sat Marjory. She had a writing-case placed before heron a table, the key of which she held in her hand. Fanshawe recognisedit at once. It was one which Tom had used constantly, which he hadcarried about with him everywhere. Tom's sister looked up at him with awistful and anxious glance."Mr. Fanshawe," she said, "this has been brought to me to open. Myfather cannot bear to look at anything, and I--I feel as if we had noright to search into his secrets. It seems dishonourable, when he cannotdefend himself--when he is in our power."Fanshawe went round to Marjory's side, and took into his own the handwhich, half unconsciously, she held out, appealing to him, and touchedthe fingers with his lips. Her eyes were full of tears, and the look sheturned to him, asking for counsel and sympathy, went to his very heart.A slight colour came to her face at this answer to her appeal; butMarjory was not vain, and took it in no other light than as an impulseof sympathy."Must I do it?" she asked."Is there any reason why? is it necessary? must you do it?" he asked."Miss Heriot, your brother was but a man like others. There may bethings he would not have had you see."Once more Marjory blushed; but this time more hotly. She drooped herhead not to look at him."That is what I thought," she said, very low. Then after a pause, shelooked up suddenly in his face. "Mr. Fanshawe, you were his friend; youheard what he said about something to tell me. He thanked God at thelast that he had told me, though he had not, you are aware. Do you knowwhat it was?""No." It was a relief unspeakable to him to be able to say this. "I knownone of his secrets--if he had any. So far as I am aware, he wasirreproachable. I knew nothing of him which you might not have known.""Thanks!" she said, with a smile, once more holding out her hand. Howgrateful she was to him for knowing nothing! "Do you think, if I keep itby me, to refer to in case of need--do you think that would do?""Or your uncle might do it," said Fanshawe.To his astonishment, she shrank from this suggestion."Uncle Charles is very good and kind; but he would be hard upon poorTom--he was always hard upon him. I must do it, if it has to be done.Must it be done? I am so unwilling to do it, that I cannot trust my ownjudgment. Oh! why cannot our little treasures, our secrets, ourmysteries, be buried with us in our graves?""He may have left a will--instructions--something that concerns others,"said Fanshawe, hesitating.Miss Heriot was not perfect, or an angelical woman. She almost turnedher back upon him as she answered coldly,"Thanks; you seem to think it necessary. I will not trouble you further,Mr. Fanshawe. I am much obliged to you for your advice.""What else could I say?" poor Fanshawe asked himself, as he retired."What the deuce have I done? She talks as if it was my fault. I did notkill Tom Heriot, nor lock up his secrets in his despatch box. I hope,though, she won't find anything to shock her. What do the people heremean by leaving all this to her? They give her everything to do. ByJove! if it was me she would find the difference. I should be her slave.She should do just what she liked, and so would I. I wonder if she'dlike it? I mean not me, but the kind of thing--to be served instead ofserving, to be kept from trouble instead of being bothered by everybody.Just for the fun of the thing I should like to know."At this stage of his thoughts, Mr. Fanshawe being outside on theplatform before the house, lighted his cigar; and then he strolled downthe cliff to the rocks, where he wandered about till the hour ofluncheon."I suppose it's best as it is," he said to himself, as he clambered upagain at the sound of the bell. Such a sentiment is perhaps lesscontented, less satisfactory than it looks. "I suppose it's best as itis!" Certainly there was a certain ruefulness in the countenance withwhich it was said.CHAPTER X.Mr. Heriot did not come to luncheon. A tray carefully piled witheverything that old Fleming could think of to tempt his master'sappetite was carried to him in the library; but before the rest of theparty had left the table, Fleming came back disconsolate, bearing histray untouched."In case ye shouldna believe me, I've brought it back, Miss Marjory," hesaid, with an injured air, approaching the young mistress of the house."Look at it with your ain e'en, and maybe then ye'll believe me. No athing tasted, no more nor he did yesterday, and me sent away for an auldbletherin' scoondrel. An auld bletherin' scoondrel! Man and boy I'vebeen in the house o' Pitcomlie forty years, and it's the first time sucha name was ever applied to me.""Fleming, you must not mind," said Marjory. "My father did not mean it.It was his grief that spoke, and not he.""Nae doubt ye ken better than me, Miss Marjory; the bairns we've broughtup on our knees are aye wiser than us old folk; but he means that, Isuppose?" said old Fleming, holding up his tray triumphantly. "And whatkind of a meaning is that for the father of a family? No to take hisgood food that's been prepared wi' a' the care and pains of a clean andChristian woman, that sud have been accepted wi' a grace and eaten withthanksgiving. When I mind the luncheons the Laird used to eat, the gooddinners he made, the fine nat'rel appetite!" cried Fleming, almost withtears in his eyes, holding up his tray as an eloquent witness of hiscase, "and now to be sent away with a flea in my lug for a bletherin'scoondrel,--because I was fain to see him eat a morsel of wholesomemeat!""Go away to your pantry, Sir, and say no more about it," said Mr.Charles, authoritatively. "Miss Marjory has plenty to put up with,without your nonsense. Your father, my dear, has been in the house fordays together. He has not so much as taken a walk, he that was alwaysafoot. That's the reason why he cannot eat; for my part, I am notsurprised. He'll be better, I hope, when Charlie comes back.""I would get the doctor," said Fleming, with stout self-assertion. "Mr.Charlie may be kept back by ill winds, or many a thing beside. I wouldhave the doctor if it was me."Fanshawe looked at this scene with mingled amusement and surprise; butthough Mr. Charles stood up in defence of his niece, neither of themthought it strange that the old butler should have his word to say. Theold man even emitted extraordinary murmurs, which were almost likegroans, as he continued his attendance at table."I've seen death in the house afore. I've seen plenty of sore trouble;but I never saw the Laird as he is now. Waes me! waes me!" saidFleming; and the conversation, such as it was, was interrupted by thismonologue.They all went into the drawing-room together, glad to escape from it.Mr. Charles took his three-cornered seat by the fire, and his newspaper,which he had left lying upon it. Marjory seated herself at thewriting-table in the bow-window. They had their natural occupations, thethings they did habitually every day; but as for Fanshawe, he had nooccupation to turn to. He turned over all the books on the tables, andthen he went and stood at the window. The weather had changed sinceyesterday, which was much too bright to last. It was a true Spring dayon the East coast, with a white mist closing in over land and sea, and achill wind blowing. Was he to spend that whole long afternoon gazing atthe tumbling, leaden waves, and the choking white vapour that lay heavylike a coverlet over them, and clung to the edges of the cliff like afringe of woolly whiteness, and shut out both earth and sky?Just then Mr. Heriot put in his head, and asked sharply,"Have you written to Charlie?""Yes, papa," said Marjory, with a little start; and a minute after,Fanshawe, at the window, saw the old man go out, with his head upon hisbreast, to the misty cliff that lay before the windows.He stood still there for some moments, with his tall figure relievedagainst the forlorn blackness of the waves and the woolly mist, hiswhite hair and the skirts of his coat blowing in the wind; and then hetook the rocky path down the side of the cliff, which led to the beach.It seemed to be natural that he should choose such a day to go abroadin, a hopeless day, when the sun and the light were obscured, when thewind searched to the marrow of the bones, and the mist crept into thethroat, and the sea moaned and complained among its rocks.Fanshawe stood and watched him as long as he could see him. The very airand water seemed to sigh "Waes me!" like the old serving-man who lovedthe house."Mr. Fanshawe," said Marjory, from the recess, "is there anything to bedone for you? We are dull, and we cannot help it. None of us are goodfor anything. I should like to ask you to walk with us; but it is aneasterly haar, and that is bad on our coast; and riding would be stillworse; and it is too late, even if the weather were not so bad, to go toSt. Andrews, as Uncle Charles proposed--""Never mind me," said Fanshawe, with some shame. "You must think me aman of few resources, and so, I fear, I am. I am good for nothing. Ihave got out of the way of reading. It is a horrible confession, but itis true. The only thing that suggests itself to me on such a day is, ifnot to walk, yet to talk.""Let us talk, then," said Marjory, closing the blotting-book in whichshe had been writing her letters.She said it, he thought, with a sort of half contempt, as if thisinsignificant occupation of talk was a kind of idleness, and beneathher ordinary activity; and then, as was natural after such a conclusionhad been come to, a dead silence supervened. Mr. Fanshawe broke it witha laugh."I fear you despise talking," he said; "and conversation is a thingwhich cannot be done of malice prepense. May we have some musicinstead? There is music enough there in your case to last a life-time,much less an afternoon.""Music!" said Marjory, somewhat startled. "To be sure," she added, witha smile, "music is not merry-making, as our poor folk fancy. It does notneed to be the voice of mirth; and now you suggest it, there are fewthings that would express one's feelings so well--the forlorn, confused,oppressed--" She paused, with tears rising, which got into her throatand her eyes, and stifled her words. "But I must not, Mr. Fanshawe. Itwould shock everybody. My poor father would think me mad, and I cannottell what the servants would say. It would seem to them the very heightof heartlessness.""No, no," said Mr. Charles, from his corner; "no, May, my dear; nomusic. I could not put up with that."Fanshawe turned away, dismayed. He felt himself the most profane,secular, troublesome intruder. Poor Tom's shadow seemed to stop up allthe ordinary currents of life, and create a fictitious existence, fullof impossible laws of its own for the mourners. Little Milly sat in acorner, reading--not her favourite stories, or the fairy tales which hadbeen her constant companions, but a good book about a little boy whodied in the odour of sanctity. She was reading it with the corners ofher mouth turned down, and every soft, wavy line about her stilled intoangles and gravity.Fanshawe went and sat down by her, and began to talk of that voyage,which he had once proposed, to the Isle of May. He led the child so farout of herself, that at the end of five minutes she laughed, a soundwhich frightened her to death, and which made both her uncle and hersister raise their eyes, as if something dreadful had happened. May saidnothing, and her eyes, tearful though they were, smiled at the littlecreature; but Mr. Charles said in a voice which was harsh for him:--"You forget that this is a house of mourning."Poor Milly cried a little by way of expiating that weakness of nature,and relapsed into her good book; but Fanshawe could not cry, and had nogood book to retire into. He yawned visibly, as he lay back in his lowchair and contemplated his companions. He was a good-for-nothing; he hadno letters to write, no studies to carry on. When he was not amused oroccupied, he yawned. What else was there to do?There is nothing which more piques a woman than this frank andunblushing ennui, when it makes itself visible within reach of her.Marjory felt half-insulted, half-stimulated to exertion."Is there nothing we can show Mr. Fanshawe?" she said, in a tone ofsemi-irritation. "I fear our pictures are only family-portraits, and wepossess nothing that is curious. Uncle Charles has all the rarities inthe house, and those you have seen already. Should you like to go overthe old hall--the ruinous part? There is not much to see.""I should like it very much," said Fanshawe.He did not care two straws about the old ruined Manor-house; but thethought of a tte--tte with May was pleasant to him, partly becauseof the vague attraction which a handsome young woman has for a youngman, and partly because he was curious about her individually. She was anew species to him; he had not made her out, and the study was anagreeable kind of study. With a slight flush of impatience on her face,she had risen to lead the way; and he, secretly delighted, but perfectlydemure and serious, was following, when all his satisfaction wassuddenly turned into discomfiture. The door opened, and, with a tone ofsolemnity, Fleming entered and announced,"Doctor and Mistress Murray."When he had solemnly pronounced the names, giving full weight to everysyllable, the old servant ranged himself by the wall, to see the effectof his announcement; he watched complacently while the visitors enteredafter him in panoply of woe, with looks wrought up to the requisitepitch of sympathetic solemnity. It was, as Fleming said afterwards, asgood as a sermon to see the Doctor. He had come to condole, and he wasfully prepared to do so. Resignation and submission--that comfortableresignation which can support with so much dignity the losses ofothers--was in every fold of his dress, in the lines of his composedcountenance, decently sad, but not gloomy, as became a man who sorrowednot without hope. To old Fleming, the Minister's aspect was a thoroughenjoyment. It was the sort of thing which was befitting to a house ofmourning; not the hot grief which refused to be comforted, and abjuredfood and carnal consolation, like that passion of sorrow which possessedhis master; but a legitimate and subdued sentiment, which fulfilled allproprieties, and was an example to all beholders.Mrs. Murray was not so satisfactory. She came in crying softly, and tookMarjory into her arms, who--thus caught on the very verge of going out,and making an effort after amusement, was confused, as if she had beendoing something amiss."My poor Marjory! my poor bairn!" said Mrs. Murray; while May, thoughthe tears started from her eyes, felt as if she must cry out inself-accusation, and confess that for that moment she had not beenthinking of Tom.Then they all sat down in a circle, of which Dr. Murray was the centre.Mr. Charles had shuffled hastily out of his fireside corner, and hadcome forward to shake hands, with a certain solemn empressement, whichwas the proper way in which members of the family should receive such avisit. Fanshawe stole away behind backs, and sat down again by littleMilly; but Milly, with a dreadful recollection of that laugh, avoidedhim, and fixed her eyes upon the Minister--for what would happen if,under sore press of temptation, she was to make such a terrible mistakeagain?"And how is your father, Miss Marjory?" said the Doctor; "far from well,I fear? He had a shaken look yesterday at church that grieved my heartto see. No doubt it is a great affliction, a very sore stroke from theAlmighty; but we must remember that it is the Almighty, and that it isnot our place to repine.""No doubt, no doubt; that is true," said Mr. Charles, acquiescingsolemnly.It was a thing incumbent on him in his representative position as theonly man of the house."I don't think my father means to repine," said Marjory. "His heart isjust broken; he never thought of it--never expected such a thing as thathe should live, and poor Tom be taken away!""And the heir, too," said the Doctor. "The ways of the Lord are veryinscrutable. Just those lives that seem to us most valuable are taken.When I look round upon the world," added Dr. Murray, "and see how manypeople are struck just in the way that was most unexpected, mostunlikely! But he has other children left, and you must do what you canto keep him from brooding. My dear Miss Marjory, a great deal is in yourhands.""I can do so little," said Marjory, with tears. "My poor father! hisheart is broken. There does not seem anything that we can do.""You must tell him to be resigned," said Dr. Murray. "I am very sorrythat he is out. I should have been glad if I had been able to speak aword of comfort to my old friend and respected heritor. You must remindhim how much we have all to bear. Not one of us is without his cross.Sometimes it falls heavier on one than on another. It is his turnto-day, and it may be ours to-morrow; but none of us escape. The onlyone thing certain is that there must have been need of it. Thismysterious and terrible dispensation has not been sent without some goodend.""No doubt, no doubt; it must be for a good purpose," said Mr. Charles."I cannot say how sorry I am that Mr. Heriot is not in," continued theDoctor. "I might have timed my visit differently. I had not thought itlikely that he would be well enough to go out.""He has gone down to the rocks," said Marjory, feeling that her fatherwas put on his defence. "It is not a day to tempt any one. I think themoaning of the sea soothes him. He cannot bear conversation; we are noneof us capable of much--""My poor child! as if anything was to be expected," said kind Mrs.Murray, drawing her aside. "I would not even have had the Doctor come sosoon. I thought I might have come myself first, to give you a kiss, mydear. Oh! May, I know what it is! Tell your father my heart just bleedsfor him. I'm glad he's out to take the air, though it's a dreary, drearyday; but, perhaps, in grief like his, a dreary day is the best. Whenit's bright, Nature seems to have no heart. The Doctor thought it washis duty to come, though it's so soon. And, my dear, tell me, has anychange been thought of? what are you going to do?""We have sent for Charlie; that is all. What other change is therepossible? I hope perhaps my father may take some comfort when Charliecomes home.""Now that is just what I said," said Mrs. Murray, growing a little morecheerful on this argument. "Doctor, I told you they would send forCharlie. He should be home now with his bairns, to bring them up intheir own country; and India's a weary place for children. You can neverbe happy about them. I am looking for my Mary's two eldest, poor things!It will break their mother's heart to part with them; but what can shedo? Oh, yes, my dear; it will be a great happiness to me; but I cannotexpect you to take any interest in that, and you in such trouble. MissJean is coming to-morrow to pay you her visit, May. I will say nothingto her about Charles; she will like best to hear that from you herself.""It is quite the right thing to do," said the Doctor; "and we may bethankful that your brother Charles has always been very steady, and amarried man, and all that. He will be a great comfort to you all, and ahelp to his father about the estate. Your father has got a great shake,Miss Marjory, and I doubt if he will ever be as strong to go about as hehas been. Charles's arrival is the very best thing that could happen.Always a steady lad, and able to take his part in the management of theproperty. He will be a comfort to you all."It was on Marjory's lips to say that she wanted no comfort, and that thesubstitution of one brother for another gave her, on the contrary, anadditional pang; but she restrained herself, and acquiesced silently,while Mr. Charles answered,"Oh, no doubt, no doubt. Charlie will be a comfort when he comes."And then Marjory was once more folded in Mrs. Murray's kind arms, andthe doctor, with concentrated woe in his face, laid his hand upon hershoulder, and exhorted her to be resigned, as he took his leave. As thedoor opened, Fleming's voice was heard exhorting another visitor toenter."Come in, sir, come this way," said Fleming.And Fanshawe, who stood in the recess of the bow-window, watching thewhole proceedings, saw a young man enter shyly and with reluctance,whose appearance somehow entirely changed the placid feelings with whichhe had watched the Minister and the Minister's wife. The new-comer cameup to Marjory with eager, though hesitating, steps; he took her hand andheld it, bowing over it so deeply that the spectator asked himself, inscorn, whether the fellow meant to kiss it. He had kissed that same handhimself in respect and sympathy not very long before; but thepresumption of the stranger struck him as something inexcusable.The visitor was a slim young man, with large dark eyes, and that"interesting" look which women are said to admire, and which men regardwith savage scorn. Fanshawe was not handsome himself; his eyes were ofno particular colour, and he was more muscular than interesting.Therefore his scorn was intensified. Instinctive dislike and enmityfilled his mind, when he saw young Hepburn's head bent so low overMarjory's hand."I thought I might come to ask," said Hepburn, hurriedly. "I did nothope to see you. I came in only because Fleming insisted, without anywish to thrust myself--Miss Heriot, you will be good and kind, as youalways are. You got my note?"She did not sit down, but received her visitor standing, which was akind of satisfaction to the looker-on."Yes. I got your note. It is very kind, very friendly of you--""Oh, hush! don't say so. Kind of me! But if you will make use ofme--anyhow, Miss Heriot! only that I may feel I am doing something. Letme run errands, write letters--anything. What is the use of my life butfor your service?" said the young man, in his emotion and excitement.Fanshawe, fortunately, did not hear these last words."Thanks," said Marjory, with a cold yet gentle graciousness. The wordsounded to the one as if it had come out of the snows of the Arcticregion; but to the other, the distant spectator, it sounded warm andsweet. "We do not require any help, Mr. Hepburn. All that we wished hasbeen done. Everybody has been very kind. How can I thank you? We havefelt the kindness of our friends to the bottom of our hearts.""How can you speak of kindness? There are some who would giveanything in the world to take a single burden from you. You willthink of me, then--as the greatest favour, Miss Heriot--if there isanything--anything you think me worthy to do? That is all. I will notsay another word except that my whole heart is with you in your grief. Ican think of nothing else.""Nay," said Marjory, drawing back a step like a queen, as she gave himher hand again. "You are too kind to say so.""Confound these old friends!" Fanshawe said to himself, thinking thisdouble hand-shaking a quite undue and unnecessary familiarity, whilepoor young Hepburn withdrew, feeling as if she had spoken to him fromthe top of a mountain--from some chill and impassable distance. "My ownfault for intruding so soon," he said to himself, sadly, as he wentaway.Thus the brief interview made a totally different impression upon twopersons present. Hepburn had not noticed Fanshawe, had scarcely seen,indeed, that there was any one in the room but Marjory herself."Is that Johnnie Hepburn?" said Uncle Charles, as he went away. "What anice-looking young fellow the boy has grown.""He looks like a Johnnie," said Fanshawe, with a laugh.It was unpardonably impertinent, he felt, the next moment; but hisfeelings demanded some relief."He is very good and very kind," said Marjory, majestically, casting alook upon him which avenged poor Johnnie. Fanshawe grew meek as a childin a moment, and begged pardon as humbly as Milly herself could havedone."And now we can go to the old house," he said, going after her withintense satisfaction, as she went to the door."Not now; I am too tired. I cannot do more to-day," said Marjory; and heheard the sound of a low sob as she escaped, little Milly rushing afterher."It is all that fellow's fault," was Fanshawe's comment, as he went backto his bow-window, and sat down and looked out disconsolately upon theleaden sea and the white choking mist. What was it to him whose fault itwas? But Marjory Heriot was the only thing he had to interest him, andhe took a great interest in all that affected her--for the moment atleast.CHAPTER XI.Marjory, I am sorry to say, thought nothing at all of the interest shehad excited; she was not so much as conscious of it; and she did noteven think of Fanshawe, who was rather an embarrassment than a comfortto the household. She had been sinking into a certain calm, close as shestill was to the great misfortune which had befallen her family; buttime travels very quickly at such moments, and it already seemed ages toher since she entered poor Tom's sick-chamber, and since she saw himdie. She had been quieted by the calm of the silent Sunday after thefuneral; but her visitors had driven all her quiet away. When theMinister had bidden her to be resigned, she had felt a wild impatiencefill her mind; she hastened to her own room, dismissing Milly, and thenthrew herself upon her sofa, and wept as a child weeps. It was sorrow,but it was not such sorrow as Marjory was capable of feeling. Herbrother had been dear to her; but he was not all in all to her.Impatience, a painful sense of the narrowness of human sympathy, and theimperfection of human good sense, mingled, in this little outburst, withnatural grief, and that painful pity with which, wherever no deepreligious sense of gain comes in, the death of a young man cut off inhis prime must be regarded.Marjory's mind was not one of those which are apt to speculate upon thepossibilities of damnation; but on the other hand, it was impossible tothink of poor Tom as an evangelical conqueror, a saint-like personage inrobes of white and crown of glory. He could not have reached thatheight, poor fellow! and therefore the ache of pity with which hissister thought of his early severance from all he had cared for, wasvery sore and painful. The human comparison seemed to add an edge ofsharper pain to grief. His companions lived and flourished--and he wasgone. They had their easy mornings, their gay evenings, their sports andamusements, and enjoyed them all with light hearts. In the papers thatvery day, had been an announcement of the marriage of one of them--andTom was dead!Marjory's heart contracted with a pang of pain, as though some gigantichand had crushed it. She thought it was grief, but it was something morethan simple grief. Under the sway of this feeling she went to the tableupon which his desk had been placed, and seated herself once more beforeit. The last time she had done so--that time when she had ineffectuallyquestioned Fanshawe--she had felt herself shrink from the painful task,and had not really made any investigation into poor Tom's secrets. Nowshe opened the desk with her eyes full of tears for him, with thatpainful contraction at her heart.There is nothing in the world so sad as thus to open some humancreature's most cherished repositories, when the poor soul is gone, andcan guard his foolishness no more. How trivial half the things are! afourth part of them, at least, thrown there in that light-heartedinadvertence which death makes to appear like a solemn intention,puzzling the survivors with its want of meaning. Why did he keep this orthat? an unimportant invitation, a letter about nothing at all, an emptyenvelope, a memorandum about a race, a receipt for physic for a horse.What a curious mixture of awe and astonishment was in her as shegathered them together! They were good for nothing but the waste-basket;and yet the fact that Tom had treasured them gave the worthless scrapsan interest. She cleared away a mass of these remains of his life. Thereis a little hill near Rome which is made, they say, of fragments ofcrockery, and such other valueless relics of an ended existence; but ahme! when one remembers what sacred spot lies there under the cypress, inthe shadow of Testaccio, how solemn and sacred does that mound ofclassic rubbish become to us! Something of the same effect was wroughtupon Marjory by the sight of poor Tom's rubbish, now that death had madeit mysterious. She tried hard to get some meaning out of it, and failingin that, put it aside in a pile, with a certainty that it must be herperceptions which were in fault. Was there nothing to be found but thesemiserable dbris, that had so little signification? There were billsbesides, and letters about bills; letters which Marjory knew would bevery little welcome to her father. How was she to tell him of them? Tom,poor fellow, had become as a god, as an angel to his father, since hislife ended; and to plunge him back again into the old atmosphere of debtand promises to pay--how miserable it would be! She made these too upinto a parcel by themselves with a sense of humiliation. Was this allthat was left of Tom? His bills; and those frivolous scraps that meantnothing--that had no human value, that threw no light upon hisexistence. Was it worth while for a man to have been born, to have livedand died, for nothing better than that? Marjory felt that even ill-doingwould have been better than no doing at all; and grew scornful almost ofher own fears. She had felt as if she were about to thrust herself intoTom's secrets--and lo! Tom had no secrets at all.These thoughts were in her mind, filling her with a kind of angry shame,when she picked up, out of a corner, a letter, badly folded and badlywritten; but put away, it was evident, with some care. It had noenvelope or address. The paper was very finely glazed and gilt-edged;but it was folded awry, and the handwriting was quite unformed. "Nodoubt a letter from his groom," Marjory said to herself, with a painfulsense of the unsatisfactory character of Tom's correspondences; but whenshe had read the first few lines, her countenance changed. Shepaused--she looked at the signature. A momentary look of haughtydispleasure and disgust crossed her face, and she let the letter drop,as if with the intention of tossing it from her; but on second thoughtsshe changed her mind. She lifted it once more gingerly, as if it weresomething which might stain the white fingers in which she held it, andwith a deep and painful blush began again to read. I do not think therewas anything in the letter to call that blush to Marjory's cheek; butshe had the same prejudices as other women, and was deeply susceptibleto everything that felt like shame. The writing was not absolutelycoarse--it was like the writing of a child, unformed and uncertain,written upon ruled lines, which had been partially rubbed out; but thesentiments were not those of a child. This was what, with a proud senseof humiliation, keen disgust and indignation, Marjory read--all hernatural prejudices starting into warmest life."I cannot write to you in the way you tell me--I would think shame.Oh, Sir, you must not expect much from a poor lass that never haslearned anything, till I tried to do it, to please you. There isnothing I would not do to please you. Ye've been very kind to me,Mr. Heriot, like a good man. And, eh! I hope I'll make a good wife,if I could but learn quicker, no to be a shame to you. Sorry, sorryI am that I did not take more advantage of the schule as I mighthave done--for, oh! Mr. Heriot, them that say 'your face is yourfortune,' say little that is pleasant to hear. When I think whilesthat it's but for my face ye fancied me; and that, maybe, if anyaccident happened--if I lost my colour, or my teeth, or what not,ye would think of me nae mair! Oh, Sir, dinna be like that! Ifyou were blind and cripplit, and pock-markit, like old John inthe clachan, I would but think the more of you. And you that are agentleman, Mr. Heriot, and know everything, you should not be lessthan poor me; for although I am little to set store by, and no ascholar, nor instructed, I'm better than my face, which is just abit of painted flesh, as the Minister says. If I thought you caredfor me, and no just it--oh, but I would be happy! I have a greatdeal to say, but I cannot tell how to say it. I am feared formaking you think me more ignorant than ever. My heart's full, full;but I think shame to say all that's in it; you know, Sir, betterthan I can tell you. When will you come back? oh! when will ye comeback? I'm weary of wishing and wishing. My sister Agnes will not goto her place, thinking ye might not like it. John Ogilvy, my firstcousin, the son of Uncle John, that is the smith, is away to theCollege to learn to be a Minister. I do not mind anything else youwould like to hear; but that I'm wearying, wearying sore, and aye,the longer the time is, the mair wearying to see my" (here therewere a great many erasures--one word written over another till itwas impossible to make out what they had been--until it finished inthe clearly written words) "my Mr. Heriot again."Your ain and your very ain, oh dear, dear Sir,"ISABELL."Marjory read this innocent and natural letter with a buzzing of excitedpulses in her ears, and a blaze of hot colour in her face. The mere factthat it was a letter from a woman moved her (naturally) as no other kindof secret could have done. Indeed what other kind of secret would havebeen worth considering in comparison? She drew a long breath when shehad read it. Her face was scarlet, as if the shame (if shame there was)had been her own. And it was hardly possible for her, at least for thefirst moment, to realise that there might be no shame in it. To havefelt so, would have been such a triumph over prejudice and over naturalfeeling as Marjory was not equal to. The bad writing, the bad spelling,the peasant dialect, struck her more strongly than the sentiments did.They seemed to imply vice--vice which to a young and pure-minded womanis the same as crime--nay, is the worst kind of crime. There was then,after all, a mystery in Tom's life, and here it was; a vulgar degradingmystery--the kind of horror which people say is so common in the livesof young men, a suggestion which Marjory loathed as every woman ought toloath it. It filled her with disgust of Tom and of all men.She threw the paper out of her hand with a cry of indignant wrath, andthen slowly, reluctantly, took it up again, unable to resist thefascination. The second time a different impression was made upon hermind. "I'll make a good wife"--what did that mean? Marjory pondered overit with excitement, which was not calmed down by this new discovery.Had he really meant--was it possible he could have intended to make thewriter of this letter his wife? His sister thrilled all over with anindignant movement of horror, Yes, I do not know how to excuse it--butMarjory, who had been blazing hot with shame at the idea of adisreputable connection on her brother's part, felt a shiver of horrorgo over her at the thought that there might be no shame in it, that hismind might be honourable and his love pure, that he might have intendedthis woman, this peasant, this Isabell, to be her sister and his wife.Her eyes fixed on those words with a painful stare. "Good heavens, hiswife!" and under her breath, in her throat, Marjory murmured, "ThankGod!" Thank God for what? that Tom was dead? that he had not lived tocarry that intention out? was this what she meant? She stopped short inabsolute dismay, when her reason perceived to what length instinct andimpulse had carried her.She hid her burning face in her hands. She fell a-weeping; tears morepoignant and real than any she had yet shed for Tom. Her mind turnedagainst itself, lost in that misery of moral confusion which makes theproblem of life so doubly bitter. She dared not say to herself that theleast honourable explanation was the least terrible; but her thoughtswent on in spite of her, against her will, shaping before her a pictureof what might have been. This peasant woman in Pitcomlie, mistress ofeverything, the successor of all the Heriot ladies, filling her ownmother's place, Marjory's sister, Milly's guardian placed on the samelevel with them, almost superior to them--good heavens! She disowned thethoughts that thus struggled in her. She tried to drive them from hermind, to ignore them, to introduce other feelings in their place, andcried, and hid her face and could not. God had stepped in and preservedthe house from this degradation; He had saved them perhaps at the lastmoment. And things being as they were, and poor Tom doomed anyhow, Godbe thanked, might not she say it? deep down where nobody could hear, inthe depths of her heart.Marjory was breathless after this battle with her thoughts; she draggedherself out of it she scarcely knew how, frightened to think what shehad been thinking, scared as a man is who has travelled in the dark,when morning shows him the precipices he has passed--or like a drowningman who has been struggling with the angry waves, she crept forth upondry land, and lay there exhausted, trying not to think, hearing thegreat searollers break beneath, too low to harm her. It seemed to herthat she had passed through a terrible conflict, and it made her heartsick to think that this perhaps was the secret which Tom had intended totell her. Perhaps he had meant to commend the girl to her care, to claimher affection and sympathy; and for the moment she felt fiercely gladthat he had not done so, that she was bound by no sort of visible orinvisible tie to this unknown Isabell. Yes, she was glad he had notlived to tell that secret, glad he had been stopped from disgracing thefamily. It hardly seemed to her, for the moment, that the exemption ofthe house from so great a shame and injury by Tom's death, was too greata thing to have been done by Providence for the sake of the Heriots. Sheseemed no longer sorry, no longer a mourner, but glad and comforted tothink that God had stepped in and stopped it, perhaps, at the lastmoment when there was no time to lose.But it was with an agitated heart, and a countenance out of which shecould not altogether banish her excitement, that she went down stairs,when old Fleming rang that inevitable bell for dinner. Dinner! with whatweary disgust Marjory thought of it, and of the compulsory meeting withall the party, the solemn sitting down to table, the politenesses to Mr.Fanshawe, the efforts she would have to make to interpose herselfbetween her father's irritable grief and her uncle Charles's amiable butsometimes untimely wisdom. She changed one black gown for anotherrapidly, and smoothed her brown hair, which (strangely she felt) keptits bright colour notwithstanding her mourning. What a farce, shethought to herself, (being bitter and sore) that mourning was? It hadjust as many troublesome accessories as the gayest dress, nay, almostmore; for the most heart-broken of women in the deepest of afflictionhas got to take care of her crape, that dear and odious addition to allmourning garments. From this it is not to be supposed that Marjory wasimpatient of her crape. She would not have cheated poor Tom out of asingle fold, she would have enveloped herself in it from head to footrather than fail in any prejudice of respect. But her heart was sore andher mind excited. Nothing seemed to her to be true. Tom had deceivedher, leading her to suppose that some matter worthy of her ears was tobe revealed to her; and lo! it was but this vulgar, poor, conventional,common sort of secret; and even she herself was a deceiver, for did shenot pretend to mourn for Tom even now, when she had begun to feel thatperhaps his death was expedient? All in the house gave themselves out tobe mourning for poor Tom; yet Uncle Charles had recovered his interestin everything that was going on, and little Milly in the afternoon hadlaughed--Mr. Fanshawe, who was Tom's friend, and ought to have been morefaithful to the poor fellow's memory, having inveigled the child intoit. Thus the party would meet, she said to herself, all longing toescape from this gloom, and talk and think like others, but dared notfor Falsehood's sake; and she herself, the falsest of all, even saw goodin the calamity, and gave thanks for it. What treachery, whatuntruthfulness was in all this! The only one who was utterly true in hisgrief, was the one who would have most chiefly suffered by Tom's furtherlife if he had carried his fancy out--the heartbroken father to whomMarjory, to-morrow, no later, would have to carry Tom's bills, the billsabout which, alas! poor Tom had not told the truth. What a confusedtangle of falsehood, and pain, and unreality it was!And Mr. Fanshawe spent a most dreary evening. Marjory had receded, hethought, from all her incipient civilities. She paid scarcely anyattention to him, and evaded his skilful reference to the old house, andthe visit to it which was to be made to-morrow. If to-morrow was notbetter than to-day, he felt that he must be driven from Pitcomlie. Hecould not bear it any longer; and yet there were certain fascinationswhich held him against his will, even in the midst of this monotony ofwoe.CHAPTER XII.When Marjory went upstairs for the night, she made a strenuous endeavourto get Tom's papers in order for her father, and to ignore the one paperwhich had opened a door, as it were, in her brother's life, and of whichnobody knew but herself. She went on working till long past midnight,always with a consciousness of that letter in the corner, which was likethe presence of some one in the room with her, of which she was notsupposed to be aware. She tried to forget it, but she could not forget.While she collected the bills and tied them together, her mind went onwith a perpetual stream of questions--Who was this girl? Where had Tommet her? Had she really hoped to be Mrs. Heriot of Pitcomlie? and ahundred other mental inquiries to which, of course, there could come noanswer. In her mind, she went over all the countryside, searching intoevery cottage in order to find out, if possible, who "Isabell" was. Itis a common name enough in Fife--a score of Isabells presentedthemselves to her fancy, but she could not realize any one of them asthe writer of that letter. And Tom had spent but little time at home. Ifit had not been so Scotch even, Marjory's curiosity would have been lessexcited; but it seemed certain that she must know who it was who wrotein that familiar dialect. While her eye noted the dates of those verydifferent documents which she was collecting--while she made out herlist of them, and slowly added up the figures--though that was a mentalprocess somewhat difficult, and not very rapid--her whole soul wasabsorbed in this other current of thought. She was even capable offeeling grieved and miserable about the effect the bills would have uponher father, while in imagination she was passing from door to door, fromcottage to cottage, searching for this Isabell. Was she wondering,perhaps, what had become of her lover, poor foolish thing! perhaps afterall, Marjory allowed, with difficulty, she might be truly fond of him,might love him even, after her fashion--might be suffering such torturesas she was capable of, wondering at his silence, wearying--was not thatthe word in the letter? wearying, wearying! for him who was to come nomore. Was Tom's sister, even for a moment, half sorry for the girl? Ifshe was, Marjory scorned the sentiment as a weakness of nature. Then, inits musing, her mind returned to its first view of the matter. Was itcertain, after all, that Tom had so far forgotten himself and his familyas to woo Isabell for his wife, as the letter implied? might not this bea mere pretence. It seemed to Marjory that her brother was more likelyto have sinned vulgarly by that system of false promises which womensuppose men to make so lightly, than that he should have seriouslyintended to introduce such a mistress to the old house. Which would beworst? There could not be a purer-minded woman than she who pondered,with an aching heart and burning cheeks, this odious question. Was itpossible there could be a question on the matter? Marjory hated herselffor hesitating--yet there was something to be said on both sides;--thathe should have meant well and honourably would be better for Tom--butfor the race, the house--The ingenuous reader will be disgusted with Marjory, as Marjory was withherself; but notwithstanding, the fact remains which we are obliged torecord. She got rid of the dilemma with an impatient sigh, disowning it,refusing to answer her own question; and plunged into her additions,which were not much less painful. Oh! to carry that woeful list to Tom'sfather! to be obliged to set in order the record of poor Tom'sprevarications (what a hard word lies is--yet sometimes the right one)and extravagances, and the unhappy meanness which must always minglewith extravagance--how it made her heart ache! She sat through half thenight preparing that miserable list, and thinking of the other matterwhich was equally miserable in whatever light it was contemplated. Itwas two o'clock in the morning, when with her head and her heart alikethrobbing with pain, she rose and went to her window and looked out uponthe night. It was very dark; she could hear the monotonous rising andfalling of the sea, sometimes like a long drawn sob, sometimes sharplike a cry, as it beat and splashed upon the rocks. "The moaning of thehomeless sea." How many people listening to it all over the world puttheir own weariness, and sadness, and discouragement into that greatand ceaseless voice! Between the black sky and the black water, bothcheerless and dismal, Marjory felt as if she stood alone, with no one tohelp her. The world was asleep--all human sympathy was closed up inunconsciousness. Was that other poor soul, that foolish creature, thatIsabell, waking somewhere too, and wondering, wearying in her ignorance?Just then a revolving light, far off, sent a sudden steady, yetmomentary, flash across the dark water. It was as well known to her asher own name--yet somehow at that moment it was unexpected, and flashedacross the waves to her like a word of consolation. At the same moment,Marjory saw what she had not seen before, a figure standing out upon thecliff, turned with its back to the sea as if gazing up at the house. Itseemed to her, for the moment, like a ghostly visitor, and gave her alittle thrill of terror. Then she turned away with a nervous laugh. Thered sparkle of the cigar, and something in the outline of the figure,revealed Fanshawe to her. She dropped her blind, and went in with alittle comfort--a sense of society and security; probably had it beenthe old gardener, she would have felt that sensation of comfort just aswarmly. But no; had it been the gardener, Marjory would have wanted, inthe first place, to know what he did there; with Mr. Fanshawe, she askedno questions. It was as if some one had held out a friendly hand to herthrough the chilliness and dullness that wrapped the world.It may seem to many people very strange that Marjory should have had sodisagreeable a task to do, and not her father, or uncle, or even theirsolicitor. I cannot explain it further than by saying that this was thecustom among the Hay-Heriots. It is so in some houses; the women of somefamilies, as I believe I have already said, are always thrust forward toreceive any domestic blow, and transmit it, blunted by its firstpenetration into the softness of their bosoms. Marjory saw nothingremarkable in this, nor did she even complain of it. Had her mother beenliving, they would both have received the thrust and taken the edge off,before it reached the father; but as it was, the eldest daughter of thehouse, heiress of its traditions if of little else, took up herinheritance without shrinking. Had it been out-of-door business, thesolicitor would have been employed no doubt; but so far as domestictroubles went the wives and daughters at Pitcomlie were the attorneys ofthe head of the house and bore the brunt first, preparing the burden forhim that he might put it on in the easiest way."Have you sorted the papers?" Mr. Heriot asked in his harsh voice nextmorning at breakfast. He never looked at any one now till he had beenirritated into attention. His voice had altogether changed. There was aline of redness and heat under his eyes, leaving the rest of his facepallid though still brown--and this redness seemed to be reflected inthe eyes themselves, which were bloodshot and heavy. The droop of hishead, the inward look he had, the air of absorption, the passionateinclination to find fault when he spoke at all, altered his aspect soentirely that his friends of six months ago would scarcely have knownthe man. He never looked even at his daughters. He spoke to Marjory withhis eyes fixed upon his coffee, which he swallowed in great gulps. Mr.Charles had insisted upon talking to him of the visits they had receivedthe day before, which perhaps had something to do with the suppressedpassion which showed itself in his tone."Not quite," said Marjory, faltering, "nearly, papa--perhapsto-morrow--""To-morrow!" he said, "who can say anything about to-morrow? are you orI so sure of seeing it that we should put off our duty? You are a sillything like the rest. What is to hinder you to give a day to your worklike the most part of your fellow-creatures? They go out to their day'sdarg, be it storm or fine, with a sore heart or a light one. But thelike of you must be kept from every fashious thing.""I submit it to you, Thomas, whether that's quite fair upon Marjory,"said Mr. Charles, "we're all in sore trouble--sore trouble, and youworst of all, poor man! but as the Minister says--""Confound the Minister!" said Mr. Heriot, "am I to be insulted in my ownhouse by an auld fool, with his cut and dry phrases? I know my duty aswell as he does. Marjory, go to your work, and see you do it, and let mehave the papers, not later than to-night.""I shall be ready," said Marjory softly, as her father left the table.She was ready then, to tell the truth; it was but her reluctance togive him another blow that held her back. She was sorry for him to thebottom of her heart; had she been rich enough to satisfy those claimswithout carrying them to him, her path would have been easy enough. Butshe was poor--the eldest daughter, the trusted of everybody, was theonly person in the house who had nothing. Her mother had been poor, sothat Marjory had no fortune by that side; and Mr. Heriot's sons had beenexpensive and cost him a great deal of money. Marjory would havesomething when he died, but so long as he lived she had her smallallowance, and nothing more. Little Milly was in a much better position;she would have an independent fortune before she had nearly attainedMarjory's age. But Marjory in her mature womanhood, twenty-five, hadnothing but fifty pounds a year for her dress; sometimes she felt it washard, and this was one of these times. It was by way of escaping fromherself that she turned to Fanshawe, who was a very close though silentobserver of all that went on. She raised her eyes to him, and addressedhim frankly with a look of confidence and friendliness which she hadnever shown to him before."You were very late last night," she said, "I saw you upon the cliff.""Then that was your window," he said, surprised into an admission, "Ithought so--I had been walking up and down watching it. It looked likethe protecting--light of the house."He had been on the eve of saying "angel," but stopped in time."Not much of a protection," said Marjory, still frank as she had neverbeen before, "it was you who gave me that feeling. I had been workinglate and I was tired, and the very sight of you was friendly--you andthe lighthouse together. You both shone out at the same time; though bythe way, now I think of it, it was much too late for you to be out.""How did you know it was Mr. Fanshawe?" said Mr. Charles, "in the darktous les chats sont gris; and it was very dark last night.""I knew him by his cigar," said Marjory with a little laugh; not thatshe had any inclination to laugh, but that she had turned her back witha wild resolution upon the subjects that occupied her, determined atleast for the moment to get rid of them. "It was improper, and he oughtnot to have been there smoking at two o'clock in the morning; but thesight of some one was a comfort to me.""That is a strange way of convincing me of impropriety," said Fanshawe,delighted, "of course I shall go on doing it all the days of my life.The scene was very wild, as wild as any I ever saw. How black the Firthwas, and the sky, and how the surf boiled upon the rocks! It looked likeNorway or Canada, rather than this sober well-to-do Fife.""That is all climate, nothing but climate," said Mr. Charles, "thethermometer has varied fifteen degrees since Sunday--fifteen degrees!it 'is just astonishing. Of course anyone could see with half an eyethat Sunday was too fine to last. Are you going to work, Marjory, mydear, as your father said?""I am going out first for a breath of air," she answered. She was almostgay in her eagerness to escape from herself, and to stave off thepainful moment which was coming. She took Milly's hand and ran round tothe drawing-room where the windows opened upon the cliff. She went outinto the morning sunshine, which fell full upon her uncovered head; thewind blew her hair about, waking in it gleams of richer colour which thesun found out. Nobody knew that it was a kind of desperation whichroused Marjory. Her uncle looked at her puzzled and half disapproving,and shook his head. He thought it was a doubtful example she was settingbefore the servants, so soon after--and Fleming, who looked on veryseriously, was of that opinion too.As for Fanshawe he followed her with delight. "Now is the time for theold house," he said, as he went after the two pretty figures, the youngwoman and the child, to the edge of the rocks. The sea was blue and themorning bright, the whole world renovated by the new day; and mourningcannot last for ever any more than night. Fanshawe felt disposed to pushold Fleming over the rocks when he came brushing past with evidentsatisfaction to interrupt this moment of ease, with a trayful ofletters. But who is there in this nineteenth century bold enough toobstruct the passage of the post? He had to stand humbly by, and accepthis own share, which Fleming handed to him, he thought with a certaintriumph, and which consisted of three bills, a note from a livery-stablekeeper informing him that his only horse had met with an accident, andan invitation to join a party who were setting out from Cowes on ayachting expedition that day. He got through this satisfactory andpleasant correspondence at a rapid rate, and then he sauntered to theedge of the cliff to wait till Marjory had satisfied herself with herletters. No doubt this would be a much longer process--no doubt she hada hundred dearest friends, who wrote about a thousand ridiculousnothings, and filled up her time and distracted her attention. She hadseated herself on the mossy stone steps of the old sun-dial, which stoodon that velvet green, undecorated lawn. She had her back turned to him,so that he could look at her at his ease. He thought what a prettypicture it would make; the grey house behind her, with trees appearingbeyond that on the land side, and here nothing but the green, greenturf, without any flowers, ending in the brown rock of the cliff whichdescended sheer down, a dangerous precipice to the sea. Milly's goldenhair, all blown about, was the central point in the picture; whileMarjory with her head drooped over her letters sat on the steps of theold dial, with the wind lightly fluttering her black ribbons, and thegolden lights in her brown hair shining out in the sun.The next moment she uttered a low cry, throwing up her hands. Fanshawerushed forward. Mr. Charles had gone away to his rooms; Milly hadstrayed back into the drawing-room; he and she were alone; he rushed upto her--"Are you ill? What has happened, Miss Heriot?""I do not think I am ill. I do not think I can be dreaming. I am sickwith fright," cried Marjory. "Oh, Mr. Fanshawe, for God's sake readthat, and tell me what you think!"He took the letter out of her hand. An Indian letter, on thin paper,written with faint ink. For the moment he could not make out the meaningof her terror. This is what he read:--"Dear Marjory,"You will be surprised to learn that we are on our way home, thoughI am sure I am anything but able to travel, nor the poor babyneither, who is a very wee, feeble thing, and not at all wellsuited with an Ayah. The reason is, Charlie has had the feveragain. He would not let me tell you, but I may now, as he is tooill to know what I am writing. This is the third attack, and thedoctor at the station, who is a very odd sort of man, coddling upall the men, and never caring for the ladies, has taken a fright;and, what is worse, has given Charlie a fright--and applied forfurlough, without even consulting me, though we cannot afford it,and your father has always so opposed his coming home. You need notthink it is my fault, for I am no more fit to travel than to fly,and probably will die on the way, and never trouble you. And ifboth of us die, as seems more than likely, I hope you will be kindto the children, or at least to Tommy, for baby, I feel, will gowith me, if I go. I am sure if the doctor would but leave poorCharlie quiet he would get better, as he has done before; but hehas to be lifted into a litter, and carried all the way toCalcutta; and how I am to be expected to look aftereverything--him, and the luggage, and the children--is more than Iknow. What with baby's nurse not agreeing with him, and Charlie'sbeing so ill, and not a soul to give me any assistance, I get norest night nor day; and when I recollect that it is only six weekssince I was confined, I cannot think how anybody has the heart toask me to do it. However, the doctor has to be obeyed, though Ihate him, and we have got leave, and the agents are to lend us themoney (for we never have a penny). You need not write, for we hopeto catch the steamer at Calcutta, and should be in England in theend of April. But don't be surprised if Tommy comes alone; for evenif Charlie gets a little better, I do not think I can bear thejourney, and baby is sure to go along with me. Good-bye; if wereach England alive, I will send you word from Southampton; but Idon't expect it, for how we are ever to get through the journey--Ias weak as water, and my poor baby only six weeks old, and Charliein a litter--is more than I can say."Your affectionate sister,"MATILDA."P.S.--Be kind to Tommy, if he is the only one that reaches home.""What do you think?" cried Marjory, raising her face to him.She had forgotten it was Fanshawe. He was the first human creature athand--the only one to whom she could turn in her distress."It is a silly letter; making the worst of everything. It is not, I amsure it cannot be, so bad as she says.""She does not make the worst of Charlie's illness," said Marjory. "Oh,my poor Charlie! She says next to nothing about him. It is not her Iam thinking of. My brother--my poor brother, must be dying! Oh God! andwhat shall we do?""She does not say so," said Fanshawe, kneeling down beside her. "DearMiss Heriot, don't be too easily alarmed. You are weak with the sorrowyou have had already. You think everything must end badly--""I know it," she said, with a moan; "I know it! We have had nothinghappen to us for so long--so long. And it is all coming together now!"CHAPTER XIII.The letter of Mrs. Charles aroused a great consternation in the house ofPitcomlie; they did not venture to tell Mr. Heriot of it. Fanshawe wentand called Mr. Charles out of his room in the tower, and they allgathered in the bow-window in the drawing-room, and read it sentence bysentence, and talked it over. Marjory was the only one who took nocomfort by this meeting. Mr. Charles was very much cast down for thefirst moment, but it did not last. "She's a very silly woman, a verysilly woman," he said over and over. "I'm not meaning to vex you, May;but nothing except a woman could be so silly and so heartless; she isthinking only of herself. However, on the other hand, if Charlie hadbeen so bad as you think, she would have been frightened. There'ssomething in a book I once read about having that fever thrice; thethird time is the--God bless me! I cannot remember what my book said."The fact was, Mr. Charles remembered only too well, and was appalled; hewas struck dumb for the moment in his voluble consolations. When hespoke again, he was a great deal less assured in his tone. "Depend uponit," he said, "she is making the worst of everything. I suppose it isher way. She's evidently a silly woman, a very silly woman, and I wouldsay a very selfish one. But she would not run on like that about herselfand the baby, if Charlie was as ill as you think.""Charlie might be very ill, and she might not know it," said Marjory,"they might not tell her--they might think it would be too much for herin her circumstances. Her baby not six weeks old, and her husband cominghome to--""To get better, my dear," said Uncle Charles cheerily. "You may be sureto get better. He is young, and has everything in his favour. The verysea-breezes would stir him up. I do not think I would take any notice,my love, to your father. It would only worry him. It will be time enoughwhen you get word from Southampton; and how that will cheer him! PoorThomas--poor man! I begin to think now that there's some hope for yourfather, May.""But what will there be if Charlie--""Toots, nonsense, Charlie! Charlie will come home quite well, you'llsee," said Mr. Charles. "But as for you, you're looking like a ghost.I'll go and order the horses, and we'll take Mr. Fanshawe out and showhim the country. We are all dying for a breath of air.""I could not go, I cannot go," said Marjory. "Mr. Fanshawe will forgiveme, that I cannot think of anything but one thing. Oh, Uncle Charles!have we done anything to bring such misery on the house?""My dear," said Mr. Charles, "the rain and the sun come on the just andon the unjust, as the Scriptures say. We are not justified in formingany rash judgment on ourselves.""And we have been happy so long!" said Marjory with tears. It seemed akind of reason for all the misery that was coming now."Happy, humph! I would not say--there is many a thing that looks likehappiness when you are in great trouble, that was little to brag of whenit was here. But in the meantime, I'm going back to my papers," said Mr.Charles, "Mr. Fanshawe, my man, come you with me, you'll perhaps findsomething to divert you. She's better left to herself--far better leftto herself," he added in an undertone. "Women-folk are not like us,she'll take a cry and she'll be better. To be sure," said Mr. Charles,as he led the way to his tower, looking back upon his reluctantfollower, "there's ill men and good men in all the degrees; but I cannotthink of a difference so great among us as between that girl, my niece,May, and the like of the selfish creature that wrote that letter. Not aword, not a thought of poor Charlie, as fine a lad as ever stepped--butall her bit miserable bantling of a baby, and her weary self.""I suppose, Sir, when a woman has a child she thinks of nothing else,"said Fanshawe, "or so at least people say.""Then the Lord preserve my niece, May, from ever having children!" saidMr. Charles, striding up the steps of his tower with his long legs, andwith hot but holy indignation in his tone. Luckily the echoing of thespiral staircase drowned the laugh with which his companion listened.Fanshawe laughed only from his lips, for to tell the truth thesuggestion annoyed him. He seemed immediately to see Marjory with achild in her arms, lavishing fondness upon it, while some idiot of ahusband looked complacently on. Sometimes men love to weave suchassociations about women, sometimes on the contrary they are revolted bythe notion; and the latter was Fanshawe's case. He had not gone so faras even to dream of the possibility of marrying Marjory, or anyone elsehimself--and of course she would marry, some fool, some Johnniesomething or other who never could, never would satisfy that woman'smind. She would do it out of mere kindness, to please him, or to pleasesomebody else, some old grandmother or uncle, or ancient bore of onekind or another, and drop into a mere child-producing, baby-worshippingdowdy; she would be compelled to take to babies, the husband being afool and unworthy of her. Fanshawe listened to Mr. Charles's lecture onthe history of the Fife families with languor after this, making now andthen an impertinent observation which startled the sage.He asked "What did it matter?" when his companion enlarged upon thatdoubtful point in the pedigree of the Morrisons, where it was rumoured,a captain from the whale-fishing had come and married the heiress andinjured the blood. "Matter!" said Mr. Charles with true indignation, "itmatters just this, Sir, that the auld house of the Morrisons derivingfrom Sir Adam of that name, that was drowned in the ship that broughtover the Maid of Norway, would be turned into mere nobodies--nobodies,Sir; with a harpoon and a fishing-net for their cognizance--""But even a harpoon and a fishing-net, after a century--" Fanshawebegan."Century, Sir; what's about a century?" said Mr. Charles.But Fanshawe did not carry on the quarrel. He was too much occupied inconsidering the original question with which he had started, and howconfoundedly Johnnie something or other would crow over the rest ofmankind if such a woman was so silly as to marry him--a questionembodying, as he felt, more human interest than any difficulty thatcould arise in regard to the captain of the whaling-ship.Marjory did not do as her uncle prophesied. This last piece of news haddried up all tears from her eyes. She wandered about the upper part ofthe house, now pausing in that room where Fanshawe had been once calledto her, and which still bore the name of "the boys' room," and nowreturning to her own. She even took a napkin and dusted carefully poorCharlie's share of the books, and his golfing-clubs, and some smallstatuettes belonging to him; she put some flowers in a little vase underhis portrait, and then withdrew them quickly, and threw them out of herwindow, some chance thought of resemblance to the decking of a gravehaving struck her fancy. She was sick and restless, unable to keepstill, longing for news--further news--fearing to allow herself tothink.After some time, when she had made up the packet of Tom's papers for herfather, she took the letter which had so much disturbed her yesterdayfrom the desk, and placed it in a little letter-case with the one shehad received that day. Why she did this she could not have explained.She went wandering in her listlessness and suspense all over the house,finding here and there some trifle to rectify, which gave her amomentary occupation, and, what was more wonderful, finding at everyturn some reminiscence of her brother Charlie, which a few hours ago shewould not have noted. He had been out of the house for many years, andnever till to-day had she been aware how much there was of him still inthe old home, which somehow seemed to Marjory to-day like a motherpreserving traces of all her children. An old fishing-rod of his hung inthe hall; a bird which he had shot, and which for some boyish fancy hadbeen stuffed and preserved, stood looking at her with its little beadyeyes from the corner of the staircase. She had forgotten all about ittill to-day.At last Marjory, in the sickness of her heart, went to the old Tower, toher uncle's room. There she could talk a little at least, which might bea relief. Mr. Fanshawe had long before left that refuge of learning andleisure, and Mr. Charles, who was compiling a family history, sat amonghis papers with his spectacles on his nose, collecting facts andarranging pedigrees, as calmly as though there were no presentanxieties to disturb his mind, or future to thrill it into terror."Well, May, my dear!" he said, cheerily, looking up at her over the topof his spectacles; and then relapsed into his work. It is impossible toestimate the advantage which that work was to Mr. Charles Hay-Heriot. Itkept him occupied, it kept him happy, it gave him "a duty" which he wasbent on performing and a "responsibility" which he was proud to feel. Hewould search for days together to prove the accuracy of a date--happydays, during which he felt himself as important as Herodotus. Friendsall over the country would stop him when they met, and would write himletters when they were apart, to ask how "his work" was progressing. Hehad come now to a very important part of that work. He had collected allthe materials for his fifth chapter, which began the Reformation period,and he had now begun the work of composition, putting these materialstogether, which was a very interesting and solemn operation. He had notsaid anything about this Opus to Fanshawe the first time he hadinvited him to his room; but to-day, in the confidence of increasingfriendship, he had told him, and the little flutter of pleasurableimportance with which he had taken the stranger into his confidence hungabout him still."Well, May, my dear," he said, after a long pause, "you have come to seehow I am getting on?""I am looking at you, Uncle Charles," said Marjory, dreamily. How faroff he seemed from her in that placid, gentle old age, with theoccupation that pleased him as its games please a child! Could his bloodboil any more, or his heart throb any more as hers was throbbing? Shesighed unconsciously as she spoke. It seemed to her that Fanshawe, whowas a stranger, yet who was in full tide of life, and knew what it meantto be cast about by varying tumults of feeling, would understand herbetter than her calm old uncle--"though he was a stranger," Marjory, inher unconsciousness, said to herself."Well, my dear, I hope it's no uninstructive," said Mr. Charles, with agentle laugh. "I do not set up for genius; but so far as workgoes--honest work--"There was a pause again, but that was not an unusual circumstance.Marjory was a frequent visitor in the tower, and sometimes the two, whowere fond of each other, would sit together for hours pursuing their ownoccupations, with a pleasant sense of companionship but without anytalk. His niece's presence did not disturb the old man; he went on quitepeacefully, taking it for granted that she, too, was occupied in herway. Nor did he lay down his pen, or look up at her face until she brokethe silence by the sudden question,"Now you have had time to consider it, what do you think about Charlie,Uncle Charles?""Toots, my dear!" said Uncle Charles. He put down his pen, as we havesaid, and stretched his hand to her across the table. "You are gettingsilly--like other women, my bonnie May.""But what do you think, Uncle Charles?""I can think no more than I did before, for I have no more information,"said Mr. Charles, pushing back his chair, and crossing his long legs;"and thinking will do no good--no good, my dear, if we were to thinktill we died of it. You just make yourself unhappy indulging anxiety. Wemust wait till we hear.""But what do you think of the letter, Uncle Charles?""The letter--oh, that's something tangible. It's a very heartlessletter, a very silly letter; but you heard beforehand that she was asilly thing. So far as I can see, there is very little in it aboutCharlie; and as for her weakness and her baby's, that's not so veryimportant. No fear of them; and as for you and me, May, whateverhappened to Mrs. Charles, we could get over that.""I wish her no harm," said Marjory hastily."Certainly, no harm," said Mr. Charles; "but oh, my dear, what a womanto be mistress of Pitcomlie! what a creature to come after my mother!and your mother, May--though she, poor thing, reigned but a short timein the old house. This one will be a new kind of lady among the Heriots.We've been fortunate in our wives, as I've often told you. I am justgiving a description of how Leddy Pitcomlie, under the Regent Mary ofGuise, held the old house against the French. She was one of the firstconverts of the Reformation. We were terrible Whigs in those days; shewas a daughter of--""Yes," said Marjory vaguely. "That is something new to think of--Matildain Pitcomlie. Uncle, we never knew--you never heard--that Pitcomliemight have had another kind of mistress?"Mr. Charles raised himself with eager interest. This was entirely in hisway, and moved his curiosity to the utmost."Another kind of mistress? There was your stepmother, of course--a nicekind of creature; but she did not live. A wife that does not live is amisfortunate thing in a family; it deranges the records, and takes awaythe unity; but is it of her you are thinking? What other mistress, May,if it were not yourself?""This is what I found in Tom's desk," said Marjory, turning pale andthen red with emotion and excitement. She had not meant to show it--andyet it was so hard to keep from showing it--to shut up the secret in herown breast. She drew out her letter-case slowly, and took from it theuneven paper, with its uncouth writing, so unlike Matilda's smooth andladylike letter. Some accidental sound in the room, some creaking of thefurniture, or rustling of the papers which the wind from the open windowrustled on the table, almost arrested her, and made her look up withstartled awe-stricken eyes, as if some unseen messenger had come to stopher. At length she put it into her uncle's hand. He had followed all hermovements with surprise, and now he had to fumble for his spectacles, toput them on, to uncross his legs, and draw his chair close to thetable. All these little preliminaries had to be gone through, for to Mr.Charles a letter was a document; it was valuable material to be put awayfor after-use. He read a few lines, and then he gave a startled look atMarjory. "My dear," he said, with indignation, folding it up again;"such a thing as this should never have fallen into your hands; it'sdisgraceful! it's----. My dear, your father goes too far--putting thecharge of Tom's things on you. He was not a reprobate, but he was not anexample. Forget it, May, forget it; such a thing should never have beenshown to you.""But Uncle Charles! you see what she says--'I'll make a good wife.'""Nonsense, nonsense, my dear," said the old man, with a flush on hisface; "the sort of thing that lads say to beguile these silly fools. Iam not defending men, nor is it a subject to be named between you andme; but if you but knew how these silly idiots court their destruction!not another word more. My dear May, my bonny May! to think that the likeof this should have been seen by you!""Uncle, it is not a fool's letter; it is not a wicked letter--""Whisht, whisht, my bonnie woman! as if the like of you could judge; notanother word. I will burn it for poor Tom's sake. He has answered hisaccount with his Maker, and why should we keep evidence against him forthose that come after us--""Give it me back again," said Marjory, feeling her property invaded; "Icannot have it burned, uncle. Perhaps this was the something he wantedto tell me; give it me back. Oh," she said, suddenly forced by theopposition to a great effort of nature; "it is very different from thisother letter; very different! She would not have written of my Charlieas his wife does. Give it me, Uncle; I must keep it. It is Tom's legacyto me.""May, May! trouble and suspense are turning your head.""My head is not turned," she said; "give me back my letter, Uncle; Ithought you would help me. Whatever she was, wherever she is, she wasnot like that."Mr. Charles allowed her to draw it out of his hand; he shook his headand reproved her gently."My dear, you are excited; you do not know what you are saying. Put itaway, put it away, if you will have it; but do not speak of an unhappygirrl in the same breath with Charlie's wife. That must never be; andsuch a thing should never, never have come into your hands."Marjory hurried away almost angry, with her letters in her hand. Shecould ask counsel from no one else; and here she had failed; she rushedback to her room with them, very sad at heart; she, to make herself thechampion of the unknown girl, whose very existence had seemed to her nolater than yesterday, such a sin and shame!CHAPTER XIV.It would be vain to attempt to trace the manner in which this revulsionof feeling came about. Marjory had gone through the whole gamut ofemotions in respect to the letter which she had found in Tom's desk.First shame, indignation, and the hardest sentence with which women candamn a woman. Then a wavering of the balance, a protestation of justiceagainst the hasty verdict which might have no foundation. Then a senseof escape and gratitude that no harm had come of it; and last of all, atremulous feeling of pity, perhaps the first Christian sentiment of thewhole, but the only one of which Marjory was ashamed. The thing,however, which all at once had made this pity into sudden sympathy wasthe letter of Mrs. Charles--a woman about whom there could be nocontroversy. Charlie's equal--Charlie's most lawful wife, under all theregulations and safeguards that law and religion could give. When sheplaced the one letter by the other, Marjory's heart swelled with asudden indignant vindication of the poor unknown girl who had loved herbrother. All at once Isabell became a distinct individual, almost afriend. A sudden protest against all her own suspicions arose in hermind; she acquitted the girl of everything as she had accused her ofeverything. The process of thought was easy enough--its very suddennesswas natural. She went to the quietness of her room in which she hadfirst read Isabell's letter with such a tempest of shame andhumiliation, with very different feelings, contrasting Matilda's letterwith this other one, and asking herself, with a vehemence of indignationwhich surprised her, which of them was the least womanly--which the moretrue and real. Her emotion, however, though she was not aware of it, wasnot all founded upon this contrast. In point of fact, it afforded acertain outlet to her excitement, and solaced her in the misery of hersuspense. She locked up the letters in her jewel case, with a fantasticsense of their importance; she turned the little silver key upon them,as if she had been imprisoning two potent spirits. Some day or other,the prisoners would be liberated, and come forth, each to fight her ownbattle. Marjory was sane enough still to smile at her own fantasticforce of imagination as this thought crossed her mind--to smile at itmomentarily, as a kind of tribute to her reason; but without any realsense of ridicule. How her interest had shifted since yesterday, sincethis morning! Poor Tom's papers lying there, carefully made up, seemedto her a year old at least, something done with and over. But Charlie,Charlie! was he being carried home to them over the sea, breathing inhealth and restoration from every breeze, coming to his natural place,the only son, the heir, the future head of the house? Or washe?--Marjory clasped her hands tightly together with a low cry of pain.Of all miseries on earth, I think suspense is the hardest to bear. Tothink that something may be happening that very moment, while you arefar off, and for good or for evil can do nothing. To think thatsomething may have happened--that the dread calm of certainty may havefollowed the excitement of a terrible event to the others who know; andto be unable to go out to meet the news you long for--to have nothing todo but to wait for it. There is no more common misery in the experience,at least, of women; and there is none more hard to bear.Marjory passed that dreary, restless afternoon in hourly expectation ofa call from her father, but Mr. Heriot did not call her. He took nonotice of the subject which he had spoken of so angrily at breakfast,when they met at dinner. When that meal was almost over, old Flemingcarried to her, with voluble explanations, another letter."Mistress Williamson has sent up to say that by some accident this wasputten in to the Carslogie bag," said Fleming. "It's an Indian letter,and it's come back with a man and horse, being markit 'Immediate,' asyou'll see, Miss Marjory. Mistress Williamson, poor body, is terriblevexed; and being an Indian letter, and markit 'Immediate'----""Thank you; that will do, Fleming," said Marjory, seizing it.Oh, if she could but have rushed from the table to make herself mistressof this second message! Her heart sank down, down to the very depths.All hope seemed to die in her; yet she threw her handkerchief over it,and tried to control herself. There had been a pause, as there so oftenwas now at that cheerless table; and Mr. Charles, who was not very quickof hearing, had put his hand to his ear, and asked, "What is it?" whichcalled his brother's attention to the occurrence. Mr. Heriot, who hadbeen very silent, turned to his daughter with the angry tone which henow always employed when he spoke to her."Why don't you read your letter? There are no strangers here but Mr.Fanshawe, and he, I suppose, does not stand on ceremony. From India, didthat blockhead say?""Ay, Sir; that was what the blockhead said," answered Fleming, who wasbehind his chair. "I'm no minding what you call me. It was a bletterin'scoondrel yesterday, and it may be a good fellow the morn. I hope I knowhow to do my duty, whatever happens; if you'll but eat some dinner," theold man added, dropping his voice with an inflection which was almosttender.This little interruption directed Mr. Heriot's thoughts from Marjory'sletter. He bade Fleming begone for an old rogue, and emptied the dish heoffered. Something had softened the heart-broken father in his passionof grief; or else the high-pressure, the immediate violence of hisfeelings, was wearing out. It was only after some minutes that, stillharsh and sharp in his tone to her, though softened to others, he lookeddown the table to Marjory, and asked quickly,"Was your letter from Charlie? Does he say when he's coming? What is itabout?""It is a letter from Matilda's sister," said Marjory, in a voicetremulous with suppressed feeling. "We do not know her, papa--a MissBassett. She tells me she was to join them at Calcutta, to come homewith them, and something about hoping to make my acquaintance. That isall.""That is not much," said Mr. Heriot; "but to know he is on the way issomething. If I but see my boy back--Fleming, there's that claret withthe yellow seal--""Is Charlie--?" began Mr. Charles.He was going to say was Charlie better. To him, as to all the others, itseemed so long since this morning, when the news of Charlie's illnesscame, that the arrival of further news did not seem impossible. The samestrange feeling of the long duration of these few sorrowful days dulledMr. Heriot's mind to the recollection that it was a very short timesince Charlie had been called home, and that no reply to that call couldhave come so soon. He accepted Marjory's explanation without any morequestions, while Mr. Charles stopped, trembling, in his question,appalled by the look which she had given him. Mr. Heriot took no notice;a little gleam of happier feeling seemed to wake in him. He entered intoa little dispute with Fleming, as to how much was left of the yellowseal. And when Marjory left the room soon after, he even stopped her,with some return of gentleness, to give her directions about Charlie'srooms."If you are thinking what rooms to give them, May," he said, hastily,"put them in the west wing. It will be warmest for the bairns."It was the first time he had called her by her name since the funeral.Poor Marjory hurried away, choking, afraid to trust herself to speak,assenting only with a movement of her head."Oh, papa's better! don't you think he's better? He kissed me, May,"cried little Milly, as they went hand in hand along the passage whichled to the drawing-room.Marjory made no answer. She wanted to be alone. She wanted to think itall over. She placed herself in the corner of a sofa which commanded thegreat bow-window, and from which she could see so much of the pale greyblue sky and wistful half-twilight atmosphere. A nervous thrill was uponher. She had heard nothing; and yet was not this letter confirmation ofher worst fears?The lamp burnt steadily and clear upon the table; the firelightflickered from the fireplace. A comfortable interior, warm, and safe,and calm, full of homely luxury, but so strangely connected with theoutside world by that uncovered window, and the pale sky that looked in.It was symbolical, Marjory thought. What might be going on beneath thatchilly heaven, beneath the great pale vault which roofed the sea, where,dead or living, Charlie was? Her heart ached with the burden of thatsuspense. How hard it was to bear it, and say nothing--and to let herfather take fallacious comfort, only to be the more deeply overthrown!She had been only a few minutes here when some one followed hastily fromthe dining-room. She thought it was her uncle, and turned to him,holding out her hand. But the hand was taken with a warmth of sympathy,which Uncle Charles would scarcely have shown."Pardon me," said Fanshawe; "I was so anxious. I came to ask what yournews really is. You don't think me impertinent? I wanted so much toknow."This sudden touch of sympathy moved Marjory, as the unexpected alwaysdoes. It was so much warmer, and more ready than Uncle Charles' sloweffort to follow her quicker feelings; his search for spectacles, bothphysical and mental; his reproofs of needless anxiety. She was overcomefor the moment, and gave way to sudden tears, which relieved her."Thanks," she said, with a half sob; "there is nothing in it; at least Ithink there is nothing in it; read it and tell me what you think."He had to go to the lamp, which was on the centre table, where Milly,confused and wondering to find herself without any share in her sister'sthoughts, had seated herself in forlorn virtue "to read her book." Manya look Milly threw at Marjory upon the distant sofa in the dark, lookingat that window where the shutters were not shut, nor the curtains drawn,and which frightened the child with eerie suggestions of some one whomight be looking in upon her. She looked up at Mr. Fanshawe, too, as hestood over her, unconscious of her existence, reading that letter. Whatwas it about? and why should he know about it, while Milly did notknow? She read a sentence in her book between each of these glances, andwas divided in her mind between the intent of this present drama, whichshe did not understand, and that of the story of the poor little boy,who died because he was good. The story itself made the child's heartache, and the other strange mystery confused her. Fanshawe read theletter anxiously, as if he had something to do with it; he thought hehad for the moment. Marjory's confidence in him, her appeal to him thatmorning, the subtle effect of feeling himself a member, eventemporarily, of this household, and becoming penetrated with itsatmosphere, all wrought in him. He had no intention of appearing moreinterested than he was; he was quite honest in the warmth and depth ofhis sympathetic feelings. And this was a letter of a very differentcharacter from the other; it was very short, and quite unemotional."Dear Miss Heriot,"I hear from my sister that she is going home with her husband andthe children; and I hear from others that he is very ill. I havemade up my mind, with my father's consent, to go with Matty, who, Ineed not tell you, is very unfit for any such responsibility. Ihave heard of you from poor Charles, and I think you may perhaps beglad to know that there is some one of some sense with them,whatever happens. I hope you will kindly allow me to go to you fora few days, to see them safely settled; but anyhow, I shall bewith them, to take care of them to the best of my power."Believe me, dear Miss Heriot,"Sincerely yours,"INVERNA BASSET.""What a strange name, and what a strange little letter!" said Fanshawe,drawing a chair in front of Marjory's sofa, and seating himself there;"but there is nothing in this, Miss Heriot, to alarm you--more--"Marjory had felt her heart lighten--until he came to that last word,which he said with hesitation, after a pause. For the moment it hadappeared to her that the stranger's eye, cooler than her own, had seensomething re-assuring in the letter; but all the more for this momentaryrelief did her heart sink. "More!" she echoed, with a forlorn voice. "Icould not be more alarmed than I am. I am almost more than alarmed. Iam--.""Hush," he said softly, putting out his hand to touch hers, with amomentary soothing, caressing touch. "Hush! don't say anything to makeyour terrors worse. You are very anxious; and it is natural. But think,he is young; he will have two anxious nurses. He will have quiet and thesea-air, and the knowledge that he is coming home. After all, everythingis in his favour. I do not ask you not to be anxious; but try to thinkof the good as well as the evil.""The evil is so much more likely than the good," said Marjory. "He isweakened with fever; one of his nurses will be taken up with herselfand her baby; the other is almost a stranger to him. Then the sea-airwill be neutralized by the close cabin, the wearisome confinement; andhe does not even know that his father will be glad to see him. Had hecome home sick a month ago, only a month ago, he would not have beenvery welcome, perhaps. All this has to be considered, and poor Charlieknows it. Mr. Fanshawe, I do not mean to blame my poor father--""I know," said Fanshawe, still with the same soothing tone and gesture."You must not think me so dull and stupid. I am not much of a fellow--Iam not worthy of your confidence; but at least I am capable ofunderstanding. I see all that is passing--"Marjory was half touched, half repelled; touched by his humility and byhis sympathy; but so sensitive was her condition, almost turned from himby that position of spectator, that very faculty of seeing everything,of which he made a plea for her favour. She drew back from him slightly,without explaining to herself why."Yes," she said; "but you must remember that a stranger sees more,sometimes, than there is to see; and less, less a great deal than hethinks. My father has always been a most kind father to all of us. Atthis present moment our loss has absorbed him in one thought; but he hasalways considered all our interests, and a month ago Charlie's returnwould have meant a great loss to Charlie, which my father, with hissense of justice to the rest of us, would not have felt himselfjustified in making up."Marjory gave forth this piece of special pleading with a calm air ofabstract justice, which moved Fanshawe at once to a smile and a tear. Hedared not for his life have shown his inclination to the first; and,indeed, he was sufficiently attendri by his position to make the othermore natural."I know, I know," he said, hastily; and then added, "Nevertheless, Ithink you may put some confidence in the writer of this letter. Who isshe--do you know her? It seems as if she would not talk, but do.""Charlie speaks of her as the strong-minded sister," said Marjory. "Hehas mentioned her two or three times. Their father is a Civil servant inCalcutta, and she keeps his house. They have no mother. She takes careof everything, I have always heard. Charlie laughs at her, but I thinkhe likes her. She does everything. Perhaps that is why the other sisteris so helpless--I mean; Mr. Fanshawe, you hear everything as if you wereone of the family. I have never seen Charlie's wife; most likely my ideaof her is wrong. You will forget it; you will not think of it again.""I hope I shall be worthy of your confidence," said Fanshawe. "I think Ialmost am. It seems to me that I must be another man since I knew you. Ihave never thought much of anything; but now if thinking would do anygood--""I don't believe it does," said Marjory, with a smile. It was very faintand momentary, but yet it was a smile. "The less one thinks and themore one can do, that is the best.""But you do not approve of simple want of thought," he said, cunninglydrawing her into those superficial metaphysics which take such a largeplace in serious flirtations. He was not consciously thinking offlirtation, but he thought he had a right to take advantage of hisopportunities. Marjory, however, divined without perceiving, the trap."Had my father left the dining-room, Mr. Fanshawe? He looked betterto-night. I see you are surprised at old Fleming's freedom, and how hetalks. He is an old servant; he has seen us all come into the world. Wecould not speak to him as to an ordinary servant. Ah! here is UncleCharles at last!"This exclamation was not agreeable to her present companion. He repeatedthe "At last!" to himself with a sense of failure which was veryirritating. Surely he was as good as Uncle Charles, at least.CHAPTER XV.Some days passed on in a noiseless calm of suspense; suspense whichdwelt chiefly in Marjory's mind, and did not hang heavily upon anyoneelse. Mr. Charles, with the placidity of his age and character, settledthe question beforehand with sanguine confidence."Depend upon it, my dear, we'll have him home all right and well," hesaid; "quite well. There is nothing like a sea-voyage for fever; it'sself-evident. That little woman, that sister-in-law, will take good careof him. What an energetic bit creature it must be! Why do I say bitcreature? She may be as tall as you are? No, no, that's impossible. Itwas a small creature that wrote that letter; a little woman, probably noso young as she once was, but a kind of capable being, that will makehim do as she pleases. You may be sure she has a will of her own. Shewill guide him like a boy at school, which will be the best thing forhim. Depend upon it, my dear, she'll bring him to us safe and sound."Marjory did not depend upon it, but she kept silence, and the slow dayscrept on. Fanshawe lingered, he could scarcely have told why. No oneasked him to stay. He was accepted by all as part of the family, with aquiet composure which is sometimes more grateful to a man thanprotestations of cordiality; but that was not his reason for remainingat Pitcomlie. He stayed--because he said to himself he wanted to see itout. It was a chapter of family history into which he had been thrustunwittingly, and he must see what would be the end of it--if the otherbrother would come back, and poor Tom's place be filled up--or if--It had the excitement of a drama to him; and Marjory's face, day afterday, varying as the weather varied, brightening into hope sometimesunder the influence of the sunshine, falling blank and pale intodespondency with every cloud, interested him as nothing had everinterested him before. This passion of suspense which possessed herwhole soul, purified and elevated her beauty somehow. It made herfeatures finer, the outline of her face more perfect, and gave a hundredpathetic meanings to her eyes. For she was not selfishly absorbed nordead to other things. Through the veil of that preoccupation whichwrapped her about like a mist, nature would struggle forth now and then,coming to the surface, as it were, with smiles and outbreaks of lighterfeeling or of independent thought. Anxious as she was, she was too trueand natural to be always thinking even of her brother. And Marjory couldnot be monotonous even in her gloom. She changed from one phase toanother, so that the spectator seemed to grow in knowledge of humanity,and wondered to himself how one emotion could put on so many semblances.And she was relieved on her father's account, though disturbed onCharlie's. Mr. Heriot had never again asked for Tom's papers. He hadrelaxed a little in his passionate misery. Sometimes, instead ofsnarling at his family, he would soften and throw himself upon theirsympathy. He would take Milly with him when he went out to walk, holdingher hand tenderly, supporting himself by her, as it seemed."Papa never speaks to me, May," Milly said, who was half-frightened,half-flattered by being thus chosen for her father's companion. "Henever says anything but 'My bonnie bairn!' And sometimes, 'May will bekind to her--May will be kind to her.' That is all he ever says.""You must try and get him to talk, my dear," said Uncle Charles. "Makeremarks, if it was only upon the sea and the rocks, or thefishing-boats, and the way they hang about in-shore. If he but said,'Hoots! hold your tongue, Milly,' it would be something gained.""Oh, Uncle Charles, what remarks can I make," said Milly, "and me solittle? Only when he says May will be kind to me, I greet--I mean I cry;and then he pats me on the head. As if I ever expected any other thingof May!""My little darling!" Marjory said, holding her close, "as if there wasanybody, but a monster, that would not be kind to you."Another time it would be Fleming who would be the expositor."Mr. Charlie should hurry hame," the old servant said, shaking hishead. "I'm no a man of many words; but, Miss Marjory, he should hurryhame.""I hope he is coming, Fleming, as fast as winds and waves can bringhim.""Lord! what's the good of that telegraph?" said Fleming. "If a bodycould travel by't, when they're sair wanted, it would be worthhaving--instead o' thae blackguard messages that plunge a hail house introuble without a why or a wherefore. Ay, he should hurry hame.""Why do you say so?" asked Marjory, more anxious than the others."Because--humph!" said Fleming, pausing, and looking round upon them."Miss Marjory, a' the world's no young like you, and heedless. I have myreasons. You ken nothing about it--nothing about it. Eh, but I hopehe'll hurry hame!""He thinks my father is growing weaker," said Marjory to Fanshawe, asthey continued their walk round that bit of velvet turf which crownedthe cliff, "and I think so too.""Not more than he has been always--that is since I came," said Fanshawe."Yes, more. And he has grown so gentle too--so gentle. Think of hissaying I would be kind to Milly--making a merit of it! It goes to myheart.""He was very cross this morning," said Fanshawe, off his guard."Cross! I am sorry I trouble you with such subjects," Marjory replied atonce, with intense dignity. "Of course family details are alwaysunimportant to strangers. Have you heard of a boat that will do foryachting? We do so little boating on the Firth, for ornament; it is allfor very use.""You would not have me make myself useful to the world in a fishingcoble?" said Fanshawe, ruefully, making a hundred apologies with hislooks.And then Marjory would laugh both at herself and him, and there wouldgather a dangerous blob of moisture in either eye.Thus it will be seen this moment of waiting was not a solitary moment.It had come to be habitual with them to take that "turn" two or threetimes round the lawn, after breakfast, and again in the twilight afterdinner, when the evenings were mild. It had been Mr. Heriot's customalways. His "turn" was part of the comfort of his meal. He had given itup, but somehow the others had resumed the habit. Mr. Charles would goonce round with Milly before he disappeared to his tower, and then Millywould steal into her favourite corner by the open window, and the othertwo, sometimes not quite amicably, sometimes indifferently, sometimeswith absent talk of all that might be coming, strayed round and roundthe mossy turf again. Insensibly to herself Marjory had come to lookforward to that "turn."Fanshawe was a stranger; he offended her sometimes, sometimes he was inthe way. She said to herself that she would be glad if he were gone, andwondered why he stayed. Yet there were things which he could understandbetter than Uncle Charles understood them. Whether he provoked her, orfelt for her, somehow there was always an understanding beneath all. Hewas near her own age; he could enter into her feelings. Marjory did notoften go so far as to discuss this question with herself, yet, withoutknowing it, she would say a great deal to the stranger as they took thatturn round the lawn.It was one morning after breakfast that the end of this long suspensecame. They were on the cliff as usual, and as usual Mr. Charles andMilly had gone in. The letters were late that day. How is it that theyare always late when they bring important news? Fanshawe by her siderecognised Miss Bassett's writing on an English letter the moment thatMarjory took it from the tray. He had seen the writing but once before,and he knew it. So did she. She trembled so that the other letters werescattered all about on the turf, where they lay, no one caring for them.Once more Marjory sat down on the mossy step of the sun-dial. She lookedup at him pitifully as she tore open the envelope. He, scarcely lessexcited, leant over her. He was a stranger, and yet he read the letterover her shoulder, as if he had been her brother, feeling in that momentas her brother might have felt."I did not telegraph. I thought this would bring you the news soonenough. I am starting to come to you with poor Matty and her fatherlessboys."Marjory turned and raised her eyes to the anxious face leaning over her."Is that how you read it?" she asked, making a pitiful appeal. "I--Icannot see. Her fatherless boys. Charlie! Oh, my God! I cannot see anymore."The letter dropped from her hand. She put down her head upon her lap.She did not sob, or faint, but held herself fast, as it were, crushingherself in her own arms. Poor Marjory! The man by her side dared not puthis arm round her to support her, and there was no one else to do so.While he stood by her, with his heart full of pity, not knowing what tosay or do, she made a sudden movement, and lifted the letter, thrustingit into his hand."Read it to me," she said, "read it--every word."He sat down beside her upon the steps of the sun-dial. No thought ofanything beyond the deepest and tenderest sympathy was in his mind. Itwas his impulse to draw her close to him, to shelter her as much as hisarm could, to make himself her prop and support; and this for love, yetnot for love--as her brother might have done it, not her lover. But hedared not make this instinctive demonstration of tender pity andfellow-feeling. He sat by her, and read the letter, while she listenedwith her head bent down upon her knees, and her face covered with herhands. In the cheerful morning sunshine, within shelter of the old housewhich was so deeply concerned, he read as follows, his voice soundingsolemnly and awe-stricken, like a funeral service, but so low as to beaudible only to her ear."I did not telegraph; I thought this would reach you soon enough. Iam starting to come to you with poor Matty, and her fatherlessboys. I wish I knew how to tell you that it might be easier thanthe plain facts; but I do not know what else to say. Your brotherdied at sea soon after we left. I had got to be very fond of him. Iwill tell you all he said when I come. And I hope you will try tolook over Matty's little faults--for he was very fond of her to thelast."We shall arrive soon after you receive this. I am very, verysorry. I do not know what more to say."VERNA."There was a long pause. She did not move or speak; she had to get overher grief as best she could, at once--to gulp it down, and think of thefuture, and how to tell her father he had no son. It was a hard effort,and this was the only moment she dared take to herself. As for Fanshawe,he sat beside her very sadly, looking at her, wondering if he ought tosay anything--trying to think of something to say. What could he say?not anything about resignation; nor that it was better for Charlie. Howdid he know whether or not it was better for Charlie? He felt sadhimself to the bottom of his heart, as if it was he who had lost abrother. Tears had come to his eyes, which did not feel like tears ofsympathy. Then he touched her shoulder, her dress, softly with the endsof his fingers--so lightly that it might have been the dropping of aleaf; it was all he dared to do. Marjory started all at once at thistouch--light though it was."Yes," she said; "it is true; there is no time to sit and think. I mustgive orders about their rooms--and--my father must know.""Miss Heriot, my heart aches for you. Tell me, what can I do?""Yes," said Marjory; "I know it; you are as kind as--a brother. Oh me!oh me!--but stop me, please; I must not cry. The first thing is--myfather must know. Mr. Fanshawe, will you go and see where he is?--if heis in the library? It is cowardly; but I seem to want a moment first; amoment--all to myself--before I tell him. Will you see if he is there?""Let me take you in first. Yes, yes, I will go.""Never mind me; do not think of me," said Marjory, nervously twining anduntwining her hands. "And tell my uncle, please--and Fleming. Tell them;all except papa. God help him! it will kill him. It is I who must tellpapa."She looked so wild and woe-begone that he hesitated a moment; but shewaved her hand to him almost with impatience. He looked back before hewent into the house, and saw her sitting where he had left her--gazinginto the vacant air before her, shedding no tears, twisting her fingerstogether; half crazed with the weight of trouble, which was more thanshe could bear.Fanshawe went softly into the house; he felt, but more strongly, asMarjory herself had felt when she went into Pitcomlie with the news ofTom's illness. This secret, which was in his keeping, made him almost atraitor; he stole through the drawing-room, along the silentpassage--nothing but sunshine seemed in the house--soft sunshine of theSpring, and fresh air, a little chilled by the sea, full of invigorationand sweet life. He knocked softly at the library-door, feeling hisheart beat, as if in his very look the poor father must read the secret.There was no answer; he knocked again; how still it was! Just as atraveller might have gone into an enchanted palace, seeing signs of lifeabout, careful order and guardianship, but no living thing; just so hadhe come in. The rooms were empty, swept and garnished; there was not asound to be heard but the steady ticking of the great old clock, whichstood in the hall, and the throbs of his own heart; and still no answerto the knock. Persuaded that Mr. Heriot must have gone out, Fanshaweopened the door softly to peep in, and make certain before he returnedto Marjory. To his surprise, the first thing he saw was that Mr. Heriotwas in his usual place, in his usual chair, calmly seated at his writingtable, paying no attention. The opening of the door, and Fanshawe'ssuppressed exclamation, "I did not know you were here, Sir," disturbedhim apparently as little as the knocking had done. Fanshawe had nomessage to give; he had forgotten even to make up any pretext for hisvisit; he said hastily, now feeling half ashamed of himself: "There is abook here I want to consult, if you will permit me," and without waitingfor an answer, he went hastily to the shelf, where stood a number oftall county histories--books which Mr. Heriot prized. Turning his backon the old man at his table, he hastily selected one of these books. "Ifear I disturb you, Sir," he said, in the easiest tone he could assume;"but in the first place, I thought you had gone out; and in the secondplace, I knew my business would not occupy a moment. I will put itsafely back."Somehow, it seemed to Fanshawe that a tone of levity had crept into hisown voice; he spoke jauntily, as a man who is playing a part is so aptto do, and the light-minded tone came out all the more distinctlybecause this speech, like the others, received no answer. No answer; howstill the room was! the fire burning brightly, but noiselessly, thesunshine coming in through the great window, nothing stirring, nothingbreathing. Mr. Heriot had not moved; he had never even raised his headto look at his visitor; through all the fretfulness of his temper to theothers he had never been but polite and friendly to Tom's friend; andthis strange rudeness struck the intruder all the more.It seemed to Fanshawe as if a cold air began to blow fitfully in hisface; and still Mr. Heriot did not move; he had not even raised his headto look at his visitor. Fanshawe stood still in the middle of the roomhesitating; and then a curious moral impression, conveyed by thestillness, or by a subtle something more than the stillness, crept overhim, he could not tell how; an icy chill went through him. It was coldhe supposed, though why it should be cold in that warm room, with thefire burning and the sun shining, he could not tell. He approached astep nearer to the master of the house. "Mr. Heriot!" he said.No answer still; not a word, not a movement. Was he asleep? Fanshawedrew nearer still with a shuddering curiosity. The old man's elbowswere leaning on the table; one hand was extended flat out, every fingerat its full length. The other held by a book which was supported on areading-stand. His eyes were fixed upon this book with a heavy, dullstare, his chin dropped a little. Had he fainted? Fanshawe drew closerand closer with a certain fascination. The long, listless hand upon thetable lay grey and motionless, like something dead. Good God! was itdeath? But how could it be death? He had not heard the news. There wasno reason why he should die in that tranquil brightness, everything sostill around him, no murmur in the air of what was coming. It wasimpossible. In his certainty of this, Fanshawe touched the motionlesshand. He withdrew instantly, with a hoarse and broken scream; theunexpected touch unmanned him. He called aloud for Marjory in his aweand terror--yes, terror, though he was a brave man. Marjory was seated,hopeless, in the sunshine, trying to subdue her own misery, trying tothink how she could tell her father. But her father had stolenpeacefully away, out of reach of that miserable news. He had gone out ofhearing; nothing that could be said to him would move him more for ever.Fanshawe stood in an agony of momentary uncertainty behind the chair.What should he do? It seemed to him terrible to leave this ice-figurepropped up here, without human watcher near. He called for Fleming witha paralysed sense of helplessness, without even the hope of being heard;and it seemed to him that the moments which passed were years. Atlength he was relieved in the strangest way. The door opened softly, andsome one came in. He thought at the first glance it was one of thewomen-servants."Call Fleming to me; call Fleming, quick!" he cried.The new-comer took no notice. She made no immediate reply. A smallfigure dressed in black, with curls clustering about her head, and asweet but gently-complacent smile. She advanced towards the tablesmiling, making a sweeping curtsey. She did not look at Fanshawe, but atthe figure in the chair, which to her was not awful. It was terrible tosee this smooth little woman, in all the confidence of one who knewherself sure to please, with her conventional salutation, her companysmile, coming calmly up, knowing nothing. She addressed herself to himwho sat there with deaf ears, not seeing her."I do not know Fleming; I am Verna," she said.CHAPTER XVI.It would be hopeless to describe the condition of Pitcomlie during therest of that terrible day. In the hall was the young widow with herchildren, an important English nurse, and the Ayah with the baby--thechildren crying, the Ayah moaning, and Mrs. Charles wondering why no onecame to receive her; while in the library the scene was occurring whichwe have described. Marjory was still seated on the steps of thesun-dial. She had not heard anything; or rather some dim perceptionsthat something had happened had penetrated her stupor without rousingher to think what it was. Her whole mind was absorbed with one thought.She had not even time to grieve. She had to tell her father. Of all thathad ever fallen upon her in her life, this was the hardest to do. Sheallowed herself this interval of calm, because she was awaiting thereturn of her messenger. It was a pretext, she felt; but she tookadvantage of the pretext with such eagerness! and, perhaps, after all,he had gone out; perhaps she might have another moment ofrespite--perhaps--Then she became vaguely aware of some commotion in the house. Milly wasthe first to rush out upon her."Oh! May, there's such funny folk in the hall; a black woman! with awhite thing over her head--and little babies. Come, come and see;they're all asking for you; everybody wants you. Come, come and see.""Babies!" said Marjory; and then, in spite of herself, burst into suddentears.The thought made her heart sick. It seemed impossible to rise up andwelcome them, to receive these strangers in this first hour of trouble.Then Fleming, looking very pale, hurried across the lawn. The old manwas heart-broken, but he could not be otherwise than acrid."This is a fine time to sit here and divert yoursel', Miss Marjory," hesaid, "when the house is full of strange folk, and no a soul knows whatto do first. They've come; and mair than that--you'll know soon enough,soon enough; but Lordsake!" cried the old man, putting Milly asidealmost roughly, "send that bairn away."Marjory rose up, dragging herself painfully back into the busy worldwhich awaits all the living, whosoever may be gone or dead. Then Mr.Charles was seen hurrying through the open window."What is this, May? What is all this I hear?" he cried. The news hadbeen told to him by the servants, without any preparation, thrown at himin a lump as servants are fond of doing, and he was stunned by thesuccession of events. It seemed to him impossible to believe in theirreality till he had come to her, who was the centre of the family life.Little Milly crying out of sympathy, knowing nothing, clung to hersister's dress--and Mr. Charles eager and anxious with his long leanperson all in tremulous motion, put his hand on the sun-dial to steadyhimself, and with agitated and white lips asked again, "What is it,May?" And at the other side of the house there suddenly appearedFanshawe, supporting a lady on his arm. Marjory's bewildered mind fixedupon this. It was the only thing she did not understand. He placed thestranger on a seat and hurried across the lawn. "Give the lady a glassof wine," he cried peremptorily to Fleming, and then took Marjory's handand drew it within his arm."Come in-doors," he said briefly, almost sternly, "they all fly to you,and it is you who ought to be considered most. Come in-doors.""No," she said, "no, I must do it first; if they have come I must dothat first; he must hear it from me.""Come in," said Fanshawe peremptorily; but before he could lead heraway, the stranger, whom he had brought to the air, came forward toMarjory."I am better now," she said. "I never fainted in my life before. It wassuch a shock. I know you are Miss Heriot, dear, and I know what you mustbe feeling. Don't mind us; I can look after everything, I know how tomake myself at home. Oh, poor thing, poor thing! father and brother inone day!""What does she mean?" said Marjory."My dear May, my dear May!" cried Mr. Charles. "Lord bless us! she doesnot know! Come in, come in, as Mr. Fanshawe says.""Father and brother in one day? then my father is dead," said Marjory.She put both her hands on Fanshawe's arm, holding herself up. "Did youtell him? did he hear?""He had died in his chair, quite calmly, before the news came.""You are sure--quite sure, he did not know?""Quite sure.""Then thank God!" said Marjory. "Oh, I am glad. Don't say anything tome--I am glad. Milly, Milly, don't cry, go and say your prayers. I can'tthink of Charlie just now, I am so glad for papa.""Oh, my dear! she has gone mad with grief," said Mr. Charles. "May, mybonnie May, cry, break your heart, anything would be better than this.""I am not mad, I am glad. Thank God!" repeated Marjory. She sufferedthem to take her in, with a calm which frightened them all. Thus thechief actors, in all the excitement of a terrible crisis, went their wayoff the scene like a tragic procession, carrying with them theiratmosphere of pain and trouble; and like the change in a theatre,another set of sentiments, another group of persons, came uppermost.Miss Bassett was left in possession of the lawn. She had received ashock, but she felt better already, and she was a curious littlepersonage. She watched them go in, making her own observations,especially in respect to Fanshawe, whose presence struck her feminineeye at once. Who was he? engaged to Miss Heriot, she concluded; it wasthe most natural explanation. Then she went across the lawn to the edgeof the cliff and looked over; then made a turn or two up and down,putting up an eye-glass to her eye, inspecting the house. The house wasvery satisfactory; it had an air of old establishment, wealth, andcomfort that pleased her."Only I would clear away all these old ruins," she said, turning herglass upon the tall old Manor-house of Pitcomlie, and Mr. Charles'stower, "and throw out a new wing," she added, putting her head a littleon one side, "with a nice sheltered flower-garden and conservatories."This notion pleased her still more. "What a different place it wouldlook," she continued musing, "if I had it in my hands; I would clearaway all the old rubbish, I would make a handsome entrance with aportico and steps. I would soon make an end of all those littleold-fashioned windows, and have plate-glass everywhere. Dear me, dearme, what a pity poor Charlie was not the eldest son!"From this it will be apparent that the newcomer was not aware of whathad happened in the family upon which she had arrived so suddenly. Whenshe had examined the house quite at her leisure, she bethought herselfof the helpless party she had left in the hall, and made her way to themround the front, finding the way by instinct with a cleverness whichnever forsook her. "I wonder what they will do with Matty," she said toherself. "I wonder what the new Mr. Heriot is like. I have seen hisphotograph, but I don't recollect. I wonder if he is married. If he isnot married, Matty's little boy will be the heir-apparent, orheir-presumptive, is it? and they will make much of him. Fancy grownpeople like Matty and myself being tacked on to little Tommy to give usimportance! If he was not Charlie's brother Matty might marry him. Asfor me, that does not seem my line; at least I have never done it yet,after being in India and all. It is droll how people differ. Matty is afool and as selfish as a little cat; but she is the marrying one. Nevermind, I shall do as well for myself. How awful that old man looked, tobe sure--I shall dream of him all my life; but don't let's think ofthat. Oh, you poor dear Charlie, how nice it would have been if you hadlived, and if you had been the eldest son!"Fresh from this reverie she met at the door Mrs. Simpson, thehousekeeper, who had just cleared the frightened and excited servantsout of the hall, and was closing the shutters with her own hands, andcrying softly between whiles with many a murmured exclamation. MissBassett was very conciliatory, almost respectful to the old servants."Can you tell me, please, where I shall find my sister and thechildren?" she said. "What a dreadful day for us to come, the day ofyour poor dear master's death! I am so sorry to give you so much moretrouble on such a day.""Oh mem, never name the trouble," said Mrs. Simpson, "if anything couldbe a comfort it would be the sight of thae dear bairns, that he didnalive to see, poor man. Eh, it's an awfu' lesson to the rest of us, tobe taken like that without a moment's preparation, reading a commonbook, that could be of no use to his soul. Eh Sirs! In an ordinary wayI'm no feared for death. It's what must come to us all; but death likethat--""I am sure though," said Miss Bassett confidently, "by the look of hisface that he was a good man. There was a believing look about him. Ifeel sure all is well with him, and if it is a loss to us, you know itis a gain to him.""Eh, what a pious good young lady," said Mrs. Simpson to herself; "wemaun aye hope so," she said aloud, but with much less certainty. She wasa Seceder, and not quite certain of her master's salvation. "He didnatake his troubles may be so well as he might have done. They say it's asure sign of the children of light when they're resigned, whatever Godsends; but oh, it's no for us to judge," said Mrs. Simpson, putting herapron to her eyes. "I hope you're better, mem. It was a sore trial for ayoung lady, going in like that to the presence of death. I'll show youupstairs where the other lady is, and if you'll just ring there's a maidwill see to everything. Meals and hours will be all wrong the day inthis mourning house; but you're a considerate young lady and ye'll lookover it--for to-day.""Oh, don't trouble about us," said the newcomer, giving Mrs. Simpson oneof her sweetest smiles, "I like you so much for being grieved for yourmaster. Never think of us--" Miss Bassett was very popular among theservants wherever she went. She gave a little nod and smile to ahousemaid she met on the stairs. She was very conciliatory. The youngestson's wife's sister has little reason to think herself an importantpersonage in any house; and as she went up the great staircase throughthe long noiseless carpeted corridor which led to the west wing, herrespect for the house rose higher. She noted that the carpet was Turkeycarpet, that every corner was covered, no matting, no boards visible,nothing that showed the least desire for economy. She was not used toany English house except the very thrifty one in which Matilda and shehad received their education, and these details of luxury were verypleasant to her. She sighed as she went into the pretty room where hersister and the children were already established. It was the largestroom in the wing, the end room with two large windows looking over thepeaceful sunshiny country, and one in the side which had a peep of thesea. There were large wardrobes, a great marble dressing-table, asuccession of mirrors, a magnificent canopied bed, and more Turkeycarpets, feeling like moss beneath the feet. The handsome room, however,was already made into a disorderly nursery. Matilda had thrown her hatdown on the writing-table, where it lay among the pens and ink, coveredover in its turn by the children's hats and pelisses. She had thrownherself on the sofa, where she lay, tired and dishevelled, makingineffectual remonstrances with Tommy, who was belabouring the floor withan ivory-backed brush which he had found on the dressing-table. Babywas sprawling on the lap of the dark Ayah, who sat squatted on the floornear her mistress's feet, and the English maid was unpacking all theboxes at once, finding all sorts of heterogeneous things in thedifferent packages."Bother that black thing," she said indignantly as Miss Bassett entered,"here's baby's short things all bundled up in mistress's best shawl.There ain't a thing where I can lay my hand on it, and all the place ina litter already."Miss Bassett did her best to remedy the muddle. She seized the brush outof Tommy's hand, and put him spell-bound in the corner. She pulled offher sister's shawl, which hung half over the arm of the sofa. She rangedthe hats upon the bed and cleared the writing-table."Matty! for heaven's sake," she said, "we have come to a nice tidyplace, and they seem disposed to treat you handsomely. This must be oneof the best rooms, don't make a pigsty of it the very first day.""I like that," said Matilda languidly; she was a pretty, listless, fairyoung woman, with light hair, without any colour in it, and blue eyes,which were somewhat cold and steely. "Where have you been to, Verna? Youwent and left us all by ourselves, to get on as we could; and but forthat nice fat woman who brought us upstairs, I do not know what weshould have done. Of course, the children must be made comfortable. Shesaid we were to have all the rooms in this end. When you can get themcleared away, and things put straight, I think I shall go to bed andhave a good sleep.""Then you don't want to know anything about the family?" said hersister."The family! oh, I suppose Marjory will come to see me by-and-by. Idon't want her till I have had a sleep, and I told the fat woman so. Ishall cry when she comes, I know; and it tires me out to cry. I want asleep first. I suppose you have seen them all; you always see everybodyfirst. Are they nice? do they look good-natured? do you think they meanus to stay here, or what am I to do? Who is knocking at the door? Oh, Iknow; it is the fat woman with the tea.""Hush, for heaven's sake!" said Verna; "do think for a moment;everything depends on how you behave. Elvin, don't let anyone in justyet. Matty, listen; old Mr. Heriot--your father-in-law--Charlie'sfather, died this morning. The house is all in confusion.""Died this morning!" Matilda's lip began to quiver, her eyes filledsuddenly with tears, her face acquired all at once the pitiful look of achild's face in sudden trouble. "Oh," she said, "must some one be alwaysdying wherever we go? It is dreadful. I cannot bear to be in a housewhere there is some one dead. I never was so in my life. Verna, take thebaby; take us away, take us away!""I will kill you!" cried her sister passionately, turning on her,clenching her little fist in Matilda's face. "You fool! hold yourridiculous tongue when the servants come in; cry as much as you please;you can do that. It will make them think you can feel, though you have aheart as hard--Cry! if you can't do anything else. Thank you very much,"she said, turning round suddenly and changing her tone in the twinklingof an eye. It was Mrs. Simpson herself who had entered, attended by amaid with a tray. The housekeeper was deeply in want of somecounteracting excitement, and she knew that the two babies on the floorwere the only representatives of the house, though their mother did not.She came in with a jug of cream in her hand, very solemn and tearful,ready to weep at a moment's notice, yet eager to explain, and tell thesad story--full of natural womanly interest about the children, as wellas anxiety touching the little heir and his mother. In short, thehousekeeper was like most other people--she had good, maternal motives,and she had an alloy of interested ones. Had the young widow been a poorwoman, Mrs. Simpson's kindness would have been more disinterested; butin the present circumstances, it was impossible not to recollect thatthe young woman crying on the sofa, who looked so innocent and childishin her sorrow, might be the future mistress of the house, and haveeverything in her hand."Oh, mem!" said Mrs. Simpson; "what is there we wadna do--every one inthe house--for poor Mr. Chairlie's lady, and thae two bonnie bairns! Oh,Mistress Chairles! dinna break your heart like that! there's plentycause; but think on your two bonnie lads that will live to be a creditto everyone belonging to them, and a' the hope now that we have in thisdistressed house. Oh, get her to take some tea; get her to lie down andrest! So young and so bonnie, and her man taken from her, and ahome-coming like this!""My sister is very tired," said Verna; "indeed, as you say, it is a verysad home-coming. She cannot thank you to-day, you kind woman; butto-morrow I hope she will be better. We have had a terrible journey. Andshe feels it so much," added the quick-witted creature, seeing Mrs.Simpson's eye linger upon Matilda's coloured gown, "having no mourningto come in; no widow's cap. You must tell me afterwards whether there isa dress-maker here whom we can have. What did you say, dear? will youtry some tea? Cry! you fool!" she whispered fiercely, turning aside toher sister, "and don't speak.""But, Verna--a cap!" Once more Matilda put on that piteous look; herlips quivered; large tears rolled down her cheek; she put her hand up toher pretty light hair."Yes, that is the first thing," said the wiser sister. "Will you pleasesend for the dress-maker? Perhaps we can get her a cap in the village.That is all she thinks of; she would not like to see dear Miss Heriotwithout her cap.""Miss Marjory is not in a state to see anybody," said the housekeeper,shaking her head; "she's taking her trouble hard--hard. She's noresigned, as she ought to be. And this is the little heir? Eh, my bonnieman! but I'm glad, glad to see you here!""Yes, this is the eldest," said Verna, puzzled; "he is called Tom, afterhis poor grandpapa. Then young Mr. Heriot is not married?"The housekeeper shook her head solemnly. "Na, na! Mr. Tom wasna a man tomarry; and oh, to think the auld house should depend upon a littlebairn."Then the good woman put her apron to her eyes. Verna watched her everylook and movement, and already her attention and curiosity wereawakened; but she would not show her ignorance of the family affairs;and she was glad to get Mrs. Simpson out of the room, fearing theoutburst which was coming. It came almost before she had closed the doorupon the housekeeper's ample gown."Oh you cruel, cruel Verna!" cried the young widow. "Oh you barbarous,unfeeling thing! a cap! I will never wear a cap; as if it was not badenough to lose Charlie, and come home here like this, and cry my eyesout, and have to please everybody; instead of my own house, and being myown mistress, as I was while dear Charlie was living; but to put on ahideous cap--I will not, I will not! With light hair it is dreadful; Iwill rather die!"CHAPTER XVII.The situation of the little party of strangers in the west wing ofPitcomlie for the week after their arrival was strange enough. They werein the house, but not of it. Partly on pretence of their fatigue, partlybecause of the agitated condition of the family, they were not asked togo down stairs, and it was the second day before Marjory even paid thema visit. On the afternoon of their arrival Mr. Charles went solemnlyupstairs, and kissed the babies, and shook hands with his new niece.Mrs. Charles had been carefully tutored by her sister, and she had somany grievances on hand that she was ready to cry at a moment's notice.First and foremost of these was the cap, which had been found in thevillage, a hideous head-dress indeed, made for some elderly villagematron, which drowned Matilda's poor pretty face within its awfulcirclet. She resisted with all her might, and cried, and struggled; buthaving no one to back her, gave in to superior force at last, as wasinevitable."The uglier it is, the more they will feel that you are in earnest,"said Verna, with an energy that carried everything before it.And when Mr. Charles came in and paid his respects solemnly, his heartsmote him for all the evil things he had said about her, when he sawthe tears stealing from under Matilda's long eyelashes, and thatpiteous quiver of her lip."Some people do themselves much injustice by their style of writingletters," he said to Fanshawe, that evening. "She may not be very wise,but she has plenty of feeling."She scarcely spoke at all during this interview, but cried and gave hima look of hopeless yet affecting sorrow, which went direct to the oldman's heart. The little boy was disobedient, but that was nothing to bewondered at after a long sea-voyage and all that had happened; and asclever Verna thought, the terrible widow's cap intended for old Mrs.Williamson at the post-office, gave the young widow worship in the eyesof all who beheld her. Verna won herself worship in quite a differentway. She put on the most becoming hat she had, and strayed down in theevening to get a little air. The first evening she saw no one. Thesecond, Mr. Fanshawe came out and walked with her round the lawn, whereshe had seen Marjory first."How is Miss Heriot?" she asked, anxiously; "is she better? Was she somuch devoted to her father? I am very, very sorry for her; but my poorMatty wants comfort too.""Miss Heriot has been ill," said Fanshawe. "She has had so much tobear--one shock after another.""Yes; Charlie's death," said Verna, watching him with keen eyes, "andthen Mr. Heriot's--""And her elder brother--so very short a time before.""Her elder brother?""I forgot. You left India before the news could have reached you. Threeof them have been swept off one after another. Mr. Heriot died of grief;he never got over poor Tom's death. The shock to Miss Heriot was not somuch her father's death, as her certainty that yesterday's news wouldkill him. All this has affected her deeply. We had almost to force herto do nothing, to see nobody except ourselves--to allow herself torest.""You have a very deep interest in Miss Heriot?" Verna asked,hesitatingly. She did not even know his name. "Or perhaps--I beg yourpardon, I am only a stranger--perhaps you are one of the family?"Fanshawe had started slightly; he had looked up at her with a suddenmovement when she made that suggestion. It had brought the colour to hisface."I--take a deep interest in all the family," he said. "No, I am not oneof them. My name is Fanshawe. I was with poor Tom Heriot when he died. Iam glad to be of use at this moment as far as I can.""Oh, I beg your pardon. I did not mean to put embarrassing questions,"she said. "Please forgive me; I am quite a stranger. Poor Matty does notknow much, never having been at home since she was married; and I knownothing at all. We did not know Mr. Tom Heriot was dead. What a terriblething! father and two sons--all the sons--there are no more?""No more--the whole family--except Miss Heriot and her little sister,and your sister's boys--have been swept away."Verna's heart was beating wildly. She could scarcely contain the suddenflood of triumph that had poured into all her veins. At last she wasgoing to be a great lady. Everything would be in her hands. Marry! why,what was marrying to this? But she restrained herself, to make assurancesure."Poor little Tommy," she said, with a demure and measured tone, whichwas put on to hide her emotion, "only three years old; is it possiblethat he is the master, of all this--that everything depends on him?""Poor child!" said Fanshawe.What a farce these words seemed! Oh happy child, blessed child, mostfortunate baby, with eighteen years of a minority before him, and hisaunt, Inverna Bassett, the only clever one of the family to doeverything for him! But she dared not betray the exultation that coursedthrough all her veins."I hope Miss Heriot will come to see us to-morrow," she said. "It willbe better for--all of us--if she will be friendly and come."Somehow there was a change of inflection in this which caught Fanshawe'sear. He was quite incapable of defining what it meant. The rapidrevolution of sentiment, the change from humility and doubt intosuperiority and certainty, the implied warning, too delicate to be athreat, that it would be better "for all of us" that the daughter of thehouse should visit its new mistress, all these gradations of thoughtwent beyond his capacity. He did not understand; but still his ear,though not his intelligence, caught some change in the tone."I do not think," he said, with some coldness, though he could not havetold why, "that we shall be able to persuade Miss Heriot to rest beyondto-day.""I am glad of that," said Verna. "I mean I shall be very glad to seeher. I saw her, it is true, yesterday, here, but she did not notice me.Of course it was a terrible moment for her--and for all of us," sheadded, with a little meaning. "Matty's first coming home--"Was there a little emphasis on that last word? Certainly there was achange of tone.Fanshawe was confused; he could not quite tell why. As for Verna, herlittle brain was in a whirl. She wanted to be alone to think. She put upher eye-glass once more, and inspected the house with such a wild senseof power that her faculties for the moment seemed taken from her."Good evening," she said, hastily. "I think I will go back to my poorsister, who has no one but me to take thought for her."How everything had changed! She had no need now to be civil to anybody;no need to put on any mask, or restrain her real feelings. She rushedinto the house, and upstairs, full of her discovery; but before shereached her sister's room, her steps grew slower, and her thoughts lesseager. Verna was ignorant, very ignorant. How did she know that theremight not be some law, or some will, or something that would modifythis too delightful, too glorious state of affairs?A little chill crept over her. Little Tommy's heirship might not beabsolutely certain, after all. If it was certain, would not everythinghave been turned over to Matilda at once? Would Miss Heriot stillventure to give herself airs as if she were the mistress of the house?Would she not rather come humbly to them, and do her best to conciliateand find favour in the eyes of the new mistress? Verna would have doneso; and it was hard for her to realise the emotions of so very differenta woman, whom, besides, she did not know. The result of all her musings,however, was that she would for the present say nothing to Matilda. Shewould leave her for the moment in her uncertainty, wondering what thefamily meant to do with her. Matilda might be kept in the desirablestate of subjection so long as she was thus humble in her expectations;but Verna knew that when she was mistress of Pitcomlie she would nolonger consent to cry and to abstain from talking.Accordingly, she concluded to keep her news to herself. When she enteredthe room where her sister still lay on the sofa, chatting with hermaids, and shrieking now and then an ineffectual remonstrance againstTommy's noisy proceedings, there came into Verna's mind a sudden andsharp conviction of the foolish mistakes which Providence is alwaysmaking in the management of the world.She had made up her mind that it was she who was to reign in Pitcomlieif Tommy turned out to be really the heir; but how would she have to doit? By means of coaxing, frightening, humouring, and keeping in gooddisposition this foolish sister, whom she had been half ashamed of forher silliness all her life. Matilda would be the real possessor of allthese advantages. She herself would only enjoy them as Matilda's deputy.Oh! if the Powers above had but been judicious enough to bestow themdirect upon the person justly qualified! This sudden thought made hersharp and angry as she went into the luxurious room, which Matilda hadturned into chaos."What a mess everything is in!" she cried. "Elvin, for Heaven's sake getthose things cleared away, and try to be something like tidy. They willthink us a pack of savages. Matty, why don't you exert yourself alittle? I declare it is an absolute disgrace to let everything go likethis. We are not in India, where one can't move for the heat. And whatif Miss Heriot were to come up now and find you like this, all in amuddle, baby crying, and Tommy rioting, and your cap off?""I have as good a right to do what I like as Miss Heriot has," saidMatilda, pouting; "and I hate your odious cap.""You have got to wear it," said the peremptory Verna, picking up theunfortunate head-dress from the floor; "and if I were you I would ratherwear it clean than dirty. As it is so late, Elvin may put it awaycarefully in a drawer; but, Matty, Miss Heriot--""Oh! how I do hate Miss Heriot!" said Matilda, ready to cry."You don't know what she may have in her power," said Verna, with acurious enjoyment of the picture she was about to draw. "She may be ableto do everything for you, or perhaps nothing; how can we tell? But inthe meantime it is better to have her good opinion. Do as I told you;talk as little as you can, and look as pitiful as you please. Probablywe shall have to go to the funeral; or if not to the funeral--we can sayyou are not well enough--at least to the reading of the will, and thatwill be very important. Nobody can expect you to do anything but cry.Whatever you may hear, Matty, for God's sake don't commit yourself tosay anything. Leave it all to me. It will save you ever so much trouble,and you may be sure it will succeed better. You know you are not soquick as I am; you are a great deal prettier, but not so quick. Now dopromise, there's a darling. Take your best handkerchief, and tie yourcap well round your face, and cry all the time; not noisily, but in anice ladylike way. It will have the very best effect; and if youpromise, it will leave my mind quite easy, and I can give my attentionto what is going on. Now, Matty dear, won't you do as much as this forTommy's sake and for me?""Is the funeral to be to-morrow?" said Matilda, putting off theformality of the promise."Why, I tell you again this is not India, you silly child," said Verna."It will not be, I suppose, till this day week, and there will be hostsof people. I shall have quantities to do without looking after you. Nowpromise, Matty! If you don't, I can't answer for what may happen; theymay send you back to papa--""I will do whatever is best," said Matilda, moved by this horriblethreat. "Tell me what is best, and I will do it. Oh, they never couldthink of that! They must give me so much a year at least, and some placeto live in. I could not go back to papa to be snubbed and treated like ababy, and hear the dear children sworn at, and never dare venture tospeak to anyone. I would rather die.""If you are good, and do what I tell you, it will never happen," saidVerna, kissing her. "I have a great deal in my head, Matty. I have heardsomething--but never you mind. I will tell you when I have found it allout. I should not wonder if we were to be very well off, and never torequire to do anything after this but please ourselves. Hush! don'tagitate yourself. You can't think what a deal I have to think of; but weshall know all about it when the funeral is over, and how it is all tobe."This had to content Matilda for the moment, and she went to bed with herhead buzzing with all kinds of pleasant thoughts. Poor Charlie! it wouldhave been much "nicer" if he had lived; he gave her a great deal more ofher own way than Verna did; he was more of a comfort to her--and then awoman is always of more consequence when there is a man behind her to beappealed to. But still, now that poor Charlie was dead and gone, and nothinking nor crying could bring him back, perhaps it might be for thebest. If the old gentleman had left him something very nice in his will,as Verna seemed to expect, Matilda thought she would go to some brightnice place where there would be good society, and bring up Tommy.Perhaps she might be able to have a carriage, if it was as much as Vernathought--and never would require to think twice about a new dress, or apretty bracelet, or anything she might fancy. These gentle fancieslulled her as she went to sleep. Yes, it was a pious thought, such athought as ought to be cultivated in the bosom of every woman; perhapsafter all it might turn out that everything had been for the best.Verna was not so pious. She sat at her open window half the night,though the air was chill, with flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes. Shecould not quite persuade herself that it was possible. "If--" she saidto herself, before she set off on a wild canter of imagination throughall the glories that could be thought of. If--What a thing it would be! To be virtual mistress of this house, to haveeverything in her power, to be able to turn out "the family" if shepleased, and make her own will superior everywhere! This hopeintoxicated the young woman. The instinct of managing everybody andeverything had been strong in her all her life; but it never had hadfull scope. She had managed her father's house, but that was little; andhe himself was a rough man, who despised women, and was not capable ofbeing managed. Now what unbounded opportunities would be hers--theestate, the house, the village, nay, the county! Verna's ambitionleaped at all. And she never intended to rule badly, unkindly, or doanything but good; Matilda should be as happy as the day was long, shesaid to herself; Tommy should be sent to the best of schools. She wouldbe as polite as possible to the Heriots, and beg them to considerPitcomlie as their home as long as it suited them.She meant very well. She would get up coal clubs, and clothing clubs,and all sorts of benevolence in the village. She would be a secondprovidence for the poor people. Never were there better intentions thanthose which Verna formed as she sat at the window, her eyes shining withanticipation, if--That was the great thing. The foundations, perhaps, might fail under herfeet; it might all come to nothing; but if--What a good ruler, how considerate of all the needs of her empire shemeant to be! People so often prospectively good in this world; whethertheir goodness would come to nothing if they had the power, it isimpossible to tell; but hoping for it, looking forward to it, how goodthey mean to be!That these feelings should exist above stairs, while such very differentemotions were in the minds of the family below, where two deaths hadoccurred, as it were, on one day, need not surprise any one. Verna hadbeen very sorry for the sufferers; but it was not in the nature ofthings that she could be more than sorry. Her own affairs were nearestto her. They and she inhabited different spheres.CHAPTER XVIII."What did you think of them?" said Fanshawe."She cried a great deal; she is very young and pretty. Poor child!" saidMarjory. "We did not say much to each other; how could we? Indeed, youknow that I cannot talk.""I know--" said Fanshawe hastily, and then stopped short. He had doneeverything for them all during those sad days. It was the eve of thefuneral now, and it was he who had taken every necessary care upon him;but I cannot explain how he had grown into the house. They werestrangers to him a very short time before; even, it was not long sincehe had yawned and asked himself why he did not go away? But now itseemed to him that he had lived there all his life; that he had neverhad any warmer interests; that he could as soon separate himself fromhis life as from all that remained of the diminished family. He hadbrought Marjory out as her brother might have done on the eve of thatmelancholy ceremonial, to breathe the fresh evening breeze, and accustomherself a little to the outer world once more. He had led her, not tothe cliff, but to the garden, where the associations were lessoverwhelming.The flower-garden was at the other side of the house, sheltered fromall the sea-winds by the old Manor-house on the East, and warmlynestling into the angles of the present mansion. It was an old-fashionedgarden; there were no stiff flower-beds in it, no studies of colour inred and blue and yellow; no ribbons of brown leafage, or artificiallines. In summer, old roses, old lilies--the flowers that ourgrandfathers loved, stood about the borders, making the whole gardensweet; but at present, in the Spring, there was little except crisplines of crocuses and snow-drops; at one side was an avenue of limes,which had, people supposed, been the avenue of the old house. Theselimes were not large trees, they were too near the sea for that; butthey had begun to shake out their light silken green leaves in the softApril air.It was here the two were walking on the eve of Mr. Heriot's funeral. Thegate of the old house was still standing, ornamented with the cognizanceof the Heriots, at the end of the avenue, and here there was still anexit upon the cliff; close to it was the door of the kitchen-garden. Iexplain this to show how the circumstances, which were about to happen,came to pass. Marjory had walked up and down the avenue three or fourtimes--leaning on Fanshawe's arm. It had become natural to accept hisarm, to take both physical and moral support from him. I do not knowthat either of them had ever gone further in their imaginations;Marjory, at least, had not. She had no time for any thoughts aboutherself. Ever since she had known Fanshawe, she had been absorbed inmatters of a very different kind. She took his support, his kindness,his sympathy, almost, I fear, as a matter of course, forgetting that shehad no right to it; not entering into the question at all; accepting thehelp which was at hand without questioning what it was.And Fanshawe, for his part, thought badly of himself when other thoughtswould gleam across his mind by turns. He shook himself, as it were, andwas angry, asking himself, "Is this the time?--am I the sort of fellow?"He was as far from contemplating marriage as a possibility as anygood-for-nothing could be. Marriage! out of Marjory's presence how hewould have laughed at the idea! But still there had been gleams of lightwhich had passed across him, fitful glimpses of meaning, even of a kindof purpose, repressed instantly by a conviction of their utter vanityand foolishness. Sometimes, unawares, when he was thinking of otherthings, some sudden plan would come into his head, some vision wouldflit before his eyes; but they were always involuntary. He had not evenrecognised them so far as to struggle against them. They were strayvisitants that came upon him without a moment's notice unawares, andthat were driven away as intruders, without a moment's indulgence. Butsometimes along with these visions, strange words would throw themselvesin his way, and claim so urgently to be spoken, that it was very hard toresist them.This was one of those occasions. In answer to her languid words, "Youknow I cannot talk," some devil or other (he thought) thrust apassionate, too expressive answer into his mind. And he had, so tospeak, to stoop and pick it up, and throw it from him like a firebrand,before he could continue the calm conversation in which they had beenengaged."You are getting tired, I think," he said, anxiously. "Come and sit downhere.""I am not tired," said Marjory. "It is wrong to think that because themind is worn out the body must be tired too. Does it not sometimes seemall the stronger? I think it would be best to be ill; but as I am notill, what can I do? I can't pretend. I am not tired, except of doingnothing, of being cooped up, of being good for nothing--""That is what I am," he said, with a slight glance down upon her, andthen turning his head away. "I am not of any use either to myself or toother people.""How can you say so, Mr. Fanshawe? To us you have been everything thatthe kindest friend could be.""For why? Because I liked it; because I have been so mixed up--pardonthe homely word--with you and yours; not for any good reason; which Isuppose, as I have been told often, is the only rule of value. Indeed,the great thing is that you have allowed me to stay, and made me, to myown surprise, good for something; not much even now. If I tried ever sooften, in an ordinary way I should not know what to do."Marjory made no answer. He had seated her on a bench under thelime-trees. He had been standing opposite, but now he sat down by her.He had discovered before that she was not to be tempted into thesepersonal discussions. She was twisting and untwisting her fingersvaguely, with a nervous habit, not thinking what she did."Life is so easy for some people," she said, at last, "quite clearlymarked out, with nothing strange or complicated in it. It has alwaysbeen so with us. I don't think it will be so in the future. I begin tofeel as if the well-known, well-worn path had stopped, and I do not knowwhat odd track may follow. I never understood the feeling before.Perhaps you, who have had more experience--you may understand it, Idon't.""That is what I mean," he said, "only I never had any well-worn path tolose. Mine is like this little byway close to us. A big old stone gate,with shields and all the rest, and nothing opening from it, except thatirregular line on the turf. One keeps to it because there is nothingelse to keep to. This will never be your case, but it is mine. I am goodfor nothing. Nobody comes in by me, or goes out by me--""Not like the path then," said Marjory, with a faint smile, "for thereis some one knocking. Is it at the old gate or the garden door?"It was twilight, and their bench, though completely hidden, was close toboth entrances. In the little pause which followed, the knocking went onsoftly, and after a while the gardener was heard trudging along thegravel path with his heavy steps."Wha's there?" he said."It's me, Sir," answered another voice; and then after a pause--"astranger, if ye please, that wanted to ask a question. I'll no keep youlong. It's a Mr. Heriot, is't no, that lives here?""Ay, my woman," said the voice of the old gardener. "You may say that.There's been a Mr. Heriot here for as long as kirks have been standingor kailyards planted. But there's nae Mr. Heriot the now, for he died onTuesday, and he's to be buried the morn.""Eh, poor man!" said the other, in a startled tone, and she added, in alower voice, "I never saw him, but I'm real sorry. It would be him thathad sons--two sons?""That's the maist mysterious part of a'," said the gardener, glad of agossip. "He had two sons--bonnie lads, and strong lads, and like life.One of them went out to India, and married a wife; but the eldest wasnaof that kind. They are both dead within three weeks, the one after theother, the father and the two sons."A cry, subdued, but strangely piercing and full of mingled awe andterror, rang into the air. Then the gardener spoke again."Does anything ail ye, lass? What's the matter? They're no a drap'sblood to you that you should be that vexed. What are ye saying? Ay,there was a Tammas, the auldest son. They are a' Tammasses in thishouse--Tammasses and Charlies; but they're baith dead and gone! Are yougreeting, lass? And what do you ken about the family? Losh me! She'sgreeting like to break her heart.""I kent--one of the--young gentlemen," answered the stranger, withbroken sobs."One o' the young gentlemen? Maister Tom was wild, I aye said it. Itwould be Maister Tom. It's no to your credit, my dear, no to yourcredit. A poor lass should have nothing to say to a young gentleman.Maybe it was away in England? but you're no English. It might be in theHielands. He was aye ranting about here and there, taking no thought.Now, my bonnie lass, was it in the Hielands? You needna distrust me.""It's no matter to you nor to naebody," said the other voice."Miss Heriot, where are you going?" Fanshawe said, in dismay.Marjory had risen from his side in a noiseless ghostly way, and hadcrossed the path under the limes to a door in the wall, which led intothe other garden. She disappeared in the darkness, while he satwondering, and immediately after he heard her speak."You are asking after the family. You are sorry for us in our trouble.You may go, Sandy. I want to speak to her myself. Will you tell meif--you want anything?""Nothing," said the other voice, with sudden and evident self-restraint."I'm sorry to have disturbed you, mem. I meant nothing but to ask aquestion on my road as I passed.""But you knew my poor brother?""I've seen a Maister Heriot, that was said to come frae Fife.""Will you come in?" said Marjory."I thank ye, mem, but I've nae time to waste. My errand's dune. I've along road before me.""If you will come with me I will let you out another way, which isshorter," said Marjory, in a conciliatory tone.There was a momentary pause, and after some hesitating answer, Fanshaweheard the door of the other garden shut, and saw two figures come backinstead of one. The new-comer was shorter than Marjory. Her dress wastucked up as if for walking; but there was not light enough todistinguish her face. I think Marjory, in the new interest whichpossessed her, had forgotten Fanshawe. To his infinite surprise, he sawher grasp the hand of the country lass as she closed the little door inthe wall, and heard her ask eagerly, in a half-whispering voice,"Are you Isabell?"The young woman drew back. She drew away her hand. She stood evidentlyon the defensive."I didna come here," she said, "to tell wha or what I am. Naebody herehas anything to do with me. If you're Miss Heriot, I beg your pardon;but you're taking too much upon you with a stranger lass, that wantsnaething from you."The listener rose to his feet; he was shocked and annoyed by what hethought the impertinence of the wayfarer, whose confidence Marjory hadcondescended to ask. But Marjory herself was not offended. She saidhurriedly,"Do not be afraid of me. I ask with no unkind meaning. I would not hurtyou for the world. What I want is that you should trust me, and tell meyour story. I will do anything in the world for you, if you areIsabell."There was another pause, as of consideration, and then the strangerreplied,"I canna say, mem, what you may mean. It's no for me to pry into yoursecrets, if you have secrets. There's many Isabells in the world, andthat might have been my name, and me know nothing about you or yours;but my name's no Isabell, if that is any satisfaction. You said youwould show me a short gait to Comlie--""I will," said Marjory, tremulously. They were walking slowly pastFanshawe, taking no notice of him, and with feelings that were notaltogether delightful, he perceived that she had forgotten his veryexistence. "But you asked about my brother," she added, with soft tonesof pleading, "and he is dead. Poor Tom! I want to know everybody heknew. Was it in--the Highlands? Will you tell me where you knew him? Itis not for any harm--""Mem, I'm sorry to have put fancies in your head by my foolishquestion," said the resolute young woman. "What could the like of me kenof the like of him? I've seen him maybe three or four times; he was kindto some poor folk in our parish; and hearing the name on a journey, Iknockit at the garden-door to ask what had come of him. I didna ken,"she added, with a quiver of emotion, which she evidently did all shecould to restrain, "that he was dead. I was struck to hear it, and I'msorry for you and all the family, with such a sore trial. If you are theonly leddy, mem, I'm maist sorry for you.""Thank you," said Marjory. "I have lost my father and both my brothers.I have nothing more left me in the world but one dear little sister.There is not a more sorrowful woman in all Scotland.""Ah! but there is, though!" burst from the girl; and then she made asudden pause, as if of obstinacy, and looked Marjory in the face defyingher.Once more Marjory took her hand. She wept as she spoke, pleading,crying, both at once, till Fanshawe, who was so close by, felt his heartmelt within him, and could have cried too."Oh!" she said, "tell me who that is? I am sure you know something,though you will not tell. What can I say to show you that I am not anenemy. Do you mean Isabell?"There was another painful pause, and once more the girl deliberated withherself."Wha is Isabell?" she said, at last, with a certain determination. "Iken many an Isabell that's in no trouble, and some that are. How am I token wha you mean?""And I cannot tell you," said Marjory, with despair. "That is all I knowof her. She--knew--my brother; and so do you. She would be sorry forhim, I am sure; and so are you.""I told you, mem," said the other, resolutely, "my name's no Isabell.I'm no responsible for a' the folk that knew Mr. Heriot. I canna takeupon me to answer for them. And if I said there was in Scotland a mairsorrowful woman than you could be, oh, can the like of you ever be assorrowful as a widow woman, a poor woman, a woman with hungry bairns,and no a morsel to give them? I've kent such: it goes against me to heara young lady with plenty of siller and plenty of friends make such amoan; though I'm sorry for you," she added, after a pause, "real sorryfor you too. And now will you let me see the short gait, or will I turnback and go the gait I came? for it's getting dark, and I dinna wish tobe on a strange road at night by mysel, my lane.""Then you will not tell me anything?" said Marjory."I hae naething to tell you, mem," said the girl.This strange visitor entered and disappeared through the Pitcomliegarden, while Verna was sitting at her open window, plotting andpreparing all the things she would do, if--. Verna knew nothing of her,and had she known, would have been full of maidenly indignation at theidea that Marjory could notice "such creatures." Marjory, however, wasof a very different mind. She led the girl through the flower-garden andthrough the house, anxiously guiding her to the light of the lamp in thehall, where she could see her face. She was but a comely country girl,nothing more, with fair hair twisted into a net, and a little brown hatwith a plain ribbon. She might have been a respectable country servant,or a cotter's daughter. There was nothing in any way remarkable abouther. She had blue eyes, very steady and serious in their expression,and a firm mouth, which at present was closed fast, as if in fear ofself-betrayal. She dropped a rustic curtsey as Marjory opened to her thegreat hall-door, and directed her how to go."You're very kind, mem, and I beg your pardon if I wasna civil," shesaid, with penitence.Marjory stood looking after her as she disappeared into the night.Perhaps after all it was but a whim of her own, a fancy that had nothingin it. She turned away from the door with a sigh, and then the gust ofchilly air which caught her from the garden, reminded her that she hadleft Fanshawe there, and that he must have heard all. She went slowlyback to seek him, and make her apology, her mind, like the night, darkand wistful, full of chill airs and many clouds.CHAPTER XIX.If Tom Heriot's funeral had called all the gentry of Fife to do thefamily honour, it may be supposed that his father's, following so soonafter, and in such circumstances of aggravated distress, brought out astill greater attendance. Mrs. Murray once more sat at the Manse window,with many tears, watching the mournful procession, and wondering muchwhether it would have been better for him had the Laird of Pitcomliebeen "resigned," or whether it was well for the old man to be thusremoved quickly, that he might not have sorrow on sorrow. It seemed toher that his was the lot she would have chosen for herself, and shethought tremulously as she wept, of her daughter in India, and prayedfor her as she cried for poor Charlie Heriot. Miss Jean had not venturedthis time to join Mrs. Murray at her window. The old woman was peepingfrom behind her blinds in the white gable, with eyes that shone at sightof the many carriages."Thomas Heriot may be proud," she said to herself, confused between thetwo deaths, and not feeling quite sure that her nephew was not in one ofthe mourning coaches enjoying the melancholy grandeur of which he washimself the object. All that was honourable in Fife was there, the oldgentry, and the new people of wealth, and the tenantry, and thetown--even the fishers, smelling of salt water, though arrayed in thesuit of "blacks" which it is a point of honour with that class to keepin readiness for a funeral. The churchyard was quite full of people,intent upon showing their respect for Pitcomlie.It was Mr. Charles who had received and arranged all this miscellaneousassemblage. People at his age do not mourn for each other very acutely,perhaps because the separation cannot be a long one, perhaps becausethat grand final event has become so ordinary an occurrence. To theyoung it is less familiar, less close at hand. The older one grows, themore one is disposed to represent death to one's self as an every-dayincident, and old men who are themselves approaching that verge are aptto dismiss somewhat summarily those who have preceded them. Besides, aweek had elapsed between Mr. Heriot's death and his funeral, and thatlong interval of seclusion, and absorption in one idea, is enough totake the edge of all but the most sensitive feelings. It was anxietymore than grief that sat heavy on the brow of Mr. Charles."We must think now of the living, not of the dead," he had said on theprevious evening.And indeed there was reason enough to make that transference ofsolicitude, and to think of the living. For all the courses of naturehad been driven out of trim, and no one of the party cared to confrontthe position, or ask themselves what was to come of it: except indeedVerna, who thought of nothing else; but her thoughts would have beenfar from pleasing to the others had they known.It was a long business to get all the sympathizing friends away, and tothank and shake hands with the distant hereditary acquaintances who oncemore had come so far to do honour to the Heriots. The house was in acurious excitement during this interval. All round Pitcomlie manycarriages were waiting, and profuse hospitality was being dispensed byMrs. Simpson and her maids in the servants' hall amid gossip, melancholybut consolatory.Mr. Charles was doing his duty manfully in the dining-room,administering the excellent sherry, and making such serious remarks nowand then as did not misbecome a mourner.Marjory, with Milly at her feet, and Fanshawe, bearing her mostsympathetic company, was in the drawing-room, where the shutters werestill closed, letting in mournful lines of light through theirinterstices upon the group. She had felt herself "obliged" last night totell him about Isabell. She was glad to feel herself obliged to do so,for her heart was aching with a desire for counsel and sympathy; andFanshawe had taken her confidence very differently from Mr. Charles'smode of taking it. He had been interested and touched by the letter. Hehad even suggested at once that this was what poor Tom had intended tospeak of; and he agreed with Marjory that the visitor who had so totallydeclined to tell who she was, or why she came, must have been somehowconnected with the unknown Isabell. The secret, which was now betweenthem, added another delicate bond to their friendship. He sat beside hernow, talking it all over; suggesting, now one way, now another, offinding out who and where Isabell was. Tom had never mentioned such asubject to him--"Which makes me," said Fanshawe, feeling abashed even in the gloom,"have all the more confidence that you are right, Miss Heriot. Had itbeen a--nothing, a--a mere levity--I don't know what words to use--hewould have spoken of it; but not a serious and honourable love.""Indeed, I am sure you do yourself injustice," said Marjory, even in herlanguor of grief, discovering, with surprise, that she was capable of ablush."No," he said, humbly; "men are ashamed of what is good oftener than ofwhat is evil."They were speaking low, that Milly might not share any more of thesecret than was inevitable, a precaution which was vain. Milly took inevery word, along with the gloom of the room and the lines of strange,pale eerie light, and the heavy, sad, and painful excitement of themoment. The scene and the story never went out of her mind; but it didnot make her much wiser.There was something about poor Tom, and something about some one calledIsabell, and partial darkness and transverse lines of light, themselvesso pale and dark, that they made the gloom rather heavier. Milly satclose to Marjory's knee, holding by her dress. The child could not bearto be without a hold upon something. When she let go, she seemed to sailaway through some dark world of shadows and misery, full of sounds ofthe distant wheels of the mourning coaches, and that solemn, drearybustle which attends the last exit of every mortal from his earthlyhome. Twice in a few weeks this had occurred, and it gave a confusedsense of permanency to the wretchedness, so far as the child wasconcerned.To Marjory there was, perhaps--who can say?--a certain sense offellowship and comfort in the companion with whom she could talk freely,and upon whose sympathy she could reckon, which made up for something.Little Milly, perhaps, who could not in reality feel all that happenedhalf so deeply as her sister, was for the moment more cast down,enveloped in that vague dreariness of childhood which, while it lasts,is more deeply depressing than any maturer grief.A very different scene was going on upstairs in the west wing, where thestrangers were being clothed in their new mourning, in preparation for asolemn appearance at the reading of the will. Poor Matilda, covered withcrape, and drowned in the big widow's cap, was as woe-begone as hersister could have desired, and cried more and more every time she lookedin the glass."It is hideous with light hair," she said. "Oh! Verna, how cruel youare! They will think me eighty; they will not feel for me a bit. Youknow very well, when you have an unbecoming dress, men always find itout, though they never know what makes it unbecoming. And wheneverything depends on the impression I make, for the poor children--""Oh! you little fool!" said Verna, to whom it must be allowed the deepmourning, with the delicate broad hems of her collar and wrists, wasvery becoming; "the only impression you have to make is that you are awretched widow, able to think of nothing but your poor dead husband. Ifyou had the heart of a mouse, you would be thinking of him to-day, andnot of anything else.""And so I am," said Matilda, with real tears. "He would never have mademe wear this horrible thing. He liked to see me look my best, and alwaysthought of me, and what I would like, before everything. You may be surethat so long as I am with you, who are a little tyrant to me, I shallnever, never forget poor dear Charlie. And, of course, I want to lookdecent, for his sake. What are they to think of him, dear fellow, whenthey see me look such a dowdy, and with no money, nor anything. It isfor Charlie's sake!"Verna, however, was invincible even to this argument."There are a great many other things to think of to-day," she said."Now, just remember what I say to you. They can't change what you are tohave, because that will be settled by Mr. Heriot's will; but if youdon't behave yourself as you ought, they can put you under trustees, orsomething, who will pay you out so much a month, or so much a year, andmake you do exactly what they please. That's what you have to be afraidof. If they think you look as if you could ever enjoy yourself again,be sure that's what they will do. I know them. If a woman looks as ifshe had not the heart to do a single thing, then they let her have herown way.""Do you really think so?" cried Matilda, stopping short suddenly in hertears, and looking up to her sister with round eyes, staggered by thisnew suggestion."I am certain of it," said Verna. "And then, you know, poor Charlie'swill leaves that old uncle guardian along with you. If you want to haveany freedom, you must look as if you cared for nothing of the sort. And,Matty, I have just one other word to say. If you hear anything tosurprise you, whatever it is, don't appear to take any notice. Now,recollect what I tell you. Don't jump up, or cry out, or make a fuss, ifyou hear that you are either better off or worse off than you thought.If you are left better off than you expect, you'll see these men willtry to get the upper hand, and take away your freedom, unless you lookas insensible as possible; and if you are left worse off, there arealways ways of working upon them with a heartbroken widow. I don't wantyou to be clever and understand, for you can't; but you can cry.Here's a lovely handkerchief I got for you expressly. It is just alittle too pretty. There is a row of beautiful small work above thehemstitch--too small for other people to notice much--and it will be acomfort to you.""Well, it is a beauty," said the disconsolate widow. "But all thesame," she added, after a moment's pause, "I don't see why I should notunderstand my own business as well as you.""Do you?" said Verna, turning round upon her, with flashing eyes.Matilda quailed, and fell back."Don't look as if you were going to bite me," she cried. "Did I ever sayI did? But that is not my fault. You never will let me manage anything;even Charlie wouldn't. But he did not tell me I was a fool, as you do.He said, 'I won't have my darling bothered!' Oh! dear Charlie! what Ilost when I lost you!""That was a pleasanter way of putting it," said Verna, grimly; and thenshe, too, softened, and a glimmer of moisture came into the eyes whichwould have been fine eyes had they not been somewhat hard and beady. "Hewas a fool, too," she said; "a fool about you, as men are; but he wasa dear fellow. You pink-and-white creatures have all the luck; you getmen to be fond of you that are far too good for you, while people whocould understand them--"Matilda interrupted her with a low laugh."You were always envious of me," she said; and with her complaisancerestored, and her pretty handkerchief in her hand, she made herselfcomfortable on the sofa, waiting the summons to go downstairs.Poor little Tommy was affubl, like the rest, with paramatta andcrape. He had a large sash of the latter material, which had the air ofa hump and two tails behind; and the paleness of the little Indianchild came out with double effect from this heavy framework. Verna'squick eye noticed this, and felt that much was to be made of Tommy. Sheposed him at his mother's knee, and contemplated the group, and feltthat no cruel trustee, no hard-hearted guardian, could stand againstthem. When she reflected that the guardian was only Mr. Charles, shefelt triumphant. He certainly would never oppose her. And now the momentof fate approached; soon it would be decided whether Verna, by Tommy'smeans, was to have it; or, if--What a relief it would have been to her mind, had she known that theestate was entailed, and that even Mr. Heriot's will could do nothingagainst that! but whether it is for want of education or not, certain itis that women know very little about such matters; and Verna's fineintellect was hampered by her ignorance. She knew nothing about the lawsof entail, or whether a man could change them at his will and pleasure.She felt that the possible gain was so great, that there must be someevil possibility in the way, which would make an end of it. And thissense of a tremendous decision about to be made, wound Verna up to thehighest pitch of excitement. She looked handsome, though she was notregularly handsome--almost beautiful in her emotion; her eyes' sparkled,her colour was high, and the smile, which usually was too complacent,was swept away from her face altogether, leaving only an animatedreadiness to change in a moment from grave to gay, from calm totriumphant. Her heart was beating under her new black gown as it hadnever beat in her life before. She had not lived till now, it is true,without some little movements of the heart--but none of them had at allapproached in interest to this.At last the summons came. With one final imploring supplication toMatilda to do nothing but cry, and to Tommy to be a good boy, she gaveher sister her arm with every appearance of sympathy, and held out herother hand to be grasped by Tommy, who, being short, preferred herdress, to which he clung as for life and death. The maids stood admiringand sympathetic on the stairs, as this procession stole softly down.Tommy was whimpering with fright; Matilda put up her beautifulhandkerchief to hide her face; only Verna was composed and sublime,supporting her widowed sister. In the darkened library, which was, likethe drawing-room, full of lines of ghostly light from the joints of theshutters, everybody stood up as this group entered, and all hearts werefilled with a certain thrill of sympathy. The chief places were given tothe young widow and her sister. All the others seemed to group roundthem as a natural centre.Mr. Charles stood with his back to the fire, interrupting the lightwhich came from it by his long legs. He was very tired and very anxious,not knowing what the future was to bring forth for those most dear tohim, and looking at the new-comers in the gloom which hid theexpressions of their faces, with a wistful eagerness which was strongerthan curiosity. Nothing that happened could affect him personally, norwas he without the means to give Marjory a home; but there were morethings involved than mere maintenance, and however things might turnout, it was certain that the whole family was on the eve of some painfulchange.Marjory sat behind backs, very silent, not so much interested as any oneelse present, not caring much what happened. In no circumstances was itprobable that she could have cared much for the mere personalconsideration of how much was or was not left to her; and the idea ofbeing compelled to leave Pitcomlie, and to give up all the habits andoccupations of her life, had not occurred to her. I doubt whether, evenhad it occurred to her, the effect upon her mind would have beengreater. The only thing that interested her specially was Tom's secret,the unknown story to which she seemed to have been brought closer lastevening; and it was this which was going dimly, vaguely through hermind, while the others were occupied with things so much moreimmediately present and real.Milly, as usual, was on a stool by her feet, pressing her golden hairagainst her sister's black dress; and Fanshawe stood near, behind theback of her chair, unseen, scarcely thought of, yet giving a certainsubtle support. He had no right whatever to be here. The lawyer, Mr.Smeaton, from Edinburgh, had put on his spectacles to look at him, as hemight have done had he been a big beetle conspicuously out of place.Even Mr. Charles had hesitated a little before he said, "Are you comingwith us, Mr. Fanshawe?"Fanshawe would not have accepted so very uncordial an invitation tointrude into family mysteries in any other house; but this (he said tohimself) was not like any other house; and Marjory had half turned roundto look if he was following. Was not that reason enough? He feltsomewhat uneasy when he found himself there, and in a false position. Hegot as far out of the way as possible, behind her chair. And then itgleamed across him that the others might inquire what right he had tostand behind Marjory's chair? No right! not even the right of an honestintention, a real purpose. He meant nothing; the tie between the two wasentirely fortuitous, without intention on either side. What right had heto be there?CHAPTER XX.Mr. Heriot's will was an old one. As it was read, some of the listenersheld their breaths with the strangest painful feeling of anachronism andsense of being suddenly plunged back into an ended world. Little Milly,wistful and dreary, cried at the merest mention that was made of herbrothers' names. She was the one of all who had least personal knowledgeof her brothers; but their names had become symbols of grief to her. Theothers listened with much outward quietness and internal excitement,while all the stipulations of that will which the father had made infull certainty of being survived by his sons, was read in the light ofthe fact that both his sons had preceded him to the grave.The will set forth that there was twenty thousand pounds to be dividedbetween the younger children; but that little Milly being provided forin chief by her mother's fortune, only three thousand was to be given toher, the rest being divided between the son Charles and the daughterMarjory of the testator. Mr. Smeaton paused to explain that this sumwould not be fully realized, as some part of the property from which itwas to be drawn had much deteriorated in value; and went into furtherdetailed descriptions of the property, and the cause of itsdeterioration, which tried Verna's patience to the utmost, and made Mr.Charles cross and uncross his long legs in nervous impatience.Even wills, however, come to an end some time. When this was ended therewas a pause. There were no unexpected stipulations, no wrong done to anyone; all was perfectly just, kind, and fatherly. But this was not all.Except Matilda, who knew nothing, everyone in the room stirred withuneasy expectation when the reading came to an end. Matilda, for herpart, obeyed her sister's directions closely; but that did not preventher from making an anxious calculation in her mind how much was left oftwenty thousand pounds when you subtracted three, and how much was thehalf of seventeen thousand. This was a mental operation which took her along time and much thought, and she had not arrived at the other andmore difficult and, in short, utterly insoluble question as to whatincome eight thousand five hundred pounds would produce, when Mr.Charles spoke."Is there no later will?" he said; "nothing made since the late sadchanges in the family? no codicil? He might have made some memorandum,perhaps, of what he wanted to be done in the present melancholy case.""Nothing at all," said Mr. Smeaton; "it was not a case to be foreseen.Such a thing, I daresay, never entered into his head. Since both aregone, this poor little fellow must, of course, be named heir of entail,and guardians appointed--unless his father has appointed guardians.""Not likely, not likely," said Mr. Charles; and both of the gentlemenlooked at Matilda, who, thinking that she had done something wrong, hidher face in her handkerchief. This produced, as Verna expected, the mostexcellent effect."Poor young creature!" they said to each other. "It is too much for her,and no wonder.""Miss Bassett," Mr. Charles added, gently, "perhaps you could rouse yoursister a little to the necessities of her position. You know that inconsequence of the death of my two nephews, Tom and Charlie, all thebulk of the property goes to that poor infant at your feet. Poor littleman! You understand me? I daresay you have not thought on the subject,either of you. Poor little Tommy is the actual proprietor of Pitcomlie.It will be a great responsibility for his mother. Do you think you canmake her understand?"Matilda's handkerchief, which she held to her face, was violently jerkedby the start she gave. There are some minds which are quick toself-interest, though dull to most things else. Mrs. Charles was of slowintelligence, but she heard and understood this. For a moment she madean effort to obey her sister; but then nature got the better of her. Sheflung the handkerchief on the floor, and appeared from under it, flushedand tearless."What!" she cried, with a suppressed but sharp scream.The reality of her voice amid this subdued and conventional quiet,roused them all up like a flash of lightning; and Verna herself, for themoment, was too much overcome to interfere."Did she not know?" said Mr. Smeaton, aside, to Mr. Charles. "The factis, the deaths of your brother-in-law and your husband, Mrs. Charles,have left your little boy the actual proprietor of Pitcomlie. Had Isupposed that you did not know, I would have broken the news moregently--""Tommy!" cried his mother. "Tommy! Do you mean it all belongs tous--all? this house, and the money, and everything? Oh, Tommy! Are yousure--are you quite sure? Can't you be making a mistake? These things sooften turn out to be mistakes; I should not like to believe it, and thenfind out it was not true."Verna advanced with a warning air; but her sister pushed her away."Let me alone, Verna; it is my business and Tommy's. Please go on, goon. I can understand everything. Oh! make haste and tell me! AllTommy's!--and Tommy, of course, mine, being but a baby. Is it true?""It is true, so far as Tommy is concerned," said the lawyer, with asmile; "but for his mother--""There is a paper," cried Matilda; "Charlie signed a paper. Verna, youhave it; where is it, that last paper Charlie signed? You made him doit. I remember I thought it was silly, for what could it matter? It issomething about me and the children. Give it to Uncle Charles; he is init, too. Dear me! you are quick enough sometimes," said poor Matilda, invulgar triumph. "Do not keep everybody waiting; where is it now?"Verna put herself between her sister and the critical eyes that were,she supposed, inspecting her, and picking up the fallen handkerchief,restored it to its owner."Be quiet, for heaven's sake," she cried."Oh, why should I be quiet, I should like to know?" cried Matilda."Don't stand between me and the people. If I am mistress of the house, Imean to be so, and put up with no nonsense. She has got the paper allright. Tommy, my precious darling! You shall have the nicest thingsmoney can buy. You shall never go to school, my precious, like commonlittle nasty boys. You shall have----""Oh, you fool!" shrieked Verna, in her ear.At the sound of these familiar words, and the suppressed vehemence withwhich they were spoken, Matilda for the moment came to herself. Shelooked round, and saw the wondering faces turned towards her. She sawsuddenly that she had abandoned her consigne, and had got into deepwaters, which she could not fathom; and with a certain natural cunning,which her sister blessed, she suddenly fell a crying in her excitement.Then Verna began to breathe; the ball was again in her hands."Poor Charlie was very anxious about his wife and his children before hedied," she said, "as was very natural, for he did not know if his fatherwould approve of his coming home. He had not anything to leave, poorfellow, but he made his will. Here it is. It was partly his doing andpartly mine, as my sister says. I brought it in case it should bewanted. Whatever Tommy--I mean the children--may have, he made her theirguardian. My sister is very excitable"--Here Verna paused, as if forcedto make some explanation. "She was afraid there would be nothing for thechildren. The revulsion has been too much----""Mrs. Charles seems, I think, quite able to speak for herself," said Mr.Smeaton. "This is the will of Charles Heriot, dated at sea, the 21stMarch. It's worth very little, I may tell you. It is quite informal. Ifthe family choose to accept and act upon it, I have nothing to say; butotherwise it is good for nothing. It leaves everything of which he diespossessed to his widow, and appoints her and his uncle, CharlesHay-Heriot, of George Square, Edinburgh, the guardians of his children.That's so far well; it is a judicious appointment enough--- unless,"stooping his head, and speaking lower, he added, "unless the familythink it proper to dispute it, when it is a simple piece of wastepaper. It all depends upon what you think, ay or no."There was a pause. Matilda's interposition had made a painful impressionupon Uncle Charles."What could we do?" he said, in an undertone."You could dispute this, and have guardians appointed by the court,"said Mr. Smeaton. "But as you're named, and all's right otherwise, I donot see much reason why----"Matilda heard this low conversation, but she did not know what it wasabout. She thought, like every narrow intelligence, that what she didnot understand must be against her. And her feelings overcame herprudence and her awe of Verna."What are you all talking about?" she said, vehemently, sitting up quiteupright in the chair which she had been reclining in. "What are youdoing, plotting and scheming against my boy? You cannot take hisbirthright from him. Do you think I will stay quiet, as Verna tells me.Verna, hold your tongue, it is I that am the mistress, when my Charlie'swill is being torn up, and our estate taken from us. No, I will not stayquiet. We must have our rights.""Do not mind her, gentlemen," said Verna, piteously. "She is excited;she is never like this when she understands. Matilda, dear, no one isthinking of wronging you. It was this gentleman who explained howthings are. They will appoint another guardian, and take away yourauthority, if you don't mind. Be quiet, or they will take away yourfreedom. Matty! if they see you are excited and so forth, they will notlet you have any of the power. Do you hear what I say? They cannot wrongyou, but they will make you a slave; they will take away all yourpower."This was said in a passionate whisper, close to Matilda's ear, who gazedat the speaker, open-eyed, first defiant, then gradually yielding."They are not to do anything against Tommy's rights. I will not standand see my child lose his rights," she cried.Verna sat down beside her, and took her hand, and carried on a closeconversation in a whisper. It became half Hindustanee as it becamevehement. The lawyer and Mr. Charles, after a moment's pause, madethemselves into a separate group, and talked over the papers; whileMarjory and little Milly behind, with Fanshawe looking on, formedanother. The central point of the scene was in the two young women, fullof excitement and passion, who were strangers, whom the house knewnothing of, and who yet were its future mistresses, with the wonderinglittle boy in crape standing between them, holding fast by each, andgazing out with round eyes upon the strangers who filled him with afrightened defiance. You will think it strange that Marjory had noyearning of the heart towards this baby, who was Charlie's son; but, aschildren have a perverse way of doing in such circumstances, littleTommy had not a feature which recalled Charlie. He was his mother'slittle staring image, her face, her expression, the very repetition ofher look. Milly's heart was moved to him for the sole reason that he was"little"; but Marjory remained cold as the nether millstone to Charlie'sboy. She sat, indeed, very coldly during the whole discussion. Itsounded to her like a storm going on at a distance, which disturbs noone--the thunder mere echo, the lightning nothing but reflection. Shelooked at the two who were moved by feelings so much stronger than herown with a vague surprise, which only the curious stupor which hungabout her could explain. She did not enter into their feelings. She wasantagonistic to them, yet saw that but faintly. The whole scene seemed adream, which would float away, leaving--what? Marjory's mind did notseem even active enough to inquire what it would leave behind.Thus this strange scene ended, and everybody at Pitcomlie knew that achange--the greatest ever known in its records--had come about in thefortunes of the race. Other widowed ladies had reigned in the old housebefore now, but they had been kindly daughters of the country-side,trained in its traditions, and knowing what was expected of them. Thenew mistress was a stranger, knowing neither Fife nor Scotland, nor evenEnglish ways, knowing nothing about the family, nor what it demandedfrom her, and caring less than she knew. Mr. Charles, with care on hisbrow, took a "turn" with Mr. Smeaton on the cliff. They discussed thematter very seriously, but they did not make much of it one way oranother."If young Charlie's will stands, you will have to manage all the moneymatters," Mr. Smeaton said, "which will be the best thing for theestate; and perhaps you'll be able to get an influence over the widow.She'll give you a great deal of trouble, that young woman; but, on theother hand, she will understand nothing about business, and you will getyour own way; whereas, if the will is cancelled as informal, you'll haveanother guardian appointed who may take different views; and she'll giveplenty of trouble all the same.""She's young," said Mr. Charles, with careful looks; "she'll learnbetter; but I'm an old man--too old to manage a child's property, thatwill not come of age for eighteen years.""Toots!" said Mr. Smeaton; "you're not sixty. What ails you to live tillthe laddie's of age? there's plenty of your name have done it beforeyou.""My brother was but sixty-one," said Mr. Charles."Ay, ay; but the circumstances are different, they cannot occur again.On the whole, if I were in your place, I would stand by young Charlie'swill."This was the subject of conversation with the elders of the party, asthe Spring afternoon came to an end; very different from their subdueddoubtfulness and care were the feelings of Matilda and her sister asthey went upstairs. Matilda, for her part, did not want to go upstairsat all."I want to see the house," she said. "It is my own house now, and I havea right to see it. I don't see why I should be shut up in a bedroom--themistress of the house!""Come along for to-day; we are to go down to dinner!" said Verna. "Howcould you see the house when all the shutters are closed, and everythingshut up?""Let them open it, then!" said Matilda. "It has been shut up longenough--a whole week. What would anyone think of that in India?" Butfinally she allowed herself to be persuaded to go back to her room, asTommy wanted his tea. When she reached that sanctuary, she plucked thecap from her head, and tossed it to the other end of the room. "Thatshall never go on again!" she cried. "Now I am my own mistress, I don'tsee why I should make myself hideous for anybody. You need not lookshocked, Verna; you need not say a word. There are some things I won'tdo. I mean to be a good sister to you, and give you everything you want,but I won't have you sit upon me, and tell me what I am to do. You maybe the cleverest, but I'm Tommy's mother, and I have the power to dowhat I like--and I will, too!" she cried, letting down her bright locks,which had been simply fastened behind to admit of the covering of thecap. "Quick, Elvin, bring me all my pads and hairpins, and do up my hairdecently. I won't go down to dinner a fright; you can put it on if youlike, since you are so fond of it," she said, with a mocking laugh, asher sister picked up the unfortunate cap. Verna was not so happy as hersister; she had never been thus defied by Matilda before. Her brillianthopes of sovereignty were overcast. If this rebellion was to continue,all her plans would be put out of joint. It was with a very ruefulcountenance that she picked up the discarded headgear, and looked on atthe wonderful edifice of fair hair that was being built up overMatilda's low but white forehead. "I have not felt so comfortable sincewe left Calcutta," said that young woman, with a sigh of relief as shelooked at herself in the glass. "Crape is not unbecoming when it isfresh; and, thank heaven, one can always have it fresh now.""You speak as if you were glad you were a widow; you never think of poorCharlie!" cried Verna, in her discomfiture--glad to have some means ofinflicting a sting."Oh, you cruel, unkind thing! as if I did not miss him every hour," saidMatilda, with the ready tribute of tears which sprang up at a moment'snotice. "He never would have allowed you to bully me as you do; he neverasked me to do anything I didn't like; never called me a fool, as youdo.""He must have thought it many a time," said Verna spitefully."He did not; he was very fond of me--and I was fond of him, very fond ofhim!" cried Matilda; "but do you think he would have liked me to betyrannized over, to make myself look hideous?--never. He would haveliked to see me at the head of the table--"Verna had not very fine or fastidious taste; but she had sense enough toperceive when anything was offensively out of harmony with thecourtesies of life. She cried:"For heaven's sake, Matty--for Charlie's sake, not to-night!""We shall see about that," said Matilda, complacently nodding her head;"it is for Charlie's sake, poor fellow; he married me without any money,or great connections, or anything. And I want them to see I am not sucha dowdy, nor so plain, nor so insignificant as they think. For Charlie'ssake, and to do him credit, poor fellow, I am determined to be mistressin my own house."Verna was struck dumb; she was cast from her height of hope, and thefall stunned her. It was of no use now to call her sister a fool, thoughshe was proving herself so in the most violent manner. Folly is notalways obedient and submissive; there are times when it takes the upperhand, and then there is nothing so impossible as to move it one way oranother. Poor Verna, in her little pride of cleverness, was actuallycowed by the unexpected force of the heartless idiocy which shedespised. It was stronger than she in that grand primitive power ofunreason, which is strong enough to confuse the best intellect, andbreak the stoutest heart in the world.CHAPTER XXI.The drawing-room was but dimly lighted when the party at Pitcomlieassembled in it for dinner, and Matilda had been so little seen as yet,that the absence of her widow's cap made but little impression upon thesmall silent company. She came in, feeling somewhat triumphant, with herpretty hair rising in billows from the low white brow, which people hadtold her was like that of a classic statue. There was very little thatwas classic about poor Matilda, but she liked this praise. It soundedlofty and elevated; nobody had ever called her clever--but this seemedto approach or even to exceed the point of cleverness. After a momentarypause, Mr. Charles offered her his arm. He was about to place her at hisown right hand at the foot of the table, as became a visitor. Matilda,however, stood holding him fast until all the party had entered theroom. Then she said, looking round upon the company, "To saveinconvenience don't you think I had better take my proper place atonce?" and marched the unfortunate old uncle up to the head of thetable. There she spread herself out complacent and delighted. "I alwaysthink when there is a change to be made it had better be done at once,"she said, beaming with a triumphant smile, with her jet ornamentstwinkling in the light, upon the astounded party.They were so entirely taken by surprise that a moment's confusionoccurred, no one knowing where to place him or herself. Mr. Charles,helpless and amazed, was pinned to Matilda's side. To her other hand,Mr. Smeaton quietly looking on and enjoying the joke, led Verna, who wascrimson with painful blushes, and not daring to lift her eyes. Marjorywas the last to perceive the alteration that had been made. She wasabout to pass on to her usual place, when Fanshawe quietly stopped her,and placed her at the foot of the table. She looked up with anastonished glance, and met the triumphant eyes of the new mistress fromits head. I am doubtful whether Marjory at the moment fully realizedwhat it was. She gave a surprised look round, and then a smile passedover her face--could anyone suppose she cared for this? It hurt her agreat deal less than it did Verna, who was her natural antagonist; butwho thought it the most dreadful "solecism," and wondered what peoplewould think. "They will think we are nobodies, and know nothing," Vernasaid to herself, and scarcely ventured to hold up her head. The companyin general, indeed, was taken by such surprise that there was noconversation for a few minutes. Fleming's face as he placed himselfbehind Mrs. Charles's chair was a study of consternation and dismay. Hecarried the dishes to Marjory first, and pulled her sleeve andwhispered,"You'll no be heeding? the woman's daft, Miss Marjory, you're noheeding?" with an anxiety which regained him his character in Fanshawe'seyes."It is quite right," said Marjory in the same undertone. "She is themistress of the house, she was quite right. It is best she should takeher place at once."Fleming marched round the table, shaking his head. He groaned when heserved the new mistress. He called her Mistress Chairles till herpatience was exhausted."Please to call me Mrs. Heriot," she said angrily."Oh aye, Mistress Chairles," said Fleming, "will ye take some chicken orsome mutton?""If you do not call me by my right name I will send you away," criedMatilda. She was "daft," as he said, or rather intoxicated withsatisfaction and triumph."You can do that, Mistress Chairles," said the old man indifferently,going on with his service. Deeper and deeper blushed poor Verna. Oh,what solecisms! what ignorance of the world! She did not know whethershe should refrain from noticing, or whether she ought to excuse andexplain her sister's conduct. The first was the most difficult,especially as her companion, the lawyer, looked on with suppressedamusement, and noted everything. Then Matilda began to entertain herneighbours on her other side."Is that gentleman--I don't know his name--at the foot of the table, arelation?" she asked."No," said Mr. Charles, who was just now coming to the surface after hisconsternation, "his name is Fanshawe, he is a friend of poor Tom's.""Then he is engaged to Marjory, I suppose?""No," repeated Mr. Charles once more, still more blankly; and then helooked down to the other end of the table, where certainly Mr. Fanshawewas talking very eagerly to his niece, and added, "Not so far as Iknow.""Ah, young ladies are sometimes sly in those sort of affairs," said Mrs.Charles. "I should think Marjory was one of the sly ones. Now I nevercan hide what I feel; but I suppose Marjory is a great deal clevererthan I."Mr. Charles made no reply. He glanced at her confounded, without a wordto say. Was this the little thing that had looked so gentle, and criedso bitterly? He was at his wrong end of the table, everybody andeverything were out of their proper places. He was suddenly made into avisitor, he who had been at home here all his life."Where do you live, Mr. Heriot?" said Mrs. Charles, "it is dreadful toknow so little about the family; but I always was an ignorant littlething. It would be so kind if you would tell me about everybody.""Where do I live?" he said, "I have lived here most of my life--it is adifficult question to answer; though of course I have my house inGeorge's Square.""Where is that?" she asked; but waiting for no answer, added suddenlywith an innocent look of curiosity, "and will Marjory live with you?""Matty!" cried Verna in an agony; nothing but solecisms! she thought."Would you think Verna was much older than I?" said Matilda, turning tothe lawyer. "She thinks I ought to do everything she tells me; but whenonce a woman has been married, nobody has a right to tell her what to doexcept her husband. Don't you think so? One always knows one's ownaffairs best.""It is common to say so," said the lawyer; "but for my part, I think weare all most clever in managing our neighbours' affairs."This speech puzzled Matilda, who was silent for a moment. The party wasso small, and the others talked so little, that these brilliant remarkswere heard by everybody, except, perhaps, the questions about Fanshawe,which she had had the grace to make in a somewhat lower tone. Even Vernawas so paralyzed by the whole proceeding, and by her sister'sunparalleled audacity, that she had entirely lost her conversationalpowers. She plucked up a little courage now, and made an effort toregain the lead which she had lost."It is such a loss to go to India so young as we did," she said; "wemake no acquaintance with our own country. Our ways are all Indian. Weare as bad as the Americans for asking questions. The reason is that weare always meeting new people in India. We should not know anythingabout them if we did not ask."This speech raised Verna very much in the lawyer's opinion. It wasclever, he thought, and good-natured, shielding the fool of a sister."I am sure you will be able to be of great service to Mrs. Heriot," hesaid, in an undertone. "Your good sense will show what is best. It maybe a difficult business, and your brother-in-law's will is not worth asnuff if the family choose to oppose it. So she must not try theirpatience, you see, for old Charles Heriot, though very pleasant in hismanner, is an old Turk when he's opposed. There is no saying what hemight do," said Mr. Smeaton, enjoying the slander which he was utteringwithin hearing almost of the person assailed, "if his blood was up; andif your sister was to show any--well, incivility is a hard word, but youknow what I mean--to Miss Marjory, Charles Heriot would take fire. Youmust advise her, Miss Bassett; you must advise her. Hoolie and fairly,as we say in Scotland, or as the Italians have it, Chi va piano vasano." These words Mr. Smeaton pronounced as if they were broad Scotch;but Verna did not understand them, so it made little difference to her.And he added, "Everything here is long established, and hard to root up.You'll have to make your changes with great discretion, and take time tothem. Everything will be made more difficult for you if auld CharlesHeriot should take fire at any little affront, and flare up.""Oh, thank you, thank you a thousand times for your advice!" criedVerna. "It is exactly my own opinion, and what I have said to her overand over. But I did not know Mr. Charles Heriot was so hot-tempered; helooks mild enough.""The very deevil--if you'll excuse the word," said Mr. Smeaton, "whenhis blood's up."Perhaps Verna was the only one who was sorry when that dinner was over.She was anxious for advice, and to be thus fortified seemed to her ofthe greatest importance; and she received with religious faith thosevaluable hints about Mr. Charles Heriot's temper, among other things.When the ladies left the table, she tried hard to persuade Matilda to goto her room, under pretext of fatigue; but the young widow was obdurate."I want to see the house," she said, making her way, sweeping andrustling in her crape, to the drawing-room. Marjory followed, still withvery little feeling of what had happened. But even Marjory was consciousof some painful feeling when she saw her sister-in-law laid luxuriouslyupon the little sofa in the bow-window, which was her own particularseat."Indeed, it is very comfortable," said Matilda. "You know how to becomfortable. This is your favourite place, is it not, Marjory? PoorCharlie used to tell me of the bow-window, and how it was made for you.""Yes, I was fond of it," said Marjory."Then I hope you will always feel you have a right to it when you cometo see me," said Mrs. Charles. "We shall change some things, no doubt;but you will always be welcome, Marjory. I suppose you are to bemarried soon. You may think it would hurt my feelings to hear of awedding, being a widow myself; but I am not so selfish. I am sure Icongratulate you; he looks very nice indeed.""There is nothing to congratulate me about," said Marjory.It was hard upon her to hear the conversation between the sisters whichfollowed, about new curtains and chairs that were necessary. It was notVerna's fault, who gave piteous, conciliatory looks at the daughter ofthe house. She bore it all as long as she could, and then she wentnoiselessly outside upon the cliff. The Spring was very mild that year.This was again a lovely night, with a faint blue sky all sprinkled withstars, and the vague, half-seen sea beneath, which sent up long sighingwaves upon the rocks, not loud, but full of pensive moaning. There was ayoung moon shining, a moon covered with fleecy white clouds like a veil.Through the softened night rose the white rock of the May, with itssteady light; and the lighthouse further off which Marjory knew so well,and which had so often turned and thrown a pleasant gleam at her acrossthe broad waters, gleamed out all at once as she strayed round thewell-known path. It was, perhaps, only Mrs. Charles's graciousintimation that she would always be welcome, which roused her to thesense that the time was approaching when she must leave this dear oldhome. It was not in Marjory's nature to make a lesser grief into a greatone; and she had endured so much, that this additional trouble was notheavy to her, as it would have been in other circumstances. But it gaveher a certain sore feeling of pain and loss in the midst of her heavierburdens. It seemed hard to have such a subject thrust all at once,without a moment's notice, upon her. Her heart felt sore, as if a suddennew thrust had been made at it; sore with a feeling of resentment andimpatient vexation. She strayed along the familiar round, the "turn"which she had taken so often, hearing now and then the voices throughthe half-open window; voices higher pitched and more shrill than anynative to this locality. Even that difference of tone seemed somehowunreasonably offensive to her. She chid herself for the foolish feeling;but how could she help it? The moon gleamed softly upon the oldManor-house and on Mr. Charles's tower; there was a glimmer ofhalf-dying firelight making his windows visible. Had Marjory known thather successor, Verna, had already planned in her mind how to pull allthose ruins down!She had not been thinking of Fanshawe, nor of any one, when he joinedher suddenly; her thoughts had been all vague, full of that sorenesswhich was almost a relief from the heavy stupor of her grief. She hadseemed to herself, not suffering actively, but stupid in sadness; sad,sad down to the bottom of her heart; a state of mind not without acertain repose in it, which this other sensation of being wounded andinjured shot across, now and then, like a thrill of life. But it seemedvery natural to her when Fanshawe came to her side, more natural eventhan if it had been Uncle Charles. He held out his arm, and she took itonly half consciously, and with a kind of faint pleasure allowed him tolead her to the edge of the cliff, where the sea-line was visible, withthe Isle of May rising well out of the waters, and the twinkling lightsalong Comlie shore marking out the length of the little town. Her heartwas overwhelmed with this profound and gentle sadness; and yet there wasa pleasure in it, too."Miss Heriot," said Fanshawe; "I want to have you a little while tomyself, to-night. This is no place for me any longer. I must go away.""It is no place for any of us," said Marjory, instinctively adopting himinto the number of those who belonged to her. They were so few now.But he took no advantage of this inference. He took it for granted,simply as she did. Perhaps he pressed her hand a little closer to hisside; but if so, the action was involuntary."No," he said, "it is no place for you. This piece of impertinenceto-night--""I never thought of it," said Marjory; "it was nothing; that could notmake any difference; but we must go.""It is selfish of me to say anything," he said; "but it is I who must gofirst--not the same man who came here a month ago, Miss Heriot; just amonth--though it might be an hour, or it might be a year. It hasseparated my life into two pieces. May I write to you after I havemanaged to take myself away?""Surely," she said, in her gentlest tone."And will you write to me? I have no right to ask it; but youare--different, somehow. You know how little I am good for. I don'tmean to make any professions to you now--to say you have made me better.Perhaps I am past making better. I should like to try, first; but if youwould write now and then, just three words--""Certainly I will write," she said, looking frankly in his face. "Howmuch you have been to us all this terrible time! Do you think I can everforget it? And it is not only that we owe you a day in harvest--as weScotch folk say--but people cannot feel with each other as we have done,and then cease and forget each other. Certainly I will write; it will beone of my pleasures."He held her hand tight in his arm; his heart was beating vaguely withmany half-formed impulses. But even if anything like love had been ripein him, it would have seemed profanation at that moment. He only heldher hand closer to his side where his heart was stirring so strangely,and said--"You make me almost happy--if it was possible to be happy in going away.I suppose I shall never come back--absolutely back here, to Pitcomlie;but we shall see each other? It is not a parting, this--only for themoment? say you think so, to cheer me.""I hope so!" she said. She was franker, more open than he was; but shewas much less agitated. It was to her an easy thing to believe in thisfuture meeting, because she wished for it without any passionate desire.But he longed for assurance, and doubted even while he affirmed; for itseemed to him as if his whole future was dark and uncertain till thatmoment should come."How good it is to hear you say so!" he said. "If you hope for it, itwill come to pass. I have not so much faith in my own prayers.""Alas! the things I have hoped for have not come to pass," she said,with a little outburst of sorrow. And then, when her brief fit ofweeping was over (he would have liked so to have taken her into hisarms, to have had her sob on his breast--but dared not), she looked upto him again with a faint smile. "I have got so used to cry and show youall my weakness," she said; "how I shall miss you! It is luxury to havesome one by who will not be impatient of one's tears."This, however, was getting too much for poor Fanshawe; his heart wasmelting in his breast. It was all he could do to keep from some foolishdemonstration or other. He had put his other hand on hers where it layon his arm; he bent over her, stooping his head towards her--almostcarried away by the tide of emotion in him. He felt that to savehimself, and to save the sanctity of this last meeting, he must fly aslong as he was able."May I say good-bye to you here?" he said, trembling; "I must goto-morrow. You will write to me about everything? about Milly, and Mr.Charles--and the book--and about Isabell, if you find out anything more;but chiefly, and above all, about yourself--you promise? Then good-bye,and God bless you; you will say the same to me?""God bless you!" she said, moved by his emotion, looking at him withtears still in her eyes; "God bless you, dear friend, and good-bye."He stood a moment irresolute, hanging over her; holding both herhands--not knowing very well what he did. If there had been light enoughto show his face, they never could have parted so. But he knew he wasnot seen, and felt as if he had concealed his feelings. At that lastmoment he stooped suddenly, and kissed her hair just where it wasparted; and then dropped her hands and disappeared--she could not tellwhere.CHAPTER XXII.The day after a great event is, in all kinds of circumstances, adifficult one. The remains of great excitement, not yet quite spent,make the air heavy, and produce innumerable little explosions likehalf-exhausted fireworks. Common life is feeble, and fills withlassitude people who have been living at high pressure; and the mixtureof weariness, oppression, and lingering excitement is hostile to everyattempt at settling down. This was the state of the atmosphere atPitcomlie after the long strain was over, after the shutters wereopened, the blinds drawn up, and ordinary existence had re-commenced.And besides this inevitable and feverish dullness, there was all theexcitement of half completed events to intensify the painfulness of thepause. The former inhabitants of the house did not know what step totake first; the new possessors were equally doubtful. Neither liked tomake the first movement. They avoided each other, yet were compelled tomeet.Mr. Charles spent the morning in his room, pondering over the situationwith many troublous thoughts. To tear himself away from this familiarplace was painful to him; but that was not all. To leave the home of hisfathers in the hands of these two young women, who were altogetherstrangers to the race, was more painful still. The one, he said tohimself, was a selfish fool, utterly incapable of comprehending theinterests of the young heir, or of adapting herself to the life that wasbest for him; the other Mr. Charles had not been able to fathom. Hethought her a sensible sort of girl, that might keep her sister out ofmischief. He had put all his beloved papers in order, feeling that hiswork might be interrupted; but these very papers belonged to the houseof Pitcomlie; he could not take them away with him any more than hecould take the old walls. What was he to do? His work would come to anend--the occupation of his life. He would have to go and seek a new homeat his age--find a new refuge for all those accumulations of art whichit was so pleasant for him to think he had added to the attractions ofthe old house. He sat down, and sighed over them at one moment, feelingthe change impossible; and then he would rise, stimulated by somerecollection of last night, and push the engravings together into theirportfolios, and hunt for the covers of the cases in which hiscuriosities were set forth. Where could he take them to? His own housein George Square certainly was ready for their reception and his, butthe idea did not attract him. He was not fond of his own house. It hadno associations, no recollections except those of a dreary week now andthen which he had spent in it alone. Mr. Charles was a born oldbachelor, but he was as little used to being alone as any paterfamilias.His brother's children had been brought up at his feet, he hadpossessed the delightful privilege of interfering with their education,laying down laws for them, finding fault with them, interfering andcommenting, without any responsibility. No privilege could have beenmore delightful to him than this; and when he had now and then returnedfor a few days to his own house, he had been, as it were, a banishedman. To be sure if he went to his own house now, he could take the onlyremaining children of the family with him, and make a home for himselfby their means; but this brought in the element of responsibility whichhe feared, and of which up to this moment he had kept clear. No wonderthat Mr. Charles closed his portfolios hurriedly, and sat down in hischair with a sigh. If only any means could be thought of, any devicefallen upon, for compromising the matter, and keeping things as theywere.Marjory, strangely enough, was infinitely less sensitive. Though she hadno other home, and had never contemplated another--though it wasimpossible to her to realize the fact that she was no longer mistress ofPitcomlie, yet the possibility of change affected her much lessstrongly. Her whole being seemed to be dulled and slower of perception.She sent away the servants who came to her as usual for orders, and feltno pain. She even arranged her books and her papers for going away,without any sharp sense of the hardship of leaving her home. She had noparticular feeling of any kind. Life seemed to be running low in her,and sometimes grief plucked at her heart; but for other emotions, shedid not seem to have any. The thing she felt most was, that she missedsomething. What was it? Something she had been used to had slid fromher. There was a vague want which she could not, and perhaps did not,wish to identify. Fanshawe had gone away that morning. She had beenmoved by his leave-taking, almost more than she thought seemly in hercircumstances. She had a strong feeling of what was fit and natural, andthe curious vague excitement with which his last looks and words filledher, seemed strangely out of place, and even wrong. She repressed thefeeling with a strong hand; but she did not suspect that the blank senseof inability to feel anything which had crept over her could beconnected with that repression in any way. She was dull, dull to thedepths of her heart and to the tips of her fingers. Nothing seemed toaffect her. As for the little vexations of the household, thetransference of her powers, these moved her no more than pin-pricks. Shewas quite ready to have gone away, and would not have felt it. When shewas called downstairs by an intimation that Miss Jean was seen coming upto the great door to visit the family, she obeyed the call without anyparticular sentiment. Matilda and her sister were both in thedrawing-room when Marjory went in, and Miss Jean, leaning upon her cane,in her new "blacks," to which she had added another fold of crape foreach new death, was standing in the middle of the room, looking at them.Matilda had not budged from her sofa. She had nodded, and said, "Howd'ye do? Give the lady a chair, Fleming," without further disturbingherself; and it was these words that Aunt Jean was slowly repeating whenMarjory went in."Give the leddy a chair, Fleming!" she said; "that's a kind and apleasant welcome for one that was born in the house, and knowseverything and every person in it. Perhaps, Fleming, as, no doubt,you're informed on the subject, you will let me know who this young ladymay be?""It's Mrs. Chairles, mem," said Fleming, solemn as a judge."Ah! poor thing; I understand," said Miss Jean; "brought up in India!that explains much. But, Mistress Chairles, if you'll allow yourhusband's grand-aunt to say it, young women in this country get up offtheir seats when they're visited by any person worthy of respect. I amtwice your age, and I'm Thomas Heriot, your father-in-law's, aunt.""Tell her how delicate I am; I am not allowed to talk much," said Mrs.Charles, addressing her sister. "And I am in great trouble," shecontinued in her own person; "and very much tried, and too unwell to doanything. Pray take a seat. Marjory will be here directly. I suppose sheis the person you want?""I came to see an afflicted family," said Miss Jean, solemnly. "Mostpeople think it necessary to say they're sorry when there's been deathin a family. Oh! you are here, Marjory! Mistress Chairles tells me it'syou I want. I wanted the whole family--that was my intention; but ifyou're all as easy in your mind, and stand as little in need of comfortas she does, I'll have my coming for my going, and I might have stayedat home.""I am very glad to see you, Aunt Jean," said Marjory; and struck withthe unchangeable look of the old face, which altered not, whateveraltered, a sudden accs of tears came to her. "It seems to be yearsago," she said, faltering; "but you never change.""No, I never change," said the old woman, with a tremble in her voice.The words very nearly overset her composure, steady as she was in thecalm of her old age; for Aunt Jean, too, had human feelings--and a stillolder generation, further off than the father of this house, who hadbeen so lately carried out of it, sprang out of all the shadows asMarjory spoke, and came and stood about the old, old human creature whohad once been young."I'll sit down," she added, hastily. "I'm old and no strong, though Inever change. That was a hard word to say. I mind changes enough inmyself, more than you have ever known; from young to old, MarjoryHay-Heriot; from a bonnie young thing, as bonnie as you are at yourbest, to an old witch like what you see me. I hope that's change enough;but you think I should change away out of the world, and let youngerfolk take my place and bide? Well, maybe so do I; but one way oranother, it's not in our hands.""I did not mean anything unkind, Aunt Jean.""Well, you might have meant that, and no harm done," said the old woman;"and you may cry, it's natural; but you need not forget your manners.Introduce these young leddies that do not know me. The one on the sofais Mistress Chairles. Ay, I know that; but she does not know me.""Oh, yes; indeed I do, thanks," said Matilda. "Excuse my getting up. Iknew whenever you came in, that you must be poor Charlie's old aunt.""That shows how civil he must have been in his descriptions, and what itis to be well-bred," said Miss Jean."And this," said Marjory, hastily interrupting her, to stop some fartherinterchange of courtesies, "is Miss Bassett, Mrs. Charles's sister."Verna came forward with a curtsey of deep deference."I hope you will forgive my sister," she said; "she is very muchfatigued with her journey, and all she has had to bear since. It is notvery long, not three months, since her baby was born; and with all hertrials--"Miss Jean looked somewhat contemptuously towards the sofa, and then shesaid, abruptly,"Where's your Uncle Chairles? He's a born haverel, but he's a man, and,therefore, trusted. Send for him, that I may hear his mind. I've notcome this long way for nothing, and I want to know what you are allgoing to do."Marjory rang the bell. She did not even understand the look with whichMrs. Charles from the sofa watched her. When she was about to give herorders, however, Matilda interrupted her."You can give Mr. Heriot my compliments," she said, addressing Fleming,"and say that his aunt is here, and that I wish him to come, please. Ibeg your pardon, Marjory; I prefer to give him all the orders myself. IfI don't, he never will get used to me; and Charlie used to say I wasalways too humble, letting everybody get the better of me. I should nothave said Mr. Heriot, though. Fancy, Verna! it is little Tommy that isMr. Heriot, and his old uncle is only Mr. Charles. What fun it is!"Miss Jean looked on with keen eyes. If Marjory had shown any signs ofdiscomfiture, probably she would have enjoyed it; for she too, in herantediluvian experience, she who had once been the Laird of Pitcomlie'sdaughter, and dethroned by a sister-in-law, could recall some scenesvery similar, which had driven her nearly frantic with rage. But Marjorywas still so dull and dead, that this incident scarcely affected her. Aslight smile came upon her face when Matilda stopped her, and she drew achair beside her visitor without making any remark. Miss Jean, however,made a great many remarks. Her keen eyes travelled about the room, fromone corner to another, noticing everything in the new arrangements whichhad already crept in; the displacing of a chair, the sofa drawn forward.She was not very familiar with the Pitcomlie drawing-room, and yet sherecognised the changes with her keen eyes."That used to be your favourite place?" she said, pointing to the spotwhere Mrs. Charles's sofa had replaced Marjory's chair."Yes, I liked the window," said Marjory, making the best of it."And it was there you used to have your work?""Yes, Aunt Jean--but--""And that's the bow-window Thomas Heriot was so foolish as to make, poorshortsighted haverel of a man, for his bonnie May?""Oh, Aunty, yes! I have had the good of it so long--but if I had neverenjoyed it at all," cried Marjory with tears, "I should be glad to thinkhe had done it--for me!""Ay, ay," said the old woman, "that's how the world goes. For his bonnieMay! I tell ye there were things once done like that for a bonnieJean--that has not been bonnie this many, many a day--and the strangersget the good of them. That's how the world goes.""What are they talking about?" said Matilda to Verna. "What an old witchshe looks! I know she means to be disagreeable. But don't you think Ishall give in, not for all the Heriots in the world. I am not going tobe interfered with by sisters, or aunts, or any other kind of relations.I mean to be mistress in my own house.""And of course you will do it your own silly way," said Verna. "When youhave the whole house by the ears, don't ask me to come in and help you,that is all. I never saw anyone so hard-hearted, so silly, so cruel--""Oh, I like that," said Matilda, with a fool's invincible barbarity. "IfI were as cruel as you call me, how long would it be before I sent youback?"Mr. Charles came into the room at this moment, moody and absent, stillfull of his own thoughts. His chimney-corner was covered with an old redIndian shawl. Matilda had tried that too this morning, and found it acomfortable seat, though rather too warm for the season. "In Winter itwill be charming," she had said, and left her shawl, her air-cushion,and her footstool, by way of showing her appropriation of the place.Somehow that flag of the invader caught Mr. Charles's eye even when hedrew his chair into the middle of the room, and greeted Aunt Jean withthe seriousness which was appropriate to a visit of condolence. "You seeus in sad circumstances, very sad circumstances," he said."Some of you bear up wonderfully considering all things," said MissJean, "though perhaps not this girl here, who is a perfect shadow. Afuneral visit's a dreary thing, Chairlie Heriot, and I did not come justto condole. I had a good enough guess how things would be, having gonethrough it myself; and I came to ask what were your plans, and what wasto be done with Marjory? I suppose she does not mean to stay here.""Say something, Matty," whispered Verna, shaking her sister, "for yourown sake don't be quite a wretch--say something! Ask her to stay.""We have come to no resolution," said Mr. Charles blankly. He could notlook round to make an appeal to the new mistress of the house, but heraised his voice in his weakness that she might hear him. "We have cometo no resolution. I'm very fond of my old tower, and so is Marjory ofher father's house.""Say something, Matty, for heaven's sake," again said Verna behindbacks. "It is a large house--ask them to stay.""I am sure," said Matilda after a pause, "I don't wish anyone to hurry.If Marjory will promise not to interfere with the servants, or thethings--or give orders, or ring the bell for Fleming when shepleases--she may stay if she likes. Only I know dear Charlie would havewished me to be mistress in my own house."Mr. Charles had sprung nervously to his feet. "Not another day!" he saidhastily; but then sat down again with that blank irresolute air. Wherewas he to take her? and then the responsibility, and his old tower thathe loved!"You're a very considerate young woman," said Miss Jean grimly, with afierce little chuckling laugh. "You'll be much respectit in the county,and much thought of by the Heriots' auld friends. That I'll assure youof--indeed I'll see to it myself.""Oh, thanks," said Matilda, with a certain alarm, for it was evidenteven to her obtuse understanding that more was meant than met the ear."I'll see to that myself," the old woman repeated with a chuckle. "Andin the meantime, Marjory, go you and get your things, and bring thebairn, and come away home with me. Comlie High Street is no amiss for aborn and bred Heriot; everybody in Fife knows you, and what you are, andhow you come there, which is more than can be said for everybody. Comeaway, my bonny woman; and as for you, Chairlie Heriot, you can do whatyou please; stay on till they turn you out, or till you've gathered upall your playthings, your pictures and your papers, and the wholeparaphernalia. But in the meantime I'll no see my flesh and bloodputting up with the slights of a strange woman. Marjory and the bairnshall come with me."Mr. Charles was wounded in his tenderest feelings, but still he saw acertain consolation and relief in this suddenly propounded plan, whichwould save him from so many difficulties."I would not say but it was the best thing that could be done," he said,slowly. "Anyhow, May, my dear, it would leave us time to think.""I had thought of it," said Marjory. "I knew Aunt Jean would take us in.It is the best refuge for us. I shall be glad to go away, and yet not togo away. If you think we will not be a trouble to you--""Na, na; no trouble, no trouble. In a whilie," said the old woman, withmoisture in her keen eyes, "it will all be yours, my old house and mypickle siller. It's a great thing to have natural heirs. You're toonatural, Marjory, too natural. You've smiled the lads away from you withscornings and civil speeches, as I did myself. You'll be Miss Heriot,like me. It's suited me well enough, but yet I'm wae to see anotherbegin. For life's long, and sometimes it's weary and dreary. There'smore trouble the other way, but even trouble is a divert, and keeps youfrom that weary think-thinking, and all about yourself.""But you've no warrant, Aunt Jean--no warrant," said Mr. Charles, withgreat impatience, "for saying that Marjory will be an old maid, likeyou.""An old maid!" said Miss Jean, hastily; "she's an old maid already;she's five-and-twenty; that's the age that makes an old maid--and notfive-and-seventy, which is my amiable time of life. But I'm no one togive nicknames, or I would be sore tempted to say that you were an oldmaid yourself, Charlie Heriot, with all your pernickety ways. You werenever a lad of mettle, even in your best days; but you'll get no restfor your long legs here, ye may take my word for it. In the meantime, yecan give me your arm to the door, where I'll wait for Marjory. Goodmorning to ye, leddies; you're very civil and polite to the family, andI'll not fail to make it known.""Oh, what an old witch!" said Matilda, as Miss Jean marched out with hercane tapping more briskly than usual upon the floor. "I suppose shewanted to come too, and live upon Tommy's money, like all the rest; buthe has got a mother to take care of him, the precious darling!""Oh, Matty, for heaven's sake--don't be such a fool!""You're frightened of the witch," cried Matilda, with a laugh; "as ifshe could do us either good or harm.""No good, you may be sure!" said Verna, walking to the window withdisturbed looks. Miss Jean's old carriage stood at some little distancefrom the door, and she herself walked up and down in front of the housewith her cane, leaning on Mr. Charles's arm. Fleming stood on the steps,taking his part in the conversation. "A bonnie-like mistress for the oldhouse!" she was saying, with scorn in her keen black eyes."Ye may say that, Miss Jean!" said old Fleming, shaking his head.Verna did not understand what was the meaning of so strange anexpression. "Bonnie" sounded like admiration, and Matilda certainly waspretty; but there was little admiration in the tone. Her watch wasinterrupted by the entrance of Marjory to take leave. Milly was clingingby her sister's side as usual, holding out her little hand with acertain defiance; and even Matilda faltered out a half-apology, andraised herself from her sofa to say good-bye."I hope it isn't for what I said about the servants, Marjory. Of course,I didn't mean to vex you; but you know yourself, unless a change is madeat once, it is never made; and dear Charlie was so set upon it that Ishould be mistress of my own house.""You are quite right, and I am not vexed;" said Marjory, with a smile;and it was thus hurriedly, without any more leave-taking, before theweeping maids had time to gather from all the corners, to take leave ofher, that she left, as she thought for ever, her father's house.CHAPTER XXIII."Go away, go away, you taupies!" said Fleming; "go away to your wark;what's the use o' a wheen women, girnin' and greetin' about the place?It's a' I can to do to keep things gaun, saftly and steadily, for thecredit of the house, so long as my time lasts--without distraction fromyou.""Whar's Miss Marjory?" said the housemaid. "If you think it's you we'rewanting you're far mistaken. Maister Fleming, it was ill done of you tolet her go away, and never to say a word. Eh, what changes in this housesince I came here! I've been here ten year come the term--""And me mair than that!" said Beenie, who was kitchenmaid under Mrs.Simpson, and nearly as good a cook as her superior. "I mind her when shewas a bit lassie, and me no much mair myself. If any have reason to bedown-hearted about the family it's me, that am the longest here, exceptMr. Fleming. Eh! but I'm wae no' to have seen the last of her--as I'veseen the last o' a' the rest.""For guidsake, woman, dinna speak as if Miss Marjory was dead like therest!" cried another. They all stood round the door, gazing out afterthe rumbling old carriage as it jolted along the drive. Mr. Charles hadturned from the door, and was visible in the distance, making towardsthe side entrance into his beloved refuge. Marjory's maid set up adismal cry at the sight of the departing vehicle. "Oh, my young leddy!my bonny young leddy!" she cried. "I'm no so auld as some of you, butthat's no my fault; and I've seen mair of Miss Marjory than the whole ofyou put together. Eh! will I never see her mair? will she never comeback to this dreary house? We may get as good places, but there willnever be the like of her in Pitcomlie again.""Haud you your tongue, my woman!" said Fleming, patting her on theshoulder. "If Miss Marjory had thought as much of you as you do of her,she would have taken you with her. She's no that ill left but what shecan keep her maid like any other leddy. Haud a' your tongues--""What's a' this, Sirrs?" said Mrs. Simpson, suddenly appearing on thefield. "Miss Marjory? If Miss Marjory was gane twenty times o'er, isthat a reason for neglecting the wark? Wark maun be done, whoever goesor stays. Death itself makes little difference. Mr. Fleming, it's nowhat I expected of you, to encourage those taupies in their idleness. Goaway to your wark, go away every one of you. I'll speak to MissMarjory--Lord bless us! I'll never mind that Miss Marjory's nae longerthe mistress here. Now thae woman are gane, I'm free to say that itmakes a great difference to the place, Mr. Fleming. I've nothing to sayagainst English leddies; there are ower many of them in the country-sidefor the like of us to find fault; but Mistress Chairles is no to mytaste--she's no to my taste. I've learnt what it was to have leddiesover me that were grand at understanding, and I canna put up with awhippersnapper like that."Fleming nodded his head in assent; he nodded so often that one of theyoung maid-servants, lurking at a distance, had nearly betrayed herselfby laughter; but there was no merriment in his mind. "You're in theright of it there!" was all he said."It may be rather early to make up your mind what to do," said Mrs.Simpson; "and especially me as I have a kind of dependence upon Mr.Chairles, that was the one, ye maybe ken that brought me here--""I'm leaving at the term," said Fleming shortly."At the term?""Just that! I have sixpence here and sixpence there, laid out toadvantage. A man canna hear so much gude solid conversation as I'veheard at Pitcomlie table, without having his wits shairpened. I'm nowanting to set up myself as mair clever than ordinary; but it's weelinvested, weel invested. It would be a sin against my many mercies if Idid not acknowledge as much.""No doubt, no doubt!" said Mrs. Simpson, dazzled by this intimation, andrespectfully interested, as most people are in confidences respectingmoney; "you're so weel kent for a sensible man, that I can easy believethat.""Yes, it's weel invested," said Fleming. "I'm no one to brag, but I'vehad opportunities mair than most men can boast of, and I hope I'veprofited. A nice quiet business now, either in the public line, or ageneral merchant's, might be very suitable to a man like me--that hasstudied mankind a wee, and knows the world; but there's mair than a manwanted for setting up--there's the wife.""Oh, ay, nae doubt ye'll be thinking of a wife!" said Mrs. Simpson,veiling under a smile of rustic raillery the palpitation of her matronlybosom at this address. There is something in the aspect of a man who hasintentions, which betrays itself at once to the accustomed eye. Mrs.Simpson recognized it by instinct, and she made violent efforts toregain the utter unconsciousness which is the wisest attitude to bemaintained in such a case by every woman who respects herself. "You'llno be long a wanter when you have sic a story to tell," she said; "andnae doot ye have some bonnie lass in your eye.""Weel!" said Fleming, with that indescribable air of subdued yettriumphant vanity which no woman ever mistakes, "maybe no just a lass;nor maybe what you would call bonnie to them that looks but skin-deep;but a real, honest, decent woman that knows the world--and that'sbetter. I'm no just to call young nor bonnie mysel'; and if I maun speakthe truth, as is aye best, it's just you, my woman--nobody but you.""Me! the man's gane gyte!" said Mrs. Simpson, with admirable surprise.She took him in from head to foot with one glance of her eye, and puthim into a mental balance, and weighed him in the course of one moment.He was not young--nor yet bonnie; certainly not bonnie she allowed toherself; but yet there was something to be said on his side of thequestion."Na, no me," said the old butler. "I'm but showing my sense. There'smany a braw lad of my years, with guid prospects, excellent prospects,and nae incumbrances, that would please his e'e with some bit gilflirto' twenty, raither than satisfy his mind as I'm doing. Therefore, BettySimpson, my woman, if you've naething to say against it, there's myhand, I'll ne'er beguile ye. As for the bairns, as there's but two, andthem grown up, I'll look over the bairns.""Lord bless the man, his head's clean turned," cried Mrs. Simpson. "Lookover the bairns! They're nae sin that I should be excused for them. Na,na. Naebody that's no proud to have them--a callant that's a credit toa' belonging to him, and as trig a lass of sixteen as ever steppit, andextraordinary clever with her hands for her age--""I tell you I'll look over them," said Fleming. "I've nae incumbrancesmysel'; but since they're there, and canna be made away wi', I'll put upwith them, my woman. Ye may take me or ye may leave me. I'm no forcingye one way or the other; but here I am, no an ill man, though I say itthat shouldna, and you'll be a great fuil if ye dinna close the bargain.That's a' I've got to say.""Ye're but an auld haverel yourself to talk any such nonsense," said thehousekeeper, beginning to melt. "But if I could be sure ye meant a' yesay----""A', and mair, my deary," said Fleming, advancing with antiquatedgallantry. "But it's no the time nor the season," he continued, making apause. "I'll gi'e ye what proof ye like at a mair convenient moment. A',and mair.""If ye werena such an auld whillie-wha--" said the housekeeper; but shefinally withdrew, with a promise to turn it over in her mind. Flemingwas not tortured by any serious anxiety. He nodded his head when he wasleft by himself with a satisfied smile. "That's done!" he said tohimself decisively, and prepared to carry in the tray for the afternoontea, with sentiments of genial placidity and benevolence. These amiablefeelings, however, were doomed to be soon ruffled."Bring it here," said Matilda, impetuously; "do you think I am going toget up off my chair to go to the other end of the room? Wheel that tableup to the sofa and place it here.""The table will have to go back again, I'm thinking, Mistress Chairles,when you're done," said Fleming. "It's one that belongs to auld Mr.Charles Heriot, no to the house.""Hold your tongue, Sir; I was not consulting you," cried Matilda. "Inever heard a servant venture to talk so. You will please to recollect,that sort of thing might do with Miss Heriot, but it will not do withme. She might put up with it, but I shan't. If you cannot be quiet andrespectful, you had better make up your mind to go at once.""I'll do that, Mistress Chairles," said Fleming. "You and me will never'gree, I see weel. I've settled to leave at the term; but if it's mairagreeable to you to gie me board wages and so forth----""What do you mean by the term, as you call it?" said Matilda, beginningto quake."It's an awful pity when leddies do not understand the language o' thecountry they're living in," said Fleming, drily. "The term isWhitsunday, Mistress Chairles, if you ken that. If no, I'll bring ye thedate when I've lookit it up in the Almanack.""Leave the room, Sir, and go as soon as possible," cried Matilda, inwrath. It cannot be denied that the old butler of Pitcomlie was tryingas a servant to unaccustomed nerves and tempers. He drew the table shehad indicated, which was a heavy one, inlaid with marble, one of Mr.Charles's curiosities, with much trouble to the side of the sofa, andarranged the tray very deliberately upon it. Then he walked slowly tothe fire and made it up, and for five minutes kept pottering about theroom, putting invisible trifles in order, and wearing Matilda's temperto a fierce and fine edge. "Oh, for heaven's sake, go away!" she cried,"and leave the house, you horrid impertinent---- Miss Marjory might putup with you, but I shan't. Send Mr. Charles Heriot to me directly. Goand call him directly, do you hear, Sir? Will you go, or must I gomyself?" cried the impatient young woman, jumping up from her sofa."Ring the bell, Verna, ring the bell instantly! send for the oldgentleman. I suppose there are other servants in the house?""Oh, ay, Mrs. Chairles, plenty of servants," said Fleming, making hisexit in a leisurely way, while the bell pealed through the house,rousing all the maids."She's fainted or something," cried Mrs. Simpson. "She's just the kindo' person to faint. Run you, Jenny, and get the English maid; and someof ye flee with cauld water--and I'll burn some feathers and come afterye myself.""What's the matter--what's the matter?" said Mr. Charles, stumblingthrough the women, who had crowded towards the drawing-room door, in thepleasureable excitement of such an occurrence."It's Mrs. Chairles that's fainted. It's the young leddy," they allmurmured in tones of interest. Matilda, however, herself met him,furious, on the threshold."Am I to have nothing but impudence?" she cried, "and people laughing atme, and--and paying no attention to whatever I say? Is this my house oris it not? I will not put up with it. I will pack them all out of thehouse one after another. I will give them no characters; I will---- Oh,you are all a set of barbarians!" cried Matilda, bursting into tears."Oh, if poor dear Charlie had been here, he would never, never haveallowed me to be used like this. And you--do you call yourself agentleman, and let them all insult me? Or perhaps you told them to doit, because it is me, and not your niece that you are so fond of. Oh,Verna, come and help me! Oh, isn't there anybody? No man that is agentleman would stand and gape, and see me treated so!"Mr. Charles did gape, there is no doubt. He was filled with theprofoundest consternation. In all his experience, such a thing had neverhappened before. He did not understand the kind of creature thussobbing, raging, insulting everybody around her. He made a gulp toswallow down his amazement, and waved his hand to the assembledservants."Go away, go away," he said. "Whisht--never mind--go away like goodcreatures, like kind creatures. You see it's a mistake, and you're notwanted. Mrs. Simpson, my good woman, there's no need for your feathersand your salts. Take them all away. There's nothing wanted--nothingwanted," Mr. Charles repeated, closing the door upon the assistants.It was rather terrible to confront the heroine of the scene himself; buthe had all a Scotchman's terror of "exposure," and shame of excitement,and loud voices. At this moment, too, when the family was in suchtrouble! Mr. Charles looked pale and limp as he closed the door behindhim, and faced, trembling, the clamouring newcomer, who made such claimsupon him. He kept his eye upon her, as he might have done upon someunknown wild animal. And he cast a pitiful glance at Verna, who sat dumbin his own particular corner--a fact which he did not omit tonote--working, as Mr. Charles described it afterwards, "at someridiculous woman's work or other, and paying no more attention than ifit was not her concern.""Whisht, whisht!" said Mr. Charles; "don't cry! It cannot be so bad asyou think. If anybody has done anything to disturb you, of course we'llput it all right--we'll put it all right; don't cry. Tell me what'shappened, and no doubt we'll be able to put it all right.""Oh! how can you ask me what's happened--everything's happened!" criedMatilda. "There is not a servant in the house that does not insult us.They say disagreeable things to Elvin; they hate the poor Ayah, though Idon't mind that so much, for I want an opportunity to send her away. Iam sure they pinch poor Tommy when they have a chance, for the child'sarms are black and blue. And as for me!" cried Matilda, rising intorenewed excitement; "it's all because they think we're interlopers, andbecause the other Heriots, the old family, have gone and twisted theirminds. They think no more of me than if I was the dust below the feet ofthat Marjory. Marjory, indeed! an old maid, as that old witch said, thatnever had any right to be mistress--that was never anything but the oldgentleman's daughter--""Hem--ahem!" Mr. Charles made a great sound of coughing; it was the onlything he could do to drown all this, and to keep himself from gettingangry. ("I was very near getting into a passion," he said afterwards; "Iwas very near speaking sharp, as I would have been sorry to havespoken.") To prevent this, he coughed so much that Matilda's voice wasdrowned, and his own angry feelings cooled down."You will excuse my cough. I have got cold, it appears," he said,pleased with his own skill in having devised this expedient; and then,when a momentary pause had been obtained, he added, "We'll not discussMarjory, if you please. The servants here have been good kind ofcreatures; faithful and honest, so far as I've seen. You must excusethem if they feel the change. Some of them have been long here, and areused to--to the old family, as you say. But if there's been any realinsult, any disrespect, no doubt you have a right to my services; Icannot think, however, that any one in this house has been guilty ofthat. Miss Bassett--""Oh, don't ask anything of me," said Verna, turning her back. "Shechooses to manage her own affairs herself. I don't mean to interfere.""Oh! you wicked, cruel girl!" cried Matilda, throwing herself, sobbing,on the sofa. "Oh! why was I spared from the voyage, or from myconfinement--the one coming so close on the other? Why was I made tolive after my poor Charlie--my Charlie, that never would let any oneworry me? If he were here, none of you would dare--you would all betrying which could be kindest--you would, every one! Oh! what shall Iever do in this hard-hearted place? Why didn't you take me and leave mewith Charlie, and be done with it, rather than kill me an inch at atime, as you are doing now?"Mr. Charles walked about the room in confusion and dismay, and heard agreat deal more of this, before he could get free to inquire into thereal causes of the fray. When he escaped at last, the confusion of hismind was such that he stepped into the middle of Fleming's tray full ofglasses for dinner, and broke several before he could pull himself up.When the further perturbation and excitement consequent upon this crashhad been dispelled, and the pieces of broken glass carefully picked upand disposed of, Mr. Charles, still tremulous, swallowed a glass ofsherry, and opened his mind to the old retainer of the house."Fleming," he said, "we've had a great and blessed dispensation in ourladies, in this house. They've been free of the follies of their kind ina way that's quite extraordinary to think of. But we must not expectthat we're always to be so fortunate, or that Providence has justsingled us out, you know, for special favour. We must try and put upwith what's sent, and do our duty to the best of our ability--""'Deed, Mr. Chairles," said Fleming, "I have nae doubt it's realimportant to you to be able to take that comfort to yoursel', being oneof the family, and in a manner bound to do your best; but as for me, I'mbut a servant. I've served my forty year, which is long enough to gi'eme the best of characters in ony place; and I've saved a pickle siller,and invested it--by your advice, Sir, and that of ithers--in a veryadvantageous manner; and if I'm ever to mairry a wife, and hae afireside of my ain, I have nae time to lose. I'm no saying but whatyou'll make a great hand o't, and carry the leddies through and breakthem in; but for me at my age to stand yon bit creature's temper and herignorance, and haud my tongue and clip my words to please her--byGeorge! it's what I'll no do! And when I'm driven to sweer, Mr.Chairles--""And, by George! I'll not do it either!" said Mr. Charles, smiting hislean thigh. He was so roused up and stimulated by this valiantresolution, that he took another glass of sherry on the spot, a thing hehad not been known to do for years. "I wish ye joy of the wife, &c.," hesaid. "I'll not follow your example in that; but why I should makemyself miserable and ridiculous, for an idiot of a strange woman, at mytime of life! By George! I'll not do it, any more than you!"CHAPTER I.
Marjory, as may be supposed, heard nothing of the tragi-comic commotion
which she had left behind her. Her drive in the old carriage, the sight
of many familiar things and places for the first time, after so much had
passed which had separated her from her old world, roused her half
painfully, half pleasantly. Every corner of the peaceful road, every
cottage on the way, made its separate stab at her; so many remembrances
which had fallen dormant in her mind, remembrances of "the boys," which
from sheer familiarity and easiness of recollection had fallen out of
recollection, started up in new life before her. She seemed to hear the
shouts of their school time, and to see them, not men but lads, in their
innocence and foolishness, about every turning. This wounded her sore,
and yet gave her a sort of happiness. It was not like the drear blank of
disappearance, the superseding of them, and calm passing on of the
unconcerned world, which had stupefied her mind. Thus the change did her
good as people say; and perhaps the sight of Miss Jean did her good, and
the harsh yet true kindness which spoke so despotically and acted so
gently. But when she was safely housed in the High Street, a great
reaction set in. So long as daylight lasted, Marjory turned her wistful
eyes along the line of the coast towards the east, where the mansion
house of Pitcomlie stood out on its headland, with something of the
feelings which moved her on her drive. She sat there and recalled
stories of her youth, feats which "the boys" had done, hairbreadth
escapes, old dead jokes of the past, pitifullest of recollections. All
these came up and buzzed about her. She smiled and wondered to find
herself amused by memories which ought, she felt, to have been anything
but amusing. These realizations of the past were sharp and poignant in
the pain of their sorrow; but at the same time they were sweet.
It was only when night fell, when the silence of the small house fell
round her, when the few people about were all asleep, and the street,
upon which her room looked out, was quiet as the grave, that the
pleasure of these recollections failed. She got chilled in the mournful
silence. It was a still night, and the sound from the sea came very
softly upon her ear, like a cadence measured and gentle. All was very
still in Miss Jean's maiden habitation. The two maids slept down stairs
at a distance from the other rooms. They went to bed at ten o'clock, as
indeed did the little town with very few exceptions. Looking out from
her window, as Marjory did by habit, being used to look out every night
upon the sea, she saw opposite to her, in place of the intermittent
gleam of the lighthouse to which she was accustomed, a steady glimmer
in young Hepburn's window, which was opposite. That was the only sign of
fellowship in all the shadowy silent little town, where there was a
sense of the presence of others without any sign of friendliness from
them. This light roused in Marjory a vague uneasiness in the midst of so
many other heavy thoughts. What was it that it recalled to her? Some
other kind of light, some other sympathy. She dropped the blind and went
in, and sat down wearily. A stifling sense of loss and dreary vacancy
came upon her.
All her life long Pitcomlie and its interests had been her first
thought. She had become the mistress of the house at a very early age,
when she was little more than a child; and through all her subsequent
life this care and occupation was all to her that a man's purpose is to
him, filling her mind and mixing itself with all her expectations.
Marjory had never loved any man with that strong and personal affection
which overcomes all hindrances; but she had been loved and wooed, and no
doubt, but for this, might have married one of her suitors or another.
She had not, however, found herself able--she had not "had time" to let
such an idea seize hold upon her mind. It had seemed so impossible that
Pitcomlie, her father, her uncle, her baby-sister, and in the earlier
period of her incumbency, "the boys," could do without her. It was
impossible, quite impossible, she had said, when any dawn of inclination
seemed rising within her. Thus she set herself and her own life aside as
a secondary thing, and gave herself up to duties which an illness or an
accident might terminate at any moment, without help or warning, leaving
her stranded high and dry upon the shore. Women are trained to make such
sacrifices, and make them daily, with the reward of being smiled at as
old maids a little later, by their juniors who have known no such bond
of duty. Marjory was far beyond the possibility of feeling such a
penalty. She was thinking nothing of the consequences, nor of what her
future life should be. What she felt was that the use of her was over,
that her duties were finally done, that Pitcomlie wanted her no more,
nor anyone, nor any place; her work in the world seemed accomplished.
She had no longer anything to do for her family whom she had served with
loyal devotion for so long. She had been their servant, and yet in a
certain sense their mistress; but the duties of both offices were over.
She was cast adrift; look where she might, she saw in the blank world
before her nothing more to be done, which in any way resembled the
office she had filled all her life. The only charge remaining to her was
Milly; but after all to superintend the education of a child is very
different from the many and various occupations which belong to the
guidance of a family, the regulation of all domestic affairs, the
interests moral and material with which she had been accustomed to deal.
A general deprived of his command, a sailor with his ship taken from
him, could not have been more at a loss than this young woman, suddenly
deprived of the occupations which had given character and meaning to
all her past existence. She sat down drearily in Miss Jean's best room,
amid all the dark old furniture, leaning her elbows upon an old
escritoire which had belonged to her great-grandfather, and fixing her
eyes unaware upon a portrait of that great-grandfather's mother. All
around her was old, shadowy, still. It seemed to her that she herself
had glided into the midst of those shadows to take a permanent place
among them. The long silent procession of ancestors and ancestresses
seemed to take possession of her, to draw her, a silent follower into
their silent train. The very house and room seemed to exercise a certain
fascination over her. They seemed to put their veto upon all change,
novelty, movement of every kind. The High Street of Comlie, grass-grown
and silent, the monotonous continued cadence of the sea, the little
round of occupations which were no occupations, the position of
spectator, sometimes bitterly, always disapprovingly critical of
everything that went on at the house she had once ruled--was this all
that remained for Marjory Hay-Heriot at twenty-five, as it was all that
had fallen to the lot of Jean Hay-Heriot, and of many a proud silent
gentlewoman besides, who had lived and died so, and scorned to complain?
Perhaps a milder and meeker woman would have seen a point of duty still
remaining, which Marjory did not recognise. I am aware that, especially
in books, there are sisters who would have devoted themselves to the
self-denying task of watching over the new household at Pitcomlie,
guiding the young widow in the way in which she should go, and helping
to train up a new and worthy representative of the family in the person
of little Tommy, the future Laird. This, however, was an aspect of the
matter which did not occur to Marjory. The fact that these new people
were Charlie's wife and connections, I am afraid, exercised a repelling
rather than attractive effect upon her. Their existence seemed almost a
wrong to Charlie. Marjory made haste to separate his memory, poor
fellow, from that of the strangers who had come in by accident, as it
were, and snatched the home of her fathers out of her hands. She was too
proud to say a word of complaint, and too sensible not to recognize
fully the right of the new-comers. Nay, she was even impartial enough to
compel herself to understand how Matilda's impatience to take possession
of her new rights might be justified. But the reason often recognizes
what the heart does not admit; and to range herself on the side of Mrs.
Charles was utterly impossible to Charlie's sister. The best thing she
could now do was to forget Pitcomlie altogether, she said to herself.
The worst thing, and unfortunately the most likely, was that she should
become, like Miss Jean, the critic of Pitcomlie, half-consciously on the
outlook for its follies, and judging it severely, perceiving all its
mistakes, and scarcely sorry for them. Marjory, who was no model of
womankind, felt within herself all the capability for doing this. She
felt that it was possible to her, and shrank with dismay from the
thoughts.
Thus her heart was sick with more than grief--with the sense as of a
heavy curtain which had fallen over her life, an ending put to all that
was worthy of being called life in it. Her existence had stopped, but
she continued. How many of us have felt this! and what poor expedients
some are put to, to invent for themselves such excuses for living as may
cheat the vacancy into some reasonable semblance! This cannot happen,
fortunately, at twenty-five; but Marjory felt, as was natural, that
twenty-five was a great age, and that she had outlived all the new
openings, all the possibilities of youthful existence. Miss Hay-Heriot,
of the High Street of Comlie, like her great-aunt Jean, and many
great-aunts before that, with all the use died out of her, and nothing
to do but live. If she had been brought up to it, Marjory thought to
herself, she would have minded less; but what a strange and dismal
contrast from the life she had been brought up to--the busy existence
full of care which she had lived only a fortnight since, appealed to on
every side, found fault with, looked up to, with so many disagreeable
offices thrust upon her, and work which she would gladly have got rid
of! Now she had got rid of all her work at a stroke, and the cares
seemed happiness to her in comparison with the blank which their absence
left.
When her thoughts came to this point, however, they changed with a
sudden start and spring. For there was something she had to do which no
one now would dream of interfering with. It was late by this time, the
middle of the night in Comlie, where everybody was up by six o'clock,
and Marjory was half afraid to move about the old room, where every
board creaked under her foot. But she opened her box, which was near
her, and took from it poor Tom's little desk, in which she had found his
bills and his useless treasures. From thence she took out the packet
which she had made up so carefully with the list and calculations which
had given her so much trouble, and which it had grieved her so much to
think of explaining to her father. Her father had got off without
hearing of them, without any posthumous stab from his dead son. The stab
had gone into Marjory's breast to have the edge blunted, and there it
remained. Surely, she thought, with some natural tears, some good angel
had watched over him, to give him an easy dismissal out of this hard
world. He had never known that Tom had deceived him; he had never known
that Charlie had died. But some one must always pay the penalty for such
exemptions. Marjory took out her own calculations in the middle of the
night, in the stillness, among all the shadows, and looked at the list
ruefully enough. There was nobody now but herself to do it. Tom's memory
was nothing to the new possessors of Pitcomlie, to no one, indeed,
except herself, and perhaps one other, one helpless creature, who was
breaking her heart it might be, somewhere, with no right to mourn, no
power to vindicate. It gave Marjory, however, a little shock to feel the
vulgar aspect of this sole thing which it remained to her to do for the
family. It put Isabell out of her mind, so potent is the force of a bit
of harsh reality over all gentler thoughts. To pay Tom's debts; that
was what she had to do. She almost smiled by herself at the difference
between her theoretical sense of high devotion to her own people, and
the perfectly prosaic yet disagreeable form which that devotion must
take. There was nothing lofty in it to swell her heart, or give her the
elevating consciousness of a noble duty. It would only make her so much
the poorer, abridge her capabilities, and perhaps procure for her some
irritating and troublesome discussions with the "man of business," who
would not understand the necessity. But still it had to be done. Marjory
swept all the papers impatiently back, when this fact made itself
apparent to her. She was more sick than ever of everything about her. I
don't know if a little annoyance at the absolute loss of so much money
had anything to do with this feeling. I doubt very much whether it had,
for money was little more than a symbol to Marjory. But a certain
whimsical sense of an anti-climax--of a mean necessity following a grand
intention--crossed her mind, disposing her half to laugh, and half to
cry. Yes, it seemed dismal beyond measure to have come to an end of all
her duties, to have nothing now to do for her family, whose prime
minister she had been all her life; but to be roused from the painful
depression of that thought to a consciousness of still having Tom's
debts to pay! This sordid claim upon her, enveloped in a cloud of petty
misery, of meanness, and unworthiness, and shifts, and falsehood, what
otherwise was the mournfullest tragedy. Marjory pushed all the papers
away, almost throwing them into the escritoire in the movement of her
impatience--and went to bed. The most sensible thing to do, no doubt;
but meaning an amount of provoked temper, annoyance, vexation, and half
ludicrous despair, which we will not attempt to describe.
During the next week, the half of Fife drove into the High Street to
leave cards and pay visits of condolence. Such of them as were received
in Miss Jean's old-fashioned drawing-room, were edified with an account
of the shortcomings of Mrs. Chairles which made it difficult for these
ladies to maintain the gravity proper to the occasion. But as for
Marjory, she had the cards for her share; Miss Jean concluded that for a
young woman who had lost her father and two brothers in so short a space
of time, to be able to see any one, was an idea which was almost
indecent--not to say criminal. Miss Jean was strong on this point,
though her social code was lax on others; she spoke of her niece in
subdued tones, as of an invalid; she was, "poor thing, as well as you
could expect--not able for much, but resigned, and trying to bear her
trouble like a Christian woman." This was her old aunt's description of
poor Marjory's half-stupefied, half-excited state, and of the
superabundant life and energy which she felt within her. The old lady
ordered her old carriage daily for a drive, which Marjory took with
resignation, through the roads which were so familiar to her, where she
seemed to know not only every turn, but every leaf upon every tree, and
every blade of green corn which began to rise in the fields. After
taking this exercise, which was her duty, Marjory had to resign herself
to remain indoors; her longing for the beach, where the measured rising
and falling of the sea was soothing to her, was considered by Miss Jean
an illegitimate craving not to be encouraged.
"It's all imagination, all imagination. What good could the sea do ye?
Sit at the back window, and ye'll hear it, sometimes more than ye wish,"
she said, with a shiver, thinking of the stormy wintry nights.
Sometimes, however, Marjory was permitted to stray round the churchyard,
and renew the flowers which, with a weakness which Miss Jean denounced,
yet gave in to, she had placed upon the graves. She did this in the
evening, when Comlie was beginning to close its windows, and few people
saw her glide across the road in her black dress. On one of these
occasions, however, Marjory found other people before her in the
churchyard. Generally it was very quiet, the loneliest place, with its
old sixteenth century monuments standing up around, guarding it from the
approach of anything more novel. The two figures before her attracted
little attention from her at first, till she perceived that the corner
which attracted them was that which contained the Pitcomlie vault. They
came back again and again to that spot, the man diverging now and then,
the woman ever returning. When Marjory's attention was fully roused by
this, it seemed to her that she recollected the woman's figure. She was
of the middle size, of very ordinary dress and appearance, like a
hundred others who might have been met in Comlie High Street; but there
was something in her outline and the little gestures she made as she
called back her companion, which attracted Marjory's attention.
"Come back, John, come back; there is nothing I care for here but one
thing," she said, leaning upon the very railing where Miss Heriot's own
steps were bound. Marjory went up to her lightly and swiftly, and laid
her hand on her shoulder. She turned round with a suppressed cry. It was
the same young woman, round, ruddy, and commonplace, but with a serious
look in her eyes which gave her a certain dignity, whom Marjory had
spoken with at Pitcomlie the night before her father's funeral. The girl
gave a visible start, changed colour, and called again, "Come back,
John!" with an air of something like fright. Then she made an effort,
and recovered command of herself. She made Marjory a slight curtsey, and
confronted her steadily. "Were you wanting something with me, mem?" she
said.
"I want to know what you have to do at my brother's grave?" said
Marjory, breathless; "what you have to do with him? Won't you tell me?
There is nothing I would not give to know. Oh! tell me! I do not blame
you. I mean no harm of any kind; but I want to know."
"Wha said I had anything to do with either him or his grave?" said the
young woman.
Her companion, attracted by the voices, drew near suddenly, and stood as
if to stop further conversation between the two. The stranger gave one
indifferent glance up at him, and then went on:
"I'll no pretend I don't know ye. You're Miss Heriot, and I'm but a poor
lass; but I've a right to walk in a place like this, if I like--to read
the gravestones, if I like."
"Oh, tell me!" said Marjory, too much excited to notice the air which
her companion attempted to give to the discussion. "I mean no harm; tell
me only who you are, and if you belong to Isabell."
"What does the lady know about Isabell?" asked the man, interrupting
suddenly.
"Nothing but her name," said Marjory; "nothing but her name! and that
she cared for my brother. I am not blaming her, or you. I mean no
unkindness. I only want to know--to see her--to find out--"
"Miss Heriot," said the young woman, "you'll find out nothing with my
will; you're naething to us, and we're naething that I ken of to you. If
ever there was anything to tell, you would hear, like others. But dinna
interfere with us. Poor folk have rights as well as their betters. I
will answer nae questions, and neither shall any that belongs to me."
She turned away abruptly; but the man hesitated. He brought her back,
plucking at her shawl.
"The lady means no harm," he said. "She says so; and if there's nothing
to be ashamed of--"
"Oh, hold your tongue!" cried the girl, in a tone of exasperation. "It
is me that has to judge, and I've made up my mind. Hold your peace,
man! You would believe whatever was told you with a soft voice and a
pleasant look. She stands up for her ain, and we stand for ours. There's
nae fellowship nor friendship between us. Good night to ye, mem; we'll
disturb you no longer. Man! cannot you hold your tongue?"
"If there was just reason--" he said, still hesitating.
The young woman clutched at his arm, and turned him away almost
violently. Marjory watched them with a tumult of feelings which she
scarcely understood. It seemed to her strange that she, too, could not
turn to some one--tell some one what had happened. But there was no one
to tell; and for that matter, nothing had happened. She watched them as
they withdrew hastily, driven away by her presence. She stood with her
hand upon the rail that encircled the family vault, with all the tablets
inscribed with kindred names glimmering behind her. An imaginative
observer might have supposed her to be guarding these graves from
profanation. She stood as if she had driven off an attack upon them; but
what attack was it? who were they? what did it mean? To these questions
she could give no answer. She stood and leaned upon the cold rail, and
shed a few dreary tears on the marble beneath. There seemed to be
nothing left to her but that marble, the iron railing, the chill graves
that gave no response.
When she went in again, she had to close up her tears, her wondering
pangs of curiosity, her dreary sense of loneliness, within herself. Was
there no one in the world, no one left to whom ever again she could say
all she was thinking; whom she could consult, who would help her even in
such a hopeless inquiry as this? Not Miss Jean, certainly, who looked up
with her keen eyes from the tea-table, and said something about wet
feet, and needless exposure, and the need to be resigned; nor little
Milly, who was ready to cry and kiss her sister, but could do no more to
aid her; nor even Uncle Charles, who had arrived suddenly with news of
his own to occupy him, and who was impatient if she did not give him her
entire attention for his particular business. These were all who
belonged to Marjory, now, here or anywhere. Had she dreamt somehow? had
she seen a vision? had there been revealed to her in a break of the
stormy clouds--some one else?
CHAPTER II.
Fanshawe left Pitcomlie with his head in a maze, affected as he had
never been in his life, and had never supposed himself capable of being
affected. He had been in love--as who has not, who has lived to be
thirty?--but without feeling in the least as he felt now. In the
feverish fits of that malady which he had experienced hitherto it was
she, the heroine of the moment, that was foremost in his thoughts. He
had been full of nothing but how to see her, how to have opportunities
of talking to her, how to dance, or ride, or walk with her, according as
the occasion favoured. In short, she had always belonged to some holiday
version of life, and had been enshrined in a glittering framework of
society, in which alone he knew her, and through which alone he could
seek her presence. Half a dozen such loves at least, on a moderate
computation, Fanshawe had experienced, and after having been made happy
and miserable for a certain number of days or weeks, as it happened,
society which brought her to him had swept her away again, and he had
heard with resignation some time later that the temporary lady of his
thoughts had become Mrs. or Lady Somebody Else. Sometimes a passing jar,
of what is poetically called the heart-strings, hailed this information,
and for a day or so he would be very sorry for himself as a poor devil
who could never hope to marry; but there it had ended, and in a week
after he had felt better, and decided that, on the whole, everything was
for the best. This, however, was not at all the state of his feelings
now. He did not know whether he was in love with Marjory Hay-Heriot.
Sometimes he did not think he was; but one thing he was sure of, which
was that he was very much out of love with himself. None of those
complacent self-compassionating plaints of the poor devil order occurred
to him. His thoughts were of a kind much less easily managed. He was
dissatisfied with himself and everything round him, with his means, his
habits, his former life, his want of any actual existence worth speaking
of, his complete unimportance to the world. He was young, strong, not
badly endowed either in body or mind, with enough to live on, and no
cares or trammels of any kind; and yet the fact was certain that, if he
died to-morrow it would be no loss to any one; nobody would miss him;
nothing would come to a stop. How many men would find themselves in the
same position did they inquire into it? He had enough to live on, enough
to keep a horse and a servant, to do whatever he pleased, to travel, to
surround himself with such luxuries as he cared for, to get most things
that he wanted. Except in that matter of a wife, which, to tell the
truth, was a thing he had never very warmly wanted, there was nothing
which he had denied himself. To be sure he was generally more or less in
debt, but never so much that he could not set his affairs right by an
effort, if he had a strong enough motive for doing so. He had not thus
the burden on his conscience that many other men have. He was a
good-for-nothing, if we may use the expression, without being a
scapegrace like Tom Heriot. He injured nobody. One time or other, though
often considerably after date, he paid his bills. No man, or woman
either, so far as he knew, was the worse for his existence, and yet----
There are a great many people who go harmlessly, pleasantly, through the
world, who, if it ever occurred to them to place themselves by the side
of a really useful member of society, and compare their lives with his
or hers, would find themselves as much embarrassed by the contrast as
Fanshawe was. But fortunately for the idlers of humanity, the contrast
seldom strikes them with all the sharp distinctions of light and shadow
which existed in this case. The lgant smiles complacently over the
comparison, and finds in his own case a host of extraordinary
circumstances which he feels to be really superiorities, and which raise
him to a level very much higher than that of the plodding fellow by his
side, who, like Atlas, carries a world on his shoulders. The race-horse
is less useful than the dray-horse, but how different! This consolation
generally lays the most flattering unction to the souls of the
ornamental portion of society. How is it possible that the fine lady
could feel herself anything but superior to the domestic dowdy who does
so much more than she, and is of such inferior importance in
everybody's estimation? The butterflies of existence have always this
comfort, or at least they take it in most cases; and no doubt Fanshawe,
like other men of his acquaintance, had smiled and hugged himself on his
superiority to the occasional industrial of his acquaintance who had
toiled himself up into reputation at the bar, or made a slave of himself
in parliament, while his schoolfellow lounged at his club, or fluttered
in the Row, or (which was the most serious of his occupations) hunted or
shot, or went fishing in strange waters. The comparison which had been
suggested to him now, however, and the moral standard to which he had
been suddenly forced to fit himself, was of a very different kind from
that of the successful barrister or rising politician. And the effect
upon his mind was complicated by the creation of so many new sentiments
and necessities in himself, that the comparison went much further than a
mere external contrast could have done. Ambition--a thing he had never
known in his life--had sprung up within him; acquisitiveness--a desire
to have, to possess, and to enjoy; an impatience of the present aspect
and conditions of life; a sense of disgust with himself and his
circumstances. These were not moral qualities, let us allow, nor
amiable, nor in any way an improvement upon the gentle and light-hearted
contentedness of the past. I am simply stating facts, and not demanding
any approval of them. This was the new development to which Fanshawe had
come. His past easy life was odious to him; he wanted to become on the
spot something totally different--something which seemed to him better,
though morally it might not perhaps be so. Certainly at the first offset
it was not a moral improvement. To substitute dissatisfaction for
content, uneasiness for calm, care and mental restlessness for the happy
insouciance of a man undisturbed by any thought of his career, was
neither an advantage to himself, nor to anybody near him. He who had
been the most good-natured, easy-going, well-conditioned fellow known to
his friends, became all at once moody, uncertain, unmanageable. He had
resolved to "make a change," and he was pre-occupied, to the exclusion
of everything else, with thoughts of what that change must be.
For it is a great deal easier to decide that you must turn over a new
leaf, and that henceforward, instead of being useless, your life must be
profitable to yourself and the world, than it is to decide how this
change is to be accomplished. If every man when he begins to take
thought of the more serious duties of life could immediately settle
himself down as a landed proprietor, with an estate to manage, cottages
to improve, farmers to influence, a seat on the bench, and a vote for
the county, how many men would see their duty more clearly than they
have ever as yet seen it! But we cannot attain all this simply by
resolving upon it, and Fanshawe did not know what else to do. He would
have made a very creditable squire, and so would hosts of men who don't
make much of their lives in any other way; but he could not dig, nor did
he know how to employ his existence so as to fulfill his own wishes,
and be of some use to others. He was too old for many things, too old
for the army, even could he have done any good in it, too old for the
bar, too old for business; for although men in novels can turn their
minds to commerce whenever a blank comes in their career, and succeed in
it--yet men in common life are usually trained to that branch of
activity as to every other, and begin by an apprentice period, in which
they earn nothing and do little. Even for the public offices he was too
old, and what, Fanshawe asked himself, could he do in a public office?
He ran all these things over in his mind till he was in despair. He was
willing to do anything; but when he came to particulars, he found that
his education had trained him to nothing except those duties of a great
proprietor which he had no hope of ever being able to exercise. Nothing
is more difficult than thus to begin a new chapter in life. Had he
required to earn his living, no doubt the energy which necessity would
have given to his quest for employment might have found him something to
do; but he had not that stimulus--and he had not the stimulus of
aptitude for, or knowledge of, any special kind of occupation. He would
have "done anything." Was that but another way of saying that he was
good for nothing? he asked himself sometimes, in partial despair.
And then putting all these new fancies aside, he had really so much to
do in the early Summer. He had to look after his sick horse, to see a
great number of friends, to answer invitations, to make some ordinary
necessary preparations for the Derby and Ascot, and all sorts of other
engagements. He had quite enough to fill his life with this ordinary
round of trivial occupation, as it had been filled for all these years;
and when he had returned to the usual circle of that life, it must be
allowed that it was not disagreeable to him. It felt natural; and yet it
was nothing--no good to him, no good to those among whom it was lived.
No progress, either internal or external, was possible, so long as he
continued in it. But what was he to do? What even did he want to do?
Something, certainly--something that would restore him to the credit he
had lost in his own eyes, that would make him worthy in Marjory's, that
would improve his position, and help him to that natural growth and
increase and elevation in life which had become so essential; but yet
nothing that he knew of--nothing that he saw other people doing. Poor
good-for-nothing! He wanted to "better himself," to be of some sort of
use, to double his means, to make what was called establishment in life
possible, to change himself, in short, from a nobody and nothing, into a
man of some importance and consideration--a man fit to be trusted with
the life and welfare of others. This was what he wanted; but he had not
the smallest inkling of how it was to be brought about.
One thing however he did, and at once--he availed himself of the
permission which Marjory had so unhesitatingly accorded to him, and
wrote to her. He did this only a few days after he left Pitcomlie;
indeed, he began his letter on the very morning of the day on which he
left, when he was no further off than Edinburgh--but destroyed that
first letter and various others before he produced the following, which
at last, after many doubts, he sent. How to begin it was a puzzle to
him. The only thing he had any right to say was "Dear Miss Heriot;" but,
somehow, that sober and correct address did not seem to suit the
circumstances. This cost him a great deal of thought; he could think
deeply, connectedly on such a subject, though he could not think to any
purpose, in respect to the occupation which he was so anxious for. His
letter kept running through his mind during all the interval--four
days--which elapsed before he made up his mind to send it; and at last,
as will be seen, he began abruptly, with no formal start at all, which
seemed to him, somehow, more congenial than "Dear Miss Heriot." The
letter was finished at midnight, but he left it open and read it over,
and added something to it next morning before he sent it off; and after
he had fastened up the envelope, was in a dozen minds whether or not to
open it again and revise it once more. No new beginner in literature was
ever half so careful and anxious for the success of his first work.
"I avail myself very eagerly of the permission you gave me to
recall myself to your recollection. It is not that I am worth your
recollection, but because I cannot bear the idea of falling out of
it. How can I sufficiently tell you what it has been to me to have
felt myself one of the household of Pitcomlie, to have grown into
its ways, to have been part of its life at so sad a moment? I feel
almost as if you must think me unfeeling, unsympathetic in your
sorrows, when I say that I am glad I was there at this time, rather
than at another. I wonder if you will know what I mean? I grieve
for you to the bottom of my heart, and yet I am glad that I was
there. Life outside, life here in London, where, people say, and I
suppose believe, there is so much movement and excitement, seems to
me very tame and vacant. I can't think how my old friends can
endure the mill-horse round of engagements, all so null, so
monotonous, and like each other;--because they have not been in
Fife, I suppose. And yet Pitcomlie is very quiet, you will tell me?
I wonder if you are there; or if the recent events have made it
insupportable to you; or what you are doing? I keep thinking and
wondering over this, and whether you will remember me again, or be
so good, so very good as to tell me all I want to know, and answer
me half of the flood of questions which are ready to be poured out
upon you. May I ask them? I am sure at heart you are too good not
to say yes or no. I want to know about Mr. Charles; whether he has
left his tower, and his papers, and all those treasures which he
was so kind as to show me; and about dear little Milly, whom I can
no longer tempt to laugh at an unbecoming moment. How I should like
to try! and to see her look of fright, which is her own, at her
wickedness; and then that delightful gravity, which is yours,
settling over her small face. I want to know everything about her,
and about your uncle;--and anything you will tell me; any little
scrap or crumb from your table--about you.
"There are a great many things I should like to tell you about
myself, if it did not seem abominable impertinence to hope that you
would take any interest in such an indifferent personage. Nobody
can be more thoroughly aware than I am how little there is to say
about me, that would be pleasant to your ear. I have had one kind
of dubious good quality in my past life, and that has been content;
now I have lost that even. What a poor sort of affair is the life
we live without thinking of it, we wretched fellows who are, I
suppose, the scum, and float on the surface of the stream, going
wherever it carries us, in a helpless, hopeless sort of way, that
must appal and disgust any one who has ever known better. Having
had a glimpse of the better, I am disgusted too, and begin to make
a fuss among the other atoms, and long to cling to something, to
oppose the power of the tide, and get some kind of independent
action into me. I wonder if you will know what I mean? How often I
find myself wondering this--asking myself if it would be
comprehensible to you; or if you would simply scorn the poorer sort
of being whose existence has been so long without plan, or purpose,
or pilot? This would be very natural; but I like to think that you
would rather try to understand, knowing what a great thing it would
be for me if you would take so much trouble. I am no theologian,
and dare not pretend to speak on such subjects; but yet, if the
angels would take the trouble to enter a little into our mortal
concerns, how much good it would do us! Do not you think so too? or
do you think I am talking nonsense? which very likely is the case,
since I want to talk the best of sense, and mean a great deal,
which I am not clever enough to say.
"May I write again soon? and will you give me a line--just a
line--three or four words, if no more, to tell me that you still
remember the existence of one who is always
"Your faithful servant,
"E. F."
This letter Marjory read at the breakfast-table, seated between Aunt
Jean and Uncle Charles, with little Milly opposite to her, and all the
commonplaces of ordinary talk going on. How bewildered would those good
folks have been could they have read it over her shoulder! How
bewildered did she feel reading it, moved to an interest which made her
half indignant with herself, and feeling impatient with the writer for
that restrained glow of feeling, which notwithstanding communicated to
her a sympathetic thrill. "Ridiculous!" she said, and felt her cheeks
glow, and her heart move a little, notwithstanding all she did to
control it.
"That's a long letter, May," said Mr. Charles, looking at it with some
curiosity as she put it carefully back into its envelope.
"It is from Mr. Fanshawe," she said, with a consciousness for which she
could have taken instant vengeance on herself; "he has gone to London.
He said he would let me know where he had gone."
"Oh!" said Mr. Charles; and Miss Jean's eyes lighted up.
Marjory let the letter lie by her plate as if it was of no importance,
but felt her cheeks grow hotter and hotter. Ridiculous! She determined
to write him a most matter-of-fact reply, which should make an end of
this discursive nonsense. If he thought she had leisure for a
sentimental correspondence, she must convince him to the contrary; how
absurd it was! And yet to be thus put upon a pedestal of absolute
superiority, and worshipped in this covert way, is not in itself
disagreeable. A little weakness stole about her heart; insensibly it
occurred to her during the forenoon that there were several things she
would like to consult him about. She slid the letter quietly into her
pocket before she left the table. It happened to her to look at it again
during the course of the day, just "to see what he had said" about his
present occupations. As it happened he had not said anything. But how
was Marjory to recollect that?
CHAPTER III.
Mr. Charles Heriot had not come to the High Street without an object. He
had left Pitcomlie on the morning after Marjory left it, and had
proceeded straight to his house in Edinburgh to review the capabilities
of George Square; and he had not been very well satisfied with those
capabilities. The house had not been inhabited since it had been in his
possession. It was an excellent old-fashioned house, worth a dozen of
the ordinary habitations which fall to your lot and mine, dear reader;
but it was furnished with mere chairs and tables, bookcases and
side-boards, not with any associations or kindly customs of use and
wont. There was some old spindle-legged furniture, which had belonged to
some Leddy Pitcomlie in the beginning of last century, with which
Marjory could have made a quaint corner to live in, in one part, at
least, of the chilly, uninhabited drawing-room, converting it all at
once into such a chamber as some Jacobite lady might have received the
Chevalier in, or where Mrs. Anne Keith might have discoursed to young
Walter Scott. But Mr. Charles's imagination was dulled by the vexations
and embarrassments that possessed him, and he could not realize this;
and his decision about George Square was that it would not do. The chain
of habit was very hard to break with Mr. Charles; but when once broken,
he was impatient, and almost lawless, rushing into any novelty that
presented itself. The novelty in this case, however, was not
extravagant. What he did was simply to take a house in St. Andrew's for
the summer; and it was this which he had come to intimate to the
household in the High Street.
"Not but what Marjory would be very happy with you, poor thing," he said
to Aunt Jean; "perhaps more happy than I can hope to see her; but still
it will be more of a change. After griefs like hers, and all that has
happened, I have always heard that a change was the best thing; and as
she's used to me and my ways--"
"You need not apologize, Chairles Heriot," said the old lady. "If I ever
deluded myself I was to get a companion, it's best to undeceive me; but
I did not delude myself. I'm used to live alone, and no doubt after the
first I would have gone back to my crabbed ways. But there's one thing I
must say. I'm fond of the girl, though she maybe does not give me credit
for it, and she shall have all I've got to leave; I said in my haste she
was my natural heir, and too natural, and a Miss Heriot doomed, all her
days, like me. But mind this, if you take May away, I'll no have her
back. I give her to you on one condition, and that is, that you'll marry
her well. Marry that girrl, and marry her well, and you'll have my
blessing, and I'll think better of ye, Chairles, than I've ever thought
all your days."
"Marry her, and marry her well!" cried Mr. Charles, in dismay; "and how
am I to do that? I have never married myself, and neither have you."
"That has nothing to do with it," said Miss Jean, promptly. "The more
reason that Marjory should; there's enough of us poor dry trees, with
nothing to leave behind. If you have any respect for the past
generation, of which I'm the last representative, Charlie Heriot, you'll
do what I say. Marry her well; she's worthy the trouble. She'll make
such a man's wife as few men deserve, that's my opinion. Mind, I'm not
saying but what she might be mended; but marry her, and marry her well,
Charlie, or you'll get nothing from me."
"Perhaps you would tell me how I'm to do it?" said Mr. Charles, with
sarcastic seriousness.
"If you cannot find that out for yourself, you'll never do it by my
teaching," said Miss Jean. "Well I know ye have but little sense, you
useless men; but ye know other men, if you do nothing else. If it was a
wife, now, that I wanted for a likely lad, do ye think I could not lay
my hand on one? aye, and bring it to pass, too, if there was not
something sore against me. Keep your eyes open, and when ye see a man
that's worth the trouble, take him to your house--since ye are to have a
house; and meddle no more, Charlie Heriot, after ye have done that;
meddle no more. The first step is in your power; but the rest they must
do themselves, or it will never be done. That's my advice. Friends can
do a great deal, but there's a leemit which they must never pass. Once
let May see what you have in your head, and there's an end of it all.
Without judgment, ye'll never succeed in that, nor, indeed, in anything
else, as ye might have learned from the family letters ye are so fond
of. But the Heriots have never minded their daughters; they have left
the poor things to themselves. There's me, for example; not that I'm
regretting my lot. A man would have been a terrible trouble to me; I
could not have been fashed with a creature aye on my hands. But
Marjory's young enough to accustom herself to her fate, whatever that
may be."
"I hope so," said Mr. Charles, with some impatience; "but if you think
that I am going to take home every man about the Links to see whether
our May is good enough for him--"
"That's just like one of your interpretations," said Miss Jean, with
quiet scorn. "'Any man that's worth the trouble,' said I; 'every man
upon the Links,' says he; it's just what a woman has to expect. And
Marjory may have settled for herself, so far as I know. There was that
English lad, that you and poor Thomas, like two wise men, had so much
about the house--"
"Fanshawe? I don't think he has a penny," said Mr. Charles.
"Most likely no, or ye would not have taken such pains to throw him in
the girrl's way. He was not ill-looking, and he had a taking manner, and
when the heart's soft it's easy to make an impression; she has a kind of
absent look at times. And there's Johnnie Hepburn, not a great match,
but well off, that would give his two e'en if she would but look at
him--"
"Johnnie Hepburn is not an ill lad," said Mr. Charles, inclining for the
moment, if Marjory's marriage was to be brought into the foreground, to
seize on the easiest way of deciding it; "but in the meantime," he
added, recalling his thoughts, "neither marrying nor giving in marriage
is in her head--or mine either--with three deaths in the family."
"Oh aye!" said Miss Jean; "ye need not tell me the importance of what's
happened. Both to us now living and to all the race, it's a terrible
thing to think of, that both sons should be swept away, and a poor
little bairn with a strange woman of a mother, a mindless creature that
kens none of our ways, should be all that's left to succeed. Never since
I mind has anything happened like it. However, we must all die; but
there's no the same necessity in marriage, and that's why I'm speaking.
I'm old, older than all them that's gone. Before ye see me again, I may
be on the road to Comlie kirkyard, beside the rest--which is one good
thing," Miss Jean added, with her sharp eyes twinkling, "of a maiden
state like yours and mine, Charlie. No other family has any share in us.
We are sure, at least, to lie with our own at the last."
"Ay, to be sure," said Mr. Charles, who was not thinking of any such
consolation, and who was glad to recur to his original subject. "We'll
live very quietly, and see no company. St. Andrews is one of the places
where you can see many people, or few, according to your inclination;
and I'll have my quiet game, and May will have her sister to take up
her mind. For the time being, Aunt Jean, I cannot see that we could do
better; and I will always be at hand in case of that foolish young woman
at Pitcomlie going wrong altogether."
"I would let her go as wrong as she likes," said Miss Jean. "It's aye
shortest in the end to leave folks free to their own devices. When she's
done all the harm she can to herself and other folk, she will yield to
them that knows better. But I must go and look after your dinners.
You'll miss your grand cook with all her made dishes, Charlie. I hear it
was you that settled yon woman at Pitcomlie, and they tell me she's to
be married upon Fleming (the auld fool) and they're to set up in some
way of business. I cannot abide waste for my part, and when a woman that
can cook--which she could do, I say it to your credit, though I hate a
man that's aye thinking of what he puts into him--goes and gives up her
profession and marries a poor man that wants nothing but broth, or maybe
a stoved potatoe----"
"They should take up a tavern--they should take up a tavern," said Mr.
Charles, with some excitement. "Bless me! her collops are just
excellent; and I know nobody that can serve you up a dish of fish and
sauce, or salmon steak, or a tender young trout stewed in wine, followed
with a delicate dish of friar's chicken----"
"The Lord preserve us from these greedy men!" said Miss Jean. "The
water's in his e'en over his friar's chicken; which is as wasteful a
dish and as extravagant as any I know. You must try to put up with my
poor Jess's plain roast and boiled. It will be a trial, no doubt; but I
must go and give her her orders," said the old lady, marching downstairs
with her cane tapping on every step. She went to the kitchen, and
stirred up the artist there, whose powers were anything but
contemptible, by sarcastic descriptions of her nephew's tastes. "You
would think to hear him that nobody could dress a decent dish but yon
woman at Pitcomlie," Miss Jean said, artfully, "and he's very great on
fish, and thinks none of us know how to put a haddie on the table. It's
not pleasant for an honest woman like you that have been born among
haddies, so to speak, Jess; but you must not mind what an epicure like
that may say. For my part, I'm always very well pleased with your simple
dishes."
"Simple dishes! my certy!" said Jess to herself, when her mistress had
withdrawn; and being thus pitted against her important rival at
Pitcomlie, the cordon-bleu of the High Street went to work with such a
will, that Mr. Charles was smitten with wonderment and humiliation.
"It is wonderful the talent that is hidden in out-of-the-way places," he
said afterwards, when describing this feast; and when you reflect that
he did not know what sort of cook was awaiting him in St. Andrews, and
did know that the good woman in George Square was good for nothing
beyond an occasional chop, it may be supposed that his pretensions in
presence of Miss Jean were considerably lessened. This gave Mr. Charles
more thought than that other matter of the necessity of marrying
Marjory. Now that Marjory belonged as it were to himself, forming indeed
the very first of his conditions of existence, he did not see the
necessity of any change. He said to himself, as her father had once
said, "No husband would be so considerate of her as I am. She will never
get so much of her own way again," and felt that the suggestion that
Marjory should be married was an impertinence especially offensive to
himself. That could be dismissed, however, with little ceremony. It was
a more serious matter about the cook.
Some weeks, however, elapsed before the removal to St. Andrews was
effected, and in those weeks things went very badly with the household
at Pitcomlie. Fleming, being further aggravated after Mr. Charles's
departure, decided upon leaving at once instead of waiting for the term,
which had been his first intention.
"A man may argufy with a man," he said, when he announced his final
decision to Mrs. Simpson, "but to put up with a wheen woman is mair than
I'm equal to. Stay you, my dear, if you think proper; but I'm auld
enough to take my ain way, and I'll no stay to be driven about by these
new leddies. If it had been Miss Marjory, it would have been another
kind of thing; but, by George, to put up with all their tantrums, me an
auldish man, and used to my ain way and very little contradiction, and a
man engaged to be married into the bargain! I'll no do't."
This was a serious blow to the house. The footman, who had been
thereupon elevated by Matilda to Fleming's place, was elated by his
advancement, and conducted himself towards the maids in a way which
produced notice of resignation from several of the women. And Mrs.
Simpson, when it came to her turn to bear, unsupported by her Fleming,
the daily burden of the "new leddy's" unsatisfactory manners, struck
work too, and decided that it was not worth her while to struggle on
even for the short time that remained.
"I'm weel aware, mem," she said to Verna, who had attempted a private
remonstrance, "that we should act, no as ithers act to us, but as we
would that they should do. That's awfu' true; but I canna but think He
would have made a difference Himself, if it had been put to Him, in the
case of a servant. You see, naturally we look up to them that are above
us for an example; we dinna set up to give them an example, which would
be terrible conceited. And a woman like me, with a' the care of the
house on her head, and slaving over the fire, dressing dishes that I
have no heart to touch by the time they come to me--Na, na! it's no from
the like of me that a Christian example should be expectit. And then you
must mind it's said in the Bible as weel, 'I will be good to him that is
good, and froward to him that is froward.' I humbly hope I'm a Christian
woman, but I canna go beyond Scripture. And what is a month's wages to
me? I've been long in good service, and I've put by some siller, and I
dinna doubt but you've heard, mem, that though I'm no so young as I once
was, I have--ither prospects; and ane that will no see me want. So as
for the month's wages, I've made mair sacrifices than that."
"The money is not much," said Verna; "but the character, Mrs. Simpson.
My sister will be very much put out, and she forms very strong opinions,
and she might say----"
"Your sister, mem!" the housekeeper answered in a blaze of passion; but
then feeling her superiority, paused and controlled herself. "When
Mistress Chairles is as well kent in the countryside as I am, it will be
time to speak about characters," she said. "Characters, Lord preserve
us! am I like a young lass wanting a character? You're a stranger, Miss
Bassett, and a weel meaning young leddie, that has nae intention to give
offence, I ken that; and I think no worse of you for judging according
to your lights; but when it's said that Mrs. Simpson, housekeeper for
ten years at Pitcomlie, has left her situation, who do you think will
stand most in need of an explanation--Mistress Chairles, or me? If I
wanted a new place, it would not be to her I would come to recommend me.
And as it happens," said the housekeeper with modest pride, "I'm no
wanting a new place; I'm going home to my ain house."
"But, dear Mrs. Simpson, it will be so very, very inconvenient for us;
what shall we do?" cried Verna, driven to her last standing-ground.
"I'm no blaming you, mem," said Mrs. Simpson, with dignity; "but
Mistress Chairles should have taken mair thought what she was saying to
a decent woman--that has never been used to ill language. If she wanted
me to consider her, she should have shown me a good example and
considered me."
"This is what you have made of it in one month," cried Verna, rushing
into the room in which her sister sat. "She's going to-morrow; she will
not stay an hour longer. By coaxing, I got her to consent not to go
to-night. This is what your management has come to. Every servant in the
house is leaving at this horrid term, as they call it; and you, who
don't know anything of English housekeeping, nor the customs of the
place, nor what you ought to do--"
"Oh, Verna; but you know!" cried Matilda, frightened at last by the
universal desertion, and taking refuge--as was her wont--in tears.
"I know! you have refused my advice, and laughed at all my
remonstrances; you have never listened to a single word I have said
since that day when the will was read. I have made up my mind to give
up, like the rest."
"Oh, Verna, don't! oh don't forsake me; what shall I do? If I am a
little quick-tempered, is that my fault? I am always sorry, and beg your
pardon. I will beg your pardon on my knees. Oh, Verna! and the Ayah
going, and everybody. I shall get no sleep with baby, and no rest with
all these worries. If you go and forsake me, I shall die!"
"You treat me just like one of the servants," said Verna; "except that
I have no wages. I don't know why I should stay to be bullied and made
miserable. I will go too. I can have the Ayah to take care of me, and
poor papa will be glad enough to see me again."
"Oh, Verna, for heaven's sake! for pity's sake, for the sake of my poor,
poor unfortunate babies! You shall have everything you can think of;
everything you would like--"
"Yes, all that is unpleasant!" said Verna; "the kicks, but not the
halfpence; the battles with the servants, and everything that is
disagreeable--"
"Verna! if I promise never to do anything but what you like, never to
say anything you don't approve of--to do always what you advise me? Oh,
Verna! if I say I will be your slave!" cried Matilda, throwing herself
upon her sister's neck.
Then Verna allowed herself to be softened.
"I didn't want to come," she said. "I came for your sake, and poor
Charlie's. I don't want to stay; it's cold and wretched here; I like
India a great deal better; but if I should try a little while longer,
and make an attempt to keep you straight, will you promise to take my
advice, and do what I tell you? It is of no use my staying otherwise. I
am quite ready to pack up and go back to India; make up your mind what
you will do."
"I will do whatever you please," said Matilda, dissolved in tears.
"For you know you are a fool," said Verna calmly; "you always were; when
you came out a girl, and gave us all that trouble about the cadets in
the ship--when you married poor Charlie, and led him such a life--when
you came back here and insulted Miss Heriot, and made the house
miserable; you have always been a fool, and I suppose you cannot be
different; but, at least, you ought to know."
"Oh, Verna, I will!" cried the penitent; and it was thus with her blue
eyes running over with tears, with her lips quivering, and her pretty
face melting into its most piteous aspect, that Mr. Hepburn found the
young mistress of the house when he went to Pitcomlie, charged with a
message, which Marjory, wearied by his importunate desire to serve her,
had invented for the purpose. He had not been thinking of Mrs. Charles.
She was Marjory's supplanter to him, and a thoroughly objectionable
personage. But when he came suddenly into the room, and saw this weeping
creature with her fair hair ruffled by her emotion, tears hanging on her
eyelashes, her piteous little pretty mouth trembling and quivering, the
sight went to the young man's susceptible heart. No secondary trouble,
such as quarrels with her servants, or the desolation consequent upon
that amusement occurred to him as the possible cause for the state in
which he found her; no doubt crossed his mind that it was the woe of her
widowhood that was overwhelming her. He stopped short at the door out of
respect for the sorrow into which he had intruded unawares. He explained
with perturbation that he was the bearer of a message; he begged pardon
metaphorically upon his knees. "Pray, pray assure your sister that I
would not have intruded for the world; that I feel for her most
deeply," he said, the sympathetic tears coming to his own eyes.
"She will be better presently," said wise Verna; "and it will do her
good to see some one. She indulges her feelings too much. Poor child!
perhaps it is not wonderful in her circumstances--"
"How could she do otherwise? I remember Charlie so well; may I speak of
him to her?" said this sympathetic visitor.
Verna received this prayer very graciously; she said, "It will do her
good;" and now she will have something to amuse her, she added, in her
heart.
CHAPTER IV.
Hepburn amused Mrs. Charles very much, though that was not considered
one of his capabilities in Comlie. He roused her gradually from her
depressed state into general conversation. After he had delivered
Marjory's message, he stayed and talked, feeling a quite novel
excitement and exhilaration in the fact of this social success, which
was unprecedented in his experience. To be appreciated is doubly
delightful to a man who is not used to much applause from his friends.
Matilda was the first pretty woman who had "understood" him, who had
permitted herself to be beguiled out of her private sorrows by his
agreeable society. He was not the less faithful to Marjory, who had
possessed all his thoughts as long as he could remember; but still it
was pleasant to be able to comfort the afflicted, and to feel that his
efforts for that end were successful. After a while, when the tears had
been cleared away, when a gentle smile had stolen upon the fair
countenance before him; when she had yielded to his fascination so far
as to talk a little, and to listen eagerly, and to look up to him with
those blue eyes, Hepburn could not but feel that Miss Heriot must have
been deceived somehow, and that so gentle a creature must be easy "to
get on with," to those who would be good to her. For the first time in
his life, he felt that there was something to excuse in the idol of his
youth. Not a fault, indeed, but a failure of comprehension; and Marjory
had never failed before in any particular, so far as her adorer knew.
Perhaps the reason was that this gentle little widow was a totally
different kind of woman. Various things he had heard on this subject
occurred to Hepburn's mind to account for Marjory's failure. Women, even
the best and cleverest, did sometimes fail to understand each other, he
believed, upon points which offered no difficulty to an impartial
masculine intellect. This was not at all a disagreeable thought; it
raised him vaguely into a pleasant atmosphere of superiority which
elated him, and could not hurt anybody. He even seemed to himself to be
fonder of Marjory from the sense of elevation over her. Yes, no doubt
this was the explanation. Mrs. Charles had done or said something which
a man probably would never have noticed, but which had affected the more
delicate and sensitive, but less broad and liberal nature of the
sweetest of women; and Marjory, on her side, as he knew by experience,
uttered words now and then which were not destitute of the power to
sting. Hepburn thought that to bring these two together again would be a
very fine piece of work for the man who could accomplish it. A loving
blue-eyed creature like this could not but cling to Marjory's strength,
and Marjory would derive beauty, too, from the fair being whom she
supported. Yes, he thought, as he looked at her, Matilda was the kind of
woman described in all the poets, the lovely parasite, the climbing
woodbine, a thing made up of tendrils, which would hang upon a man, and
hold him fast with dependent arms. Marjory was not of that nature. To be
sure, Marjory was the first of women; but there was a great deal to be
said for the other, who was, no doubt, inferior, but yet had her charm.
Hepburn felt that in the abstract it would be sweet to feel that some
one was dependent upon him. Somehow the idea crept to his heart, and
nestled there; but Marjory naturally would not have the same feelings.
Marjory would be disposed rather to push away the tendrils. It was a
different sort of thing altogether between the two women. Thus Hepburn
felt a delicious superiority creep over him as he sat and talked. He
received Mrs. Charles's confidences about the servants after a time, and
was deeply sorry. Fleming and the rest seemed to him a set of savages,
taking advantage of this sweet young creature's ignorance and innocence.
"Let me manage it for you," he said, eagerly. "I am not very clever
about servants myself, but I will speak to my housekeeper, who knows
everybody. She will find you some one. Let me be of some use to you."
"Oh, that will be so kind!" cried both the ladies. Johnnie Hepburn had
never felt himself such a man during his whole life.
When Verna had thus arranged matters for her sister's comfort, she
herself withdrew to put the house once more in order, and to resume the
helm of state. She shrugged her shoulders when she left the room, in
which she left the new-comer quite happy, and Matilda in gentle good
spirits.
"No wonder we think men fools," she said to herself; "and no wonder men
think us fools," she added, philosophically, after a moment.
Thus it must have been decreed, she supposed, for the good of the
species; and a blessed dispensation it was, if it could be confined to
its present use of finding pleasant occupation for two incapables, and
leaving those to work who could. But unfortunately Verna knew the
process often went further than that. However, for the meantime she felt
it necessary to be content with the advantages secured to her by the
collapse of her sister's authority, and the merciful and most
providential provision of some one to flirt with, thus accorded to her
at the moment of direst need. Verna employed her afternoon so well that
she even came to terms with Mrs. Simpson, who acknowledged the
difference of having to deal with a reasonable young lady, who knew what
was due--It was a pleasant afternoon for Miss Bassett; for the first
time she went over the house, and realized the character of the kingdom
which had come into her hands by deputy. She visited all the
linen-presses, all the store-rooms; she took a peep into the
plate-closet; she went and inspected the old wardrobes, where lay many
antique stores, old dresses, and piles of what Mrs. Simpson called
"body-linen," and lace which made her mouth water. "This must belong to
Miss Heriot, I suppose," she said, trying to recollect what was named in
the will. Verna had never known what an old house was till now. She
found oak cabinets and pieces of furniture which she knew to be of
value, heaped up in garrets and on the landings of the many-turning
stairs. She found drawers upon drawers full of chiffons, which she
could appreciate still better; and in every out-of-the-way cupboard
there was some piece of china, some curiosity such as Verna had vainly
longed for all her life. They were there unseen, lurking in corners, not
prized or thought of, and too many in number to be made visible; there
was enough to decorate half-a-dozen houses; old brocade gowns which
would cut up into the loveliest chair-covers, and old Dresden, which, if
gathered together, would fill a room by itself. Oh! only to have
half-a-dozen pieces of it in the house at Calcutta, or in any other
house which Verna might call her own! She was perfectly honest, and
would not have taken a penny from Tommy's possessions for the world; but
the china went to her heart.
And then she put on her hat and went round the house outside. She took a
very comprehensive view, taking her double eyeglass, which she kept for
important moments, and studying the building thoroughly from every point
of view. Women are deeply conservative, it is common to say; but at the
same time there is no such iconoclast as an ignorant young woman longing
for perfection, and secure in her own opinion. Verna thought the old
house a most unnecessary adjunct to the new. The only useful part of it
was the tower occupied by Mr. Charles, which would no doubt accommodate
a visitor if the house was very much crowded--but then if a new wing was
built there would be a great deal more accommodation. Verna built the
wing in her imagination, drawing it along the further side of the lime
avenue, and planting long windows open to the ground in the new
drawing-room, which would be much "snugger," she thought, than the old
drawing-room which opened upon the cliff. She made a nice room for
herself in the warmest corner facing to the south, for she was cold by
right of being Indian, and liked to bask in the sun. How delightful was
this sense of being supreme, this feeling of power, this capacity for
doing as she liked! It seemed to her that she had fairly subdued
Matilda, and that nothing would tempt that incapable person, after her
failure, to meddle any more with the affairs which she had so
mismanaged; besides Verna meant to make her sister very comfortable; she
liked people to be comfortable. She had no inclination to oppress, or to
be unkind. She meant to do more for Matilda than she would have done for
herself, indulging her to the top of her bent, and putting up with all
her weaknesses. Even to the length of providing somebody to flirt with,
of taking her to gaieties which they had both dreamt of as girls, and
had read about in books, without ever having it in their power to taste
their sweetness, Verna was willing to humour her sister; and so long as
she would consent to be quiet and enjoy herself, asked nothing more from
Matty. That she should enjoy herself was necessary, as this was the only
expedient Verna knew to keep her contented. Finally she sat down on the
steps of the sundial, where Marjory had sat so often, and turned over
all her plans in her mind with a satisfaction which it would be
difficult to describe in words. Nineteen years must elapse before Tommy
should be of age. Nineteen years! a lifetime; and during that time there
seemed no reason why she should not be virtual mistress of the place. To
be sure such a thing was possible as that she should marry; but Verna
knew herself well enough to feel that she could trust herself, and would
do nothing contrary to her own interests. If some one should by chance
turn up with an estate and house equal to Pitcomlie, who had sense
enough to see what an admirable mistress she would make for it, why
then, indeed, marriage might be attractive, and an improvement upon
present circumstances; but without an inducement of this kind, Verna
felt herself to be safe. What happy visions floated through her brain as
she sat on the steps of the sundial, and looked at the house which was
to be her kingdom! What a thing it is to come suddenly from poverty and
obscurity into wealth, and ease, and honour, and glory! Mr. Bassett out
in Calcutta was not badly off, but he had brought up his daughters very
economically, and he had not concealed his desire to get rid of them as
soon as possible. Verna had thwarted and provoked her father by not
marrying. He had sworn it was her fault, though she knew it was not her
fault. Surely he could not wish nor expect her to marry a subaltern in a
line regiment, which was all the Fates had sent in her way? But still
he had been dissatisfied, warmly asserting that the business of girls
who came to India was to marry--well, if they could, but anyhow to
marry--a view of the case which disgusted his daughter; and there were
complications about a second half-caste family of young Bassetts which
made her very glad to escape from her father's paternal care. After all
the storms that had surrounded her existence, and all the shabbiness of
her beginning, and fear of future shabbiness in store, it may be
imagined what it was to Verna when her ship suddenly sailed into this
bay of plenty. She disliked cold winds generally, but the cold wind
to-day, though it blew from the east, did not affect her as she sat on
the base of the sundial and contemplated her empire. Not without a
struggle had that empire been attained. She had almost despaired when
she saw how her sister in the strength of her folly, had put to flight
the Heriots, and emptied the house; but still she had been patient and
bided her time, and that time had come at last.
Short-sighted young woman! She did not perceive, till she had put up her
eyeglass, that Johnnie Hepburn was leading Mrs. Charles out from the
open window to take the air upon the cliff. When she did see it, she
congratulated herself only on having found some one to amuse Matty--for
she had no eyeglass to remedy that short-sightedness so far as the
future is concerned, which is common to the human race.
Quite late in the same afternoon, when it was dark, and Miss Jean's
house was pervaded with fragrant odours of dinner, young Hepburn came
in much out of breath, having walked very fast from Pitcomlie to fulfil
his commission. He brought Marjory the books she had sent him for, with
an excess of apologies for his delay, which, had she cared much about
it, would certainly have enlightened her. He had been detained in the
most remarkable ways, kept back by one thing after another. And he had
found Mrs. Charles very poorly, and her sister quite anxious about her.
"I am afraid she is very delicate," he said, sitting in the dark in Miss
Jean's drawing-room, where, as the family were nearly ready for dinner,
the candles had not yet been lighted. There was a glow of ruddy
firelight just where Miss Jean herself was sitting, but all the rest
were in shadow. And from somewhere in the room there came a "humph!"
which confused the young man; however, it could not be Marjory who
uttered that exclamation.
"I am sorry if she is ill," said Marjory immediately after; and then
there was a pause, which Hepburn felt embarrassing. He wanted very much
to say something which would be mediating and conciliatory, but the
atmosphere certainly was against him; it was repelling and chilly. Women
certainly do not understand women, he said in his heart; both so
charming! what a thing that it is impossible to bring them together! and
then he cleared his voice and tried again.
"I am afraid she is not accustomed to our kind of life," he said. "India
is so different. Old Fleming has left, and the housekeeper is leaving,
and they don't know what to do. I promised to speak to Miss Jean--"
"Speak to anybody else, Johnnie, my man, before me!" said Miss Jean,
peremptorily; "I've seen the young leddy, and I was not struck with her.
She's bonnie enough, I allow, to please a silly lad; but she's not of
the kind for me."
This was a very offensive speech to the amiable peacemaker. In the first
place, of itself, that "Johnnie" made an end of him from the beginning.
Of all names to apply to an aspiring young man intending to assume an
elevated position, and feeling himself a person of influence, it is,
perhaps, the cruellest title. Marjory smiled in spite of herself,
protected by the darkness; and Mr. Charles--for he it was who made up
the party, repeated that "humph!" which had broken in so disagreeably
before.
"Don't sit in the corner and hum, hum, like that!" said Miss Jean
promptly; "if you have a cold, Charlie, go to your bed, and be taken
care of; but I cannot bide a hoasting man. We're all in a hum, hum sort
of way, Johnnie Hepburn. Go away quick and change your clothes, and come
back to your dinner; we'll be more amiable then; but come quick, for the
fish will spoil; and Jess's temper is none of the best. Lord preserve us
all!" said Miss Jean, turning upon her companions with her hand
uplifted, when he was gone. "That woman's turned the laddie's head, the
first time he's seen her! Now that's the old-fashioned way that used to
be in my day; and I respect the lad!"
"You ought to respect the lady," said Marjory. She was amused; but yet
not altogether amused. Johnnie Hepburn, for whom in himself she had a
sort of elderly sisterly regard, had been her slave since ever she could
remember. He had teased Marjory, and been very troublesome to her on
many occasions; but he had worshipped her at all times, never thinking
of any other woman. Miss Heriot was very much inclined to laugh at his
championship of Mrs. Charles; but her amusement was mingled with a
surprise which, perhaps, was not altogether agreeable. She had seldom
been more startled; and when he came back to dinner, and the lamplight
showed his youthful countenance considerably flushed with haste, or
emotion of some kind, the wonder grew. The half-pique of which she was
conscious, and which amused her too in its way, made Marjory somewhat
satirical. "So you found Mrs. Charles very nice?" she said, when they
were at table, looking up with a twinkle of laughter, which had been
long absent from them, in her eyes.
"Nice?" said Hepburn, with hesitation. "Well, I do not know if that is
the word I would use. It is touching to see a woman in her
circumstances, so young and so----. She is very delicate, I think."
"She is very pretty, I think!" Marjory said, laughing.
Hepburn could not tell how it was that the laugh sounded so much less
pleasant to him than ordinary. Was she laughing at him? She had done so
before now, and he had only worshipped her the more. But now he had just
come from the spectacle of grief, borne in a becoming manner, and it
seemed almost wrong of Marjory to be able to laugh; it disturbed his
ideal. He took care to say as little as possible about Mrs. Charles for
the rest of the evening, but still he did manage to intimate that he
thought Marjory had not, perhaps, quite understood that delicate spirit.
And Marjory replied that it was quite possible, but laughed again. Bell,
the maid, was rather of Mr. Hepburn's opinion--that Marjory's capacity
for laughter showed itself too soon.
"If it had been but the auld gentleman, indeed!" said Bell; "but three
deaths, one after anither!" and Jess in the kitchen shook her head also,
and said Miss Marjory had aye thought too little of appearances. They
all kept a very close watch upon her, to make sure that she mourned
enough, and not too much. Resignation is an excellent thing, and always
to be encouraged; but resignation never was known to do more than smile.
And Marjory, I do not quite know why, wrote to Fanshawe that evening.
She had meant to write to him some day or other; but it is possible that
Johnnie Hepburn's desertion (though she had never made any account of
Johnnie Hepburn), quickened her proceedings. She wrote him a most
matter-of-fact little note, filling one page only of a sheet of note
paper--without a word in it that would bear two meanings, or, indeed,
possessed any meaning at all to speak of.
"This will put a stop to any further nonsense," she said to herself, as
she wrote his address at his club--and she did this with much decision
and promptitude. She was going with her uncle in a few days to St.
Andrews; she was about cutting off all the threads that bound her to her
old life. This was a bit of her old life, though it occupied the very
last chapter. Fanshawe too, perhaps, might come back to Pitcomlie, and
might think that she had not "understood" its new mistress. Marjory was
about to begin a different kind of existence; she snapt this thread
without, she thought, caring much about it; but it was better, certainly
better, that it should come to an end.
CHAPTER V.
The house which Mr. Charles Heriot had taken in St. Andrews was one of
the oldest in that old town. The rooms were somewhat low and the windows
small, and its aspect outside was, perhaps, just a little prison-like
and closed up. You entered by a little door in the wall, which seemed
made for clandestine stealing out and in, for ladies veiled and muffled,
and gallant gentlemen disguised in the cloaks of romance. This small and
jealous entrance, however, admitted the visitor into an old court all
bowery on one side with jasmine and roses, and affording on the other a
pleasant peep of a velvet lawn and old-fashioned garden. The third side
of the square was filled up by the old house itself, upon which the
sculptured arms of an old Fife family shone, over the door. This door
was approached by high outside steps, under the shade of which appeared
a lower door, which showed a red-tiled passage traversing the house, and
another gleam of light and garden greenness at the other end. The
sitting-rooms of the house were thus raised to a considerable height,
and looked out from their small and deep-set windows on the ruins of the
Cathedral and the blue sea beyond. Never were ruins more complete in
their sunny annihilation of the past than the ruins of St. Andrews.
They have a sort of typical character for the students of Scottish
history. Here the noble, rich, and splendid Middle Ages, which have
conferred upon other nations their finest monuments and recollections,
lie buried, as it were, in utter effacement, not scorned any longer--on
the contrary, reverently preserved and taken care of--but blotted out
from all possibility of use, and even from all meaning. But yet there is
one monument of the past which still stands fast and sure as ever, the
old homely, inarticulate tower of St. Regulus, belonging to a past which
has no voice, a dark world which leaves everything to the fancy, and
which has stood there through all changes for centuries, appealing by
very absence of suggestiveness to that profound imagination which lies
at the bottom of the Scottish character. The graceful clustered piers,
the lovely decorated windows, the lordly breadth and majesty of aisle
and nave, are too suggestive for that reticent and deep-seated faculty;
but against the mysterious simplicity of that tower, which discloses
nothing, no sacrilegious hand has ever been raised. It stands there in
primitive gravity, plainness, lack of grace, as it might have stood in
those days when the "pure Culdee, was Albyn's earliest priest of God;"
flattering the mind of the nation with a subtle sense of its antiquity,
consistency, unity in all ages. These reflections, however, are ours,
and not those of Marjory Hay-Heriot, as she stood at the narrow window
of her new dwelling-place, and looked out upon the same sea which washed
her native headland. Her eye sought that first, as is natural to the
eyes of those who have been born upon its margin. Over the old ruins
she looked to the older, everlasting thing, which is never antiquated,
but keeps its youth continually. She could hear the sea dashing over the
pier, and see how it rose, marking with a white line of surf the sweep
of the bay beyond. That was enough to satisfy Marjory, even though the
intermediate foreground was filled up by ruins and graves. Nature is
always consolatory; but Art not always, not even the pathetic art of
antiquity and decay.
In this old house the diminished family settled down, not without some
sense of comfort. Mr. Charles had his golf, and Milly all the fresh
delights of the Links and the sands, the shops and the streets, all of
which were sweet to her unsophisticated intelligence. She thought the
shops very fine indeed, and liked nothing so much as to go with her
sister to buy a ribbon or a handkerchief; and the Links, with the
flutter of gay colours about, the red-coats scattered here and there
among the groups of golfers, the dresses of the ladies in their sacred
corner, or fluttering about the outskirts of the ground devoted to the
graver game, dazzled little Milly as with the pageant of an endless
theatre, the thing most glorious to her eyes of anything on earth. Far
be it from me to attempt to describe the ancient and royal game of golf.
How shall a feeble feminine hand attempt to depict its delights and
triumphs? St. Andrews is the metropolis of this--let us not call it
game, but science. Here its professionals congregate, and its amateurs
are happy. Twice round the Links in a day is the whole duty of man; and
one round maintains him in that decent condition of moral
respectability, falling short of excellence, but above mediocrity, which
is in some respects a more comfortable state than that of supreme
excellence itself. Mr. Charles fell into this pleasant duty the very
first day of his arrival. He was one of the oldest members of that club
which has seated itself at the entrance of the Links, like a watchful
mother, with bow-windows from which it contemplates benignantly all the
out-going and in-coming groups, and tables at which matches are made up,
and stories told of the prowess of Tom Morris and Bob Kirk, and how the
General halved a game with the Captain, and how Mr. Innesmackie gave Dr.
Boothby an odd a hole, and beat him. In these pieces of news everybody
is as much, nay more, deeply interested than in all the affairs of the
State. Mr. Charles went down to the club on the evening of his arrival.
He was a little doubtful for the first half-hour whether, in his
melancholy circumstances, after "three deaths in the family," it would
be decorous for him to play; but these scruples were soon overruled.
"If there was anything fast or dissipated about it," said the Reverend
Mr. Morrison, of St. Rule's, a member of the family which had had its
blood vitiated by the introduction of the whaling captain, "I could
understand your hesitation; but I play my game every day of my life,
without its ever interfering with my duties as a parish Minister; and
your good brother, poor Pitcomlie, is the last man in the world that
would have thought of such a thing. No, no, my dear Sir; play your
game, and be thankful to Providence, that gives us such a wholesome and
innocent amusement. It's just one of our many privileges," said piously
the excellent divine.
"That's true," said Mr. Charles, still a little doubtfully, "but if it
could be supposed for a moment to show any want, on my part, of
respect----"
"Nonsense, nonsense, Heriot; nonsense, man," said Major Borthwick (there
is a great collection of heroes on half-pay at St. Andrews.) "We cannot
turn ourselves into tombstones, however willing we may be. I had a
foursome all settled for to-morrow with old Tom and another professional
against General Maclasher and myself. The General is suddenly called to
Edinburgh on some business about his son, who is going out to Bombay by
the next mail, and the match will be spoilt. I was making up my mind to
send round and tell Tom; but you're just about as strong as the General,
as good and no more. You'll come in, in his place? You would not, I am
sure, fail an old friend."
"I would not like to do that, certainly," said Mr. Charles, "if you are
sure you can find nobody better?"
"Have I time?" said the valiant Major. "It's ten o'clock, and by eleven
to-morrow we ought to start--unless you would like me to stay up all
night?"
"No, no, certainly not; if it's a real service to you," said Mr.
Charles; and thus he was "led into it," as he said, to the relief of his
conscience, and great satisfaction generally of his being. Shut out
from his papers and collections at Pitcomlie, golf gave him new life, as
indeed it seems to do to many personages whom the reader may see on that
busy stretch of seaside grass, should he ever travel to St. Andrews. I
dare not go further into details, neither dare I tell very much about
the life of this lively sober place, which is the oldest metropolis of
learning in Scotland as well as of golf. For did I enter into the
subject fully, not the most scrupulous care to avoid personalities could
save me from the reproach of being guilty of them. Did I place an
"atomy" in the chair filled by a certain Jove-like presence, I should
still be believed to be putting the Principal in a book; and did I turn
the gallantest of ancient gentlemen into an Orson, I should still be
supposed guilty of sketching the Lord of the Manor. Far from me be such
impertinencies. If you wish to become acquainted with the St. Andrews of
social life, dear reader, go there and see for yourself.
As for Marjory, she was not permitted to sit in loneliness by her deep
window, looking out upon the little homely pier and great magnificent
sea, over the foreground of the ruins. Lady Castlemount called on the
first practicable day, and so did all the ladies with territorial
designations in the neighbourhood, such as Mrs. Haigh, of Highbarns;
Lady Walker, of Berbo; Mrs. Home, of Strath, and many more--not to speak
of the learned matrons of the University, and all in St. Andrews' town
that was worthy of presenting itself to Miss Heriot, of Pitcomlie.
Everybody came who was anybody; and if Marjory could have been
persuaded, like her uncle, that the mild form of golf practised by
ladies was necessary to her health and comfort, abundant means of
availing herself of the advantage of the Ladies' Links would have been
presented to her. But Marjory was not inclined towards 'the Ladies'
Links. She preferred the bold cliff at the old castle, the long sweep of
the East Sands and the downs beyond. The East coast has never been, so
far as we are aware, distinguished for beauty or picturesque qualities,
but the bold line of those cliffs, bound at their feet by black ribs of
half-visible reefs, iron corrugations of nature running far out, low and
dangerous, into the sea--but bordered above high-water mark by the
softest verdure of fine grass, mossy and velvety, mantling every height
and hollow--has a homely yet wild and free beauty of its own, which,
with all the endless varieties of colour upon the broad sea and broader
heavens, makes up a scene worthy alike of painter and of poet. Here and
there the rocks which line the dangerous coast rise into weird masses,
like towers of defence. One of these, the Maiden's Rock, has actually
taken the form of a medival tower; further on is a more fantastic
erection, where time and water have worn the living stone into a huge
resemblance of a spindle. This quaint mass towers over a bay full of
broken rocks, among and over which the German Ocean dashes its stormy
surf by times--while at other times it kisses softly, with many a
twinkle of light and sheen of reflection, the stern stone which it has
been undermining for ages, with apparently so little effect. The Spindle
Rock was the favourite end of Marjory's pilgrimage. The most sensitive
organizations do not always fall sick after those great mental
whirlwinds of grief and excitement which are the milestones of our
lives. But there comes to them a moment when quiet and repose are
necessary, when the mind lies still like a hushed child, refusing to
think more or suffer more, opening itself to some certain fashion of
natural sound and sight, and getting healing from that pause of all
efforts or processes of its own. Marjory, unknowing, adopted this
fashion of cure. She walked out to the Spindle (a long way) and would
sit there alone day by day among the rocks, gazing half consciously over
the broad level surface of the familiar sea, now and then crisped by
soft winds, and overarched by the broad vault of sky, which softened
down in endless variations of blues and greens, widening and fading to
the horizon line, where sea and sky met in colourless brightness. The
water lapped softly among the rocks, which here and there rose like
pinnacles of some fantastic architecture over the brown uneven masses
below. Among these rocks there were miniature oceans, crystal sea-pools
lined with softest green sea-weed like a nest, where some cunning crab
lived secure, or where those bloodless, boneless things, which are half
animal and half plant, spread out their antenn, pink, or creamy white,
or silver green, upon the water. The shining of the sea, the
ever-consolatory sound of its murmurous voice upon the rocks, the
occasional gliding past of a heavy fishing-boat with high brown sail,
or the white butterfly wing of a rare pleasure-yacht, was enough to give
occupation to the fatigued mind, which found healing in every hum of
well-known sound, in every familiar motion of that native sea. Hush!
said the soft long rustle of the water searching into every corner,
rising and falling like the breath of some watcher. Hush! said the soft
wind with a musical murmur about the lofty rocks; hush! said the dreamy
whirr of insect life upon the grass beyond. The sun shone warm, and
little flecks of white clouds floated across the sky with the wind as
the scattered sails did below. Soft motion, sound, murmur of life
filling the whole vast sphere--nothing that seemed like ending, dying,
sorrow. Marjory, who loved the sea like one to the manner born, accepted
this tranquil hush without remarking how fatal were its other voices,
and opened herself to the sunshine and had her wounds slowly healed.
One day, however, going a little further than the Spindle, she found
herself in front of a very homely thatched cottage, one of those odd
little green-brown erections so extremely objectionable in a sanitary
point of view, yet so satisfactory to the eye, which grow out of
Scottish soil wherever improvement has not banished them, like the
creation of nature. The walls were built of rough stone covered with the
mosses of many years. The thatch was patched and ancient, bright bits of
straw recently put in peeping out from the dark surface. The cottage
consisted of a "but and a ben," no more, that is a room on each side of
the low and narrow doorway--with one small window in each, facing to the
sea, and a rude bit of so-called garden, surrounded by a little rough
wooden paling enclosing the door. This cottage lay in a hollow between
two cliffs, and was sheltered from the wind on each side; the short rich
grass, like a warm cloak thrown over the sunny nook, mantled up to the
very walls; and the cottage had all the sunshine, and as little of the
chill as was possible. Marjory had vaguely noticed a figure seated near
the door for two or three days before she approached it, and a certain
curiosity had risen in her mind--nay, a something more than curiosity, a
sympathetic feeling, that the other unknown woman was like herself
resting after some convulsion of nature, and seeking restoration from
the calm, and the sunshine, and the salt sea. This feeling grew to a
strength which surprised her, when she saw the same figure languidly
seated on the same spot the second day; and on the third some natural
affinity drew the two together.
The girl at the cottage-door was younger than Marjory--very young, with
fair hair folded back from a pale little face, and knotted loosely
behind, as used to be the custom years ago. A rusty black gown, with
long close sleeves down to her slight wrists, made in the plainest
fashion, threw out, into still further relief, the colourless face and
locks, out of which illness seemed to have driven the tone of colour
which had enlivened their paleness. There were little rings of pale gold
upon her white temples, but the mass of her hair had lost its
brightness. Her face was one of those pathetic faces which it is
difficult to realize in the glow of happiness. Her eyes were grey,
large, and lucid, with that liquid softened light which is like
moonlight in a face. Her features were delicate and worn, the nostrils
somewhat pinched with suffering, the very lips pale. Intense capacity
for pain was in the face, and at the same time a quiet patience and
power of suffering. She met the eye of the stranger who looked at her
sympathetically, with a faint but friendly smile, and gave her the usual
country salutation, "It's a fine day," with a softness of tone which
touched Marjory, she could scarcely tell how. It was Marjory who made
the first advance; but the response was to her look, rather than to
anything she said. The girl did not rise and curtsey, as an English girl
of similar condition would most likely have done to greet the lady. But
in her gentle attempt at acquaintance, and the soft little evanescent
smile, with which it was accompanied, there was an appeal which only a
hard heart could have resisted; and Marjory had a rural lady's habit of
constant intercourse with her social inferiors.
"Yes," she said, "the weather is very fine for this time of the year.
(It was June, but in Scotland it is difficult to calculate upon the
weather so early in the summer). But I am afraid you are ill. Do you
live always here?"
"Ay, mem, I'm not well," said the girl. "They have brought me here for
change. It pleases them; and I like to hear the sound of the sea--not
that it will do me any good. I am too far gone for that."
"You must not think so," said Marjory, with that instinctive denial of
the plainest fact, which is human nature's first idea in the presence of
approaching death. "You are very young, and the sea always does good.
Will you tell me what is the matter?"
The girl smiled again. "It's nothing," she said, "and everything--it's a
failing; some doctors say it's decline--but it's no decline, it's just a
failing. I'm thinking the chief thing is that I'm weary, weary of this
life, and I would like to go--"
"But that is wrong," said Marjory, shocked. "At your age it is
unnatural. You ought to resist such a feeling."
"What for?" said the girl, very gently. "They all say that; but I've
gone over my Bible from end to end, and there is nothing against it.
You're no to think I would do myself harm, for that would be a sin and a
shame to them that's left behind. But Paul was wiser, far wiser than me,
and he says, 'that to depart is better.'"
"To be with Christ," said Marjory, unconsciously correcting, and feeling
somehow a certain consolation in the fact, that it was not Paul's
saintly longing, but only human weariness that spoke.
"I'm meaning that," said the girl, gently; and then with a sadder tone,
"and to make sure that they are safe and well that have gone before."
These words brought Marjory to a pause. The upraised face beside her,
with those lucid eyes turned to the sky, seemed to be penetrating that
blue veil with an anxiety only tempered by weakness. Marjory looked at
her till tears came into her own eyes.
"Don't you think we may trust God far that?" she said. "You have
lost--friends?"
"And you are in black, too," said the girl, quickly, "and I'm sure you
sit about the rocks, as if you had no heart. Oh, I'm ready to trust God!
but if you heard how our folk speak! and if one was taken suddenly--no
thinking, in the middle of his days--one that had never made any
profession, nor showed any concern about his soul--would you say then,
'Trust God?' That's the question I'm aye asking myself."
"I lost a brother so," cried Marjory, moved to open her heart, she could
not tell why.
"Ah!" The girl looked at her fixedly for a moment, and pressed her thin
hands together. The cry had burst from her lips like an outcry of fear
and pain.
"And I do trust God," Marjory resumed. "God saw all he meant, not only
what he did. Were you never misunderstood? We are better in our hearts
than we are in our deeds; but God never misunderstands."
"That's true," said the girl, clasping her hands again, "that's very
true. Oh, if you but kent what misunderstanding there is in this world?
and whiles them that are most fond of you; but as you say, mem, never
with God; that's a great comfort. Sometimes I think my heart will
break--"
"I am a stranger to you," said Marjory, "but I should like to help you
if I could. Is it anything you could confide to me?"
The girl's face, so calm in its sorrowfulness, grew agitated. She gave
one anxious look into Marjory's face. She cast her eyes around, watching
if anyone was visible. "No to-day, no to-day!" she exclaimed. "A
stranger--what could I say to a stranger? But I'm tired, tired, and the
wind is cold. I must go into the house--to-day."
She rose as if in terror, and stumbled in her weakness. "I will go
away," said Marjory, "do not let me drive you in-doors. I am going back
to St. Andrews--"
Then the girl turned, holding out her two thin hands; a little hectic
flush had come on either cheek. "I'm so weakly," she said, with a
pathetic smile; "no fit for anything; but, oh, you'll come again?"
CHAPTER VI.
The weather changed that evening, as was natural after three or four
heavenly days. The East coast is not rainy like the West; but the soft
continuous rain of the Western Highlands is scarcely so terrible as the
westerly haar, which wraps everything up in white wool, and blots out
sea and sky, and chokes the depressed wayfarer--not to speak of the
penetrating chill which even in June goes down into the marrow of your
bones, and makes the scrap of standing-ground, which is all that is left
you in the misty world, as lonely as an alp, and as dull as a fen. Even
the golfers at St. Andrews feel this miserable influence. When those
bright links are reduced to so many dark sepia blots, when the sky can
be expressed only by the same woeful colour, when the surf on the sands
seems to send up a blinding woolly steam over the faint and limp yellow
of the cliffs; when his very red coat hangs limp and damp upon the
hero's back, who goes out, notwithstanding the weather, and the best
"driver" on the links cannot get his ball across the burn--then the very
golfer is discouraged. But the population is accustomed to the
infliction, and the matches still go on, and new fights are arranged in
the club; and in the town, business and amusement proceed as usual, and
the good people walk about the streets, and pay each other visits to
keep their hearts from sinking. It is scarcely possible, however, though
your heart may be stout, and your chest sound, to walk out to the
Spindle in an easterly haar; so that Marjory did not see the new
acquaintance who had interested her so deeply for some days. She saw,
however, a sight which interested her almost as much, though in a
different way--the young woman who had visited Pitcomlie the evening
before her father's funeral, and whom she had afterwards met at the
family grave. It was in the chief street of St. Andrews that this
meeting took place--a broad and handsome street, lined with old houses
at the lower end, and terminating at the upper in an old gateway, one of
the few perfect relics of the past that remain among so many ruins.
Marjory was walking with little Milly, as usual, by her side, pressing
into her very steps--her golden hair asserting itself as a point of
colour, even in the persistent greyness of the street and the mist of
the atmosphere.
"May, May!" Milly was saying; "there is a lady bowing to you from the
carriage-window yonder; there is a gentleman taking off his hat. Why
don't you pay any attention? If it was me, you would say it was not
manners."
"Come in and look for a book at Mrs. Fletcher's," said Marjory, by way
of repelling this attack. Milly was already a prodigious novel-reader,
and instantly caught at the bait. Her sister stood at the door of the
shop, while the little girl ran in eager to survey the many antiquated
volumes, and the few fresh ones which form the circulating library of a
country town. Of the many passers-by who went ghost-like through the
mist, a great many knew and saluted Miss Heriot, of Pitcomlie; but it
was on one who did not salute her that Marjory's attention was fixed.
The dress was precisely the same as that of half the other women moving
about the town, but yet the little brown hat and cotton gown suddenly
grew individual and remarkable, as Marjory recognized the wearer. She
was walking briskly along, with the air of one profoundly occupied,
looking neither to the right hand nor to the left. Suddenly she raised
her head as she passed in front of the shop door where Marjory stood,
and their eyes met. The young woman grew suddenly red; she gave Miss
Heriot a quick, defiant look, and would have passed on without any
recognition. Marjory was startled and excited, but she did not lose her
presence of mind; she made a step out from the door. "Surely you know
me," she said quietly. The young woman paused, as if perforce, but held
her ground.
"Yes, Miss Heriot, I know you very well; you've spoken to me twice
before--when I was not wanting," she added doggedly, "to speak to you."
Marjory had some difficulty in keeping her temper, for this persistent
resistance was provoking, to say the least. She said with some haste:
"There can be very little reason why I should insist upon speaking to
you."
"I ken none, Miss Heriot."
"Well!" said Marjory, with an impatient sigh, "neither do I. You know, I
am sure, a great deal more than I do. But remember--you may be sorry
some day for having refused to tell me what you wanted at my father's
house; and by that time it may be too late."
She turned away, disturbed vaguely, as she had always been, by the
appearance of this strange woman; but her withdrawal seemed to affect
the other more than her questions had done. Before Marjory had
re-entered the shop, the stranger spoke in a hesitating tone: "Miss
Heriot, I am meaning no harm to you; there is, may be, something that I
may come and tell you--that concerns you and yours, as well as me and
mine; but I canna do it now. I thought you were artful and proud, but
now I think you're true. Maybe there is nothing in it; if there is, I
will tell you the first. But I will say nothing till I hear the truth."
"What truth? Then tell me your name, at least!" cried Marjory, her heart
beginning to beat loud with wonder and excitement.
"No, Miss Heriot, I'll no tell you my name."
"Do you know you are very rude, very uncivil?" cried Marjory, stepping
back with a flush on her face.
"Maybe!" said the other, recovering her self-possession, which had been
momentarily impaired. "I'm no a good judge what's civil and what is
uncivil; but I'll no tell you my name--nor anything about me; unless it
is true."
And with these words the stranger walked away, not pausing to hear what
Marjory had to say. This meeting had a painful effect upon her. She
pondered over it for the next few nights and days, wondering, with a
bewildered sense that her wonder was vain, what it could mean. If what
was true? or what did it, what could it matter to the Heriots whether
something known to this girl was true or not? She tried to scorn it, as
some vulgar bugbear, probably concerning something quite unimportant;
but she could not succeed. What was it? she kept saying to herself. She
could not mention it to her uncle; she could not confide anything so
serious to little Milly. What could it be? And the more a mystery of
this kind, however petty, is kept to its original possessor, the more it
vexes the mind, and becomes a daily annoyance. If Fanshawe had but been
there! Him she could have consulted; with him she could have talked it
over, and wondered aloud, and received strength from the wonderings of
another. Probably between them, they might have come to some reasonable
conclusion, to some explanation of the mystery. She was almost
half-tempted to write to him, as the only person who knew about
Isabell's letter, the only one who could understand what she meant.
Almost, but not quite; a hundred reasons of womanly reluctance, shyness,
disinclination to avow her dependence on the opinion of another, came in
to prevent the imprudence; but yet it was something strange in Marjory's
history, something new in her mind, that such an idea should have arisen
in her. She quenched it with a certain shame.
And oddly enough, one of these days, Mr. Charles brought home a friend
with him to dinner, who knew Fanshawe. I do not pretend to disclose
exactly the sentiments which moved Mr. Charles. Miss Jean's advice had
never quite gone out of his mind. He was of the kind of man to whom an
injunction, of whatever character, carries weight, and who feels that
when a charge of any sort is laid upon him, whether accepted or not, it
becomes a duty, and must be fulfilled. His good sense and his feeling of
propriety struggled vainly against the prejudice of doing what he had
been told. Instinctively, he looked about the links for men who were
worthy of being introduced to Marjory. He made a little mental cross
against the names of those who were specially endowed by any of the
gifts of Providence, who were handsome, or wealthy, or well-spoken of.
"Would So-and-So please her, I wonder?" the old man said to himself,
with a comical terror of the older woman, who had given him this
commission; and with a faltering heart he had obeyed her behest, and
under the most transparent pretence of accidentalness, had already taken
home with him two or three of the best men he could find. On such
occasions, Mr. Charles did his best to look perfectly innocent and at
his ease. He made in private many and voluble apologies to Marjory.
"I sometimes feel the want of a little conversation, my dear. Not but
what I am perfectly happy in you, that are a far better talker than most
folk. But a little change, you know; and it is good for you, too,
Marjory. You may think not, and even you may not care for it at the
moment; but depend upon it, it is good for you. It's a break upon the
monotony. It prevents you from falling out of the way of society. And I
know you are too good a housekeeper, May, ever to be taken unawares in
respect of the dinner."
"You mean you are too particular about good eating to make it possible,"
said Marjory, smiling. "But, Uncle Charles, of course you must see your
friends when you please. You do not require to make excuses to me."
"It is not that, not quite that, my dear," said Mr. Charles, perplexed,
not knowing how to avow that he would gladly have done without those
friends; and the same little epilogue had been performed several times
without the least apparent effect produced either upon Marjory or the
eligible persons thus brought to see her. Marjory, perhaps, was somewhat
disposed to retreat into her mourning on these occasions. She was
perfectly civil and friendly to her uncle's friends; but she kept them
in that category, and never allowed them to become her own; and as Miss
Jean had made the express condition that Mr. Charles was to interfere
only so far as the first step was concerned, the poor man was still more
confused and perplexed by the utter failure of his expedient. He had no
head for such delicate negotiations; he never asked the same person a
second time, nor took any steps to promote intimacy. That was not in his
instructions. However, for once he did succeed in rousing Marjory to
energy at last. The guest who knew Fanshawe was a Scotch squire, who
had been a friend of Tom's, and whom Marjory, too, had known in former
days. There were reasons for inviting him of a perfectly feasible
character, and which required no apologies from Mr. Charles.
"I've brought Walter Seton to see you; we'll give him some dinner," he
said, as he knocked at the door of Marjory's dressing-room, without
thinking it necessary to apologize; and Marjory was more open, more
friendly than usual to the old friend. It was not till after dinner that
the conversation took place which moved her out of her friendly calm.
Milly had come in, as the fashion of the house was, and taken her place
by her sister's side. It had been the old fashion in the days when Milly
was the light of her father's eyes. The little girl's chair was drawn as
close to Marjory's as the conditions of chairs would permit. She stole
her hand into her sister's under the table. Milly, indeed, had no
independent being when Marjory was by. She was a bloom growing on the
stem of the elder flower.
"I hear you had Fanshawe at Pitcomlie," said Mr. Seton, with complacent
calmness, and without a suspicion that he was about to make himself
intensely disagreeable. "Is he any steadier than he was, I wonder? You
had him for some time at Pitcomlie? Somebody told me he was on a long
visit."
"Ah, yes. We had him for a week or two. Is he not steady, then?" asked
Mr. Charles.
Marjory had pricked up her ears, and so did little Milly, to whom
Fanshawe was an example of everything admirable in man.
"Well," said the other, shrugging his shoulders, "I know nothing bad of
him; but he's a sad unsettled fellow; amiable, and all that, but, I
fear, a good-for-nothing--a ne'er-do-well, as we say in Scotland. It is
odd how many agreeable men belong to that species. For he's a nice
fellow, a pleasant fellow. Didn't you think so, Miss Heriot? All ladies
do."
"He was good for a great deal when he was at Pitcomlie," said Marjory,
feeling her cheek flush in spite of herself. "A kinder friend never
appeared in a melancholy house."
"He was all that--all that," said Mr. Charles, hastily.
"That is exactly what I should have expected to hear," said Seton. "You
have hit off his character in a word. Ready to do anything for anybody;
always serviceable; good for other people's concerns, but letting his
own, you know, go to the dogs. When I said good-for-nothing, I ought to
have said good for everybody but himself."
"That's a fatal kind of amiability," said Mr. Charles, falling into this
depreciatory estimate with a readiness which disgusted the two feminine
partizans, to whom it was impossible to see their friend assailed
without striking a blow in his defence. "I have known many men like
that, nobody's enemy but their own--"
"I think you would speak a little more warmly, Uncle Charles," said
Marjory, with a burst of which she was herself ashamed, "if you
remembered all that Mr. Fanshawe did for us. Amiability does not make a
man do what he did. Have you forgotten poor Tom's bedside? and all his
kindness to my father, and after--I beg your pardon; it is bad taste to
introduce our private matters. But, Mr. Seton, I should be a wretch if I
allowed anyone to speak disparagingly of Mr. Fanshawe without telling
what I know."
"Yes, yes; I quite understand," said Seton, with a suppressed smile.
"Ladies always give him that character. He is the most serviceable
fellow. But I speak of his own concerns; he is a very unsatisfactory man
to have anything to do with in business, for example. He is as ignorant
as a woman--begging your pardon again, Miss Heriot. He is a nice fellow,
but thoroughly unsatisfactory; as unsettled as a man can be; a complete
rover, here to-day and gone to-morrow. I like him very much myself. I
don't know any pleasanter companion; but that's his character. Socially,
of course, it doesn't matter; but it's a great pity for himself."
"No doubt about that," said Mr. Charles; "a great pity. What are his
means, now? That would be a kind of a way of judging."
"I do not see that we are the people who ought to judge him," said
Marjory, rising from the table; while little Milly, with all her golden
locks on end, holding by her sister's dress, and turning looks of fire
and flame upon the calumniator, rose too, in a flush of childish fury.
"Oh! how I would have liked to have done something to him!" cried Milly,
as soon as they had got to the safe shelter of the drawing-room. "If I
had been a man, I would have fought him, May! Our Mr. Fanshawe, that is
good for everything! I hope Uncle Charles will never, never as long as I
live, bring that man here again!"
"I hope so, too, Milly," said Marjory, breathing quick in her suppressed
excitement; and she seated herself at the deep window overlooking the
Cathedral ruins and the sea beyond, with her arm round her little
sister. Milly's hair spread over their black dresses like sprinkled
gold; Milly's little heart beat against the bosom in which another heart
was beating still more warmly; with indignation--only with indignation,
and generous resistance to wrong.
It was the longest day of the year. What lingering silvery light, what
soft tints of pale celestial colour, what opal radiance of enchanted
hours that are neither day nor night, is involved in that description! I
do not know what these evenings may be in the region of the midnight
sun; but they cannot possess such mystic, poetic light as do the long
Summer nights in Scotland, too poetic for any weird glory of unnatural
shining. The young woman and the child sat enshrined in this visionary
radiance long after Milly ought (I allow) to have been in bed. Mr. Seton
had an engagement at the Club, and did not, fortunately, return to the
drawing-room. His presence would not have been appreciated there.
CHAPTER VII.
It was according to all the rules of that condition into which Marjory
was gliding unawares that next morning she should receive another letter
from Fanshawe, which, however, was not the second nor the third. The
incident had lost all its novelty, and become common enough in her
experience. And there could be little doubt that these letters conveyed
to her, with all the subtle difference which exists between a man's
self-accusations and the censures of another man, very much the same
tale which had been told by the visitor of last night. Fanshawe allowed
in so many words that he was good-for-nothing; he told her in covert
language, but still plain enough, that he had been roused by meeting her
into thoughts of, and dreams after, better things. But he did not tell
her what better thing he was doing, what attempt he was making to attain
a career worthy of a man. And probably had she been able to see him as
he was at that moment, dropped back into all his old habits, occupied
with his old busy round of idleness, and keeping up just enough of his
nobler discontent as found utterance in his letters to her, Marjory
would have felt with a pang that Seton was right and she herself wrong.
She had a vague uneasy feeling to this effect, even while she read the
unintentionally deceptive and skilful sentences by which he appealed to
her sympathy, and by which he secured that sympathy, notwithstanding the
sense of something unreal which floated vaguely over the surface as it
were, stopping her in the full course of interest and belief. She said
to herself uneasily, why does he not do something? or why, if he cannot
do anything, should he lament over it? Had he been silent, Marjory would
not have thought upon the subject; but Fanshawe, who knew no other means
by which to recommend himself to her, unconsciously followed Mr. Seton's
lead. He abased himself, hoping to be exalted. He mourned over his
uselessness, expecting her to receive these lamentations as virtue. And
Marjory indeed, though she faintly perceived a certain hollowness in the
lamentations, did accept them as such. She took a rapid survey of the
position, and asked herself, if it was all true, wherein he was inferior
to other men? Seton, who had accused him, how was he better? He had an
estate to look after, which gave him a certain anchor, and object in
life; "and I have no doubt he manages it very badly," Marjory said to
herself, with a certain spitefulness. And her uncle, for example, who
had given up Fanshawe's cause, and had shaken his head over the idea
that he was nobody's enemy but his own, of what practical use was his
life that he should shake his head at another man? Marjory grew hot upon
this subject in her private thoughts. The Pitcomlie papers, the
portfolios of prints, and the golf at St. Andrews! Did these serious
occupations give one man a right to erect himself in superiority as
fulfilling all the duties of life over another? Marjory walked down to
the Links in her fervour, and watched all the men going out for their
game. Some of them were hardworking men taking their relaxation; but a
great many of them were gentlemen living at home at ease, and
considering, as we have before said, that two rounds of the Links was
the whole duty of man. A meritorious individual who had won his game
before luncheon, came sailing up to her with satisfaction beaming from
every wrinkle. He had no sense of being a useless member of society; but
probably he would shake his head at Fanshawe, who played no golf, and
who could be, when occasion served, the truest, most self-denying of
friends. Nobody's enemy but his own! And whose enemies, then, were the
busy groups on the Links? extremely busy--at what? Such were Marjory's
bitter feminine thoughts--thoughts which probably would never have
crossed her mind had they not been provoked by injudicious criticism.
"I have not time to speak to you, May," said Mr. Charles, waving his
hand to her. "I am engaged for a foursome; and if I am late for dinner
you must not be surprised, for I am very busy to-day."
"Oh, very busy, I see," cried Marjory, "and most usefully employed,
uncle."
"Yes, my dear, there is nothing in the world so good for the health," he
said, hurrying off with his long legs, and a countenance of the utmost
importance and seriousness. And it was he who had said of Fanshawe that
he was nobody's enemy but his own!
Little Milly was golfing too, at the Ladies' Links, whither some
youthful companions had beguiled her from her constant clinging to her
sister's side. "But I'll come with you directly, May, if you want me,"
cried youthful Milly, ready to throw down her club at a moment's notice.
What a pretty sight it was!--groups of pretty girls (the girls are all
pretty in St. Andrews) in the picturesque dresses of the period, looped
up at every available corner, with bright flying ribbons,
bright-coloured petticoats, a patch-work of brilliant colours--and such
quantities of bright locks ruffled by the breeze, as might have set up a
hair-market on the spot--were scattered in knots of two or three over
the smooth slippery velvet of the grass. Across the burn on the other
side, were the darker groups of the men, relieved by, here and there, a
red coat. Yellow heaps of sand, upturned by the sea, which was little
seen but much heard, and great rough whin-bushes scattered about the
"bent," or rougher edge of the Links, with a background of blue hills,
and enough trees to swear by on one side--and on the other St. Andrews,
on its headland, the sun shining full upon it, upon its grey towers and
white houses, and the stretch of sea which filled in the landscape. The
prettiest scene! Marjory was half softened by it, yet turned away with a
certain scorn that did not belong to her nature. These were the people
who found Fanshawe a good-for-nothing, nobody's enemy but his own!
She made a long course to the Spindle after this, and I avow that it was
a long walk for a young lady alone; but then she was in a condition in
which our own thoughts are our best companions; and she liked the soft
silence, the long meditative walk, the murmur of the sea. The day was
fine, and shone with that pathetic brightness which a Scotch summer day
so often has after a storm--as if Nature made anxious amends to her
children for those frequent interruptions which she could not prevent.
The sea was full, washing up to the very foot of the grey fantastic
rock. Little blue wavelets, fairy curls of foam, crept about it, as if
trying to soften the silent giant. They came up in little child-like
rushes, as of glee irrepressible, to the very edge of the mossy grass;
and Marjory had not been long there before she perceived the girl in,
whom she had been so much interested, wrapped in a shawl, and seated in
her former place before the door of the cottage. An old woman, with the
old "mutch," bound with a black ribbon, which has almost fallen out of
use in Scotland, stood in the doorway. She had just placed a pillow to
support the sick girl, and was looking at her wistfully, with an evident
love, which had seriousness, and even severity, in it. Marjory went up
to her with some eagerness. She was welcomed with a smile from the girl,
who rose faltering in her pleasure. "Eh! but I'm glad to see you!" she
cried; then dropped into her chair, too weak to stand. She seemed to
Marjory to look even feebler than on the previous day.
"Good day!" said Marjory, addressing the old woman at the door; "I am
afraid she is very weak; has the storm harmed her? and will you let me
ask if she has the wine and strengthening food she requires? I beg your
pardon if I am taking a liberty."
Scotch cottagers are not always to be depended on in such particulars.
Marjory knew that she might be speaking to some one as proud as a
grand-duchess, though arrayed in an ancient mutch.
"I thank ye kindly, mem," said the old woman, "we need nothing; but it
was a kind thought. Na, she's wanting for nothing, nothing; except an
easy conscience, and the comfort of them that tell the truth."
"Poor child," said Marjory; "I am sure she tells the truth."
"And that I do!" said the girl. "Oh, leddy, you said God never
misunderstood; bless you for that; but whiles the best in this world do,
and the kindest--Oh, mother, dinna speak. This lady's heart speaks for
me; she does not blame me. Tell her nothing but what I tell her. And if
you would be real good and kind, mother dear, let me speak to her in
peace."
"I'll do that!" said the mother, with a movement of anger; but in
another moment she called Marjory aside with a sudden gesture, and
whispered to her. "This lass," she said, solemnly, "God help her; she'll
never be better; she's my youngest, and she dying before my very ein.
But she's dying with something on her conscience; she tells me one
story, and this horrible world believes another. She's taken a great
fancy to you. Oh, my bonnie leddy, take pity upon a poor family that's
heart-broken; bid her no go down to the grave with a lie in her right
hand. I'll forgive all the meesery and the shame if she'll tell the
truth."
Tears were glittering in the woman's eyes; tears which did not fall, but
moistened the eyelids with a painful dew--though the eyes were red, as
if they had wept much.
"If I were in your place I would believe her," said Marjory. "Did she
ever tell you lies before?"
"Never, never! never till now!" cried the mother; and two tears fell on
the apron which she raised to her eyes hastily; but she added: "She
never had any occasion; she never did a thing to be ashamed of--my poor,
poor bairn!--till now."
"I would believe her now," said Marjory, who thus suddenly found herself
involved in a family tragedy. The girl was looking uneasily towards her;
the mother shook her head.
"Oh, if I could!" she said; "but go to her, go to her, my bonny leddy;
and if you would speak a word!"
Marjory seated herself on the grass by the invalid's feet; she was
beginning to say something about the storm, and the interruption of her
walks, but the sick girl was too much interested in subjects more
important. She looked down upon the young lady with a sickening anxiety
in her pathetic eyes. "Did she say anything?--anything to make ye leave
me--anything to turn your heart?" she said, wistfully taking hold of
Marjory's dress.
"Nothing!" said Marjory. "She said you had something on your conscience.
My poor girl, I believe all you said to me; but if you could relieve
your mother by telling her anything you have not told her?"
"Oh! no, no!" cried the girl; "there is nothing I have not told her. It
is all true--as true as the Holy Gospel. I would bear shame if I
deserved it. I would na' shrink from my just recompense. I'm bearing it
now, and falsely, and it's killing me; but the truth, and that alone, I
will say."
Marjory looked up at her with a strong and yearning pity, which she
herself scarcely understood. It seemed to her that she would like to
take the matter in hand, and clear the truthfulness of this delicate
ailing creature, who looked so shadowy and worn, and pale. Whatever her
fault might be, it appeared hard to pursue her to the edge of the grave
with reproaches, as her mother seemed doing. She was young enough to be
forgiven, Marjory thought, almost whatever she had done; young enough to
be pardoned for maintaining some fiction of self-defence, whatever it
might be. So young--and yet so near, it seemed, to those gates of death
which shut upon everything, making an end of all pretences. "Poor
child!" Marjory said, unconsciously, as she looked at her. The sight of
such a creature dropping slowly, visibly into the grave at her age, was
enough to move a heart of stone, without any addition to the sadness of
the sight.
"I am twenty," said the girl; "you think me younger than I am; and I've
lived a long life, though I am not auld. I have had sad changes, hope
and fear, and then a bit blink that was bright, bright, and then
darkness, darkness, wherever the eye could see. It is hard enough to
bear that when your own folk stand by you; but when they are turned
against ye--and dinna believe ye--"
"Does no one stand by you?" asked Marjory.
"My sister," said the girl. "She's good, good, better than anyone I ever
knew. She has given up her place to be near me. She puts her trust in
me--which is a great strength when you have to face doubt. Oh, if I
could be sure I would live till it's all cleared up! But it would be
hard, hard, to die before--though I can do that too--if the Lord
will--But oh, seeing it's the triumph o' truth and right I'm
wanting--seeing it's no for mysel', for I must die sooner or later--do
you no think He's sure to grant it before I die?"
"I do not know what it is," said Marjory; and then feeling as if what
she said was unkind and cold, she added quickly, "I hope you will live
long, and see better days. You are so young--"
The girl shook her head. She held up her thin hand, interrupting the
words. "I have no wish for length of days," she said. "Many a time I've
wondered how it was that long life was made so much of in the very Bible
itsel'. But that was in the old days, before our Lord's time, when folks
knew little about it, or where they were going to. I mind, aye, a verse
of a poem that runs in my head,
"'The saints are dead, the martyrs dead,
And Mary, and our Lord, and I
Would follow with humility.'
that's bonnie. Are you fond of poetry?"
"Yes," said Marjory, in her surprise.
"You wonder to hear me say it? but we aye liked reading at home--though
maybe not the like of that--and there were many things that I tried to
learn."
"I see that you have had a very different education from most girls,"
said Marjory, with a certain buzzing and confusion of wonder in her
mind, which puzzled herself. Some curious broken lights seemed to
glimmer into her thoughts. She could not tell what they were, or what
they meant; but a sensation of pain came over her in the midst of her
wonder, pain for which she was quite unable to account.
"No--no that," said the girl. "I liked it for itself, and so I tried;
but oh, it's a' past now--a' past and ended. I read my Bible most. My
mother says the other books put things in my head. And oh, what wonders
and mysteries there are in the Bible, more than anything in the other
books."
"But your sister always trusts you, and is good to you?" said Marjory.
Her mind was disturbed, and her curiosity most warmly awakened. She
would gladly have put some leading question to procure further
information, but this seemed all that it was possible for her to say.
"Oh, ay, very good," cried the sufferer. And she wandered off into those
religious speculations, founded upon strong and child-like faith, yet
having the appearance of doubts and questionings, which are so familiar
to young and gentle souls chiefly occupied with the other world and its
concerns. Marjory sat and listened, and interposed now and then a word.
And thus a simple sad young soul unfolded itself before her, full of
deep wonder, and pain, and sorrow, recognizing God's hand in all the
events of earth, and longing for an explanation of them--as only the
truest faith can long. The poor girl thought herself wicked in some of
her questionings--she thought no one had ever entertained such theories
before. She poured forth all her chaos of pious difficulty upon
Marjory's ears, and it seemed to the hearer, who was so much more
accustomed to the world, that these doubts and difficulties were more
devout than anything she had ever heard in her life. As they thus sat,
another woman, this time the mistress of the cottage, came out, and
suggested that the invalid had been already long enough out of doors.
She was an honest country-woman, with an anxious expression in her face,
and she made signs apart to Marjory, begging her to wait. After the girl
had gone in, which she did reluctantly, and with many entreaties to her
new friend to come again, this good woman hurried after Marjory. She
came up to her breathless, with heightened colour and anxious eyes. "Eh,
mem, you're a real leddy, and real good to poor folk, it's easy to see
that. I wanted to ask just one question. What do you think of her? I can
see you'll tell me the truth."
"I am afraid she is very ill," said Marjory, gravely; "and very weak."
"Oh, it's no her health I'm thinking of. She's all that; but though
Death is awful in a house, I'm no one that would put a dying creature to
the door. It's other things. We're decent folk--and never have had a
clash or a story about one of us, as long as I can mind. Am I right in
keeping the like of her in my house?"
"But why the like of her?" said Marjory. "She seems to me a little
saint." She thought for the moment that the poor girl's most innocent
"doubts" had affected, perhaps, some one of Scotland's rigidly orthodox
critics, and that this was the result.
"Oh, dinna say it--dinna say that! I think so myself when I look at her,
and when I hear her speak; but oh, mem, though she's very good in
words--the thing I cannot get over is--that bairn."
"What bairn?" cried Marjory, aghast.
"Did they no tell you? I thought they would; for it's no right to let a
leddy come without hearing. It's like deceiving a minister. Ay, mem,
that's just it. Poor thing, she has had a bairn."
It would be impossible to tell the revulsion of feeling with which
Marjory received this news. She gazed aghast at her questioner, she
coloured as deeply as if she herself had been the guilty person, and
finally she turned and fled homeward without reply. To such a question,
what answer could be made.
"I cannot advise you, I cannot advise you!" she cried. She put her hands
to her ears, that she might not hear more. She quickened her steps,
stumbling over the grass. Was there then nothing in the world which
could be accepted honestly, as pure and true, without horrors of
questioning and investigation? When she had gone half the way, Marjory
sank down on the turf, and covered her face with her hands, and wept
bitter tears of grief and mortification. Her very heart was sick. After
all her new friend was nothing to her--the chance acquaintance of an
hour--a girl in a totally different sphere, where such sins were
differently thought of; and yet, this new disappointment seemed somehow
to chime in with the irritation of the previous night. Perhaps it was
her nerves which were affected. Pain and shame, and a sensation of
wounded and outraged feeling, such as she had never known before,
overwhelmed her being. Was there nothing real--nothing reliable--nothing
to be trusted in this whole miserable, sinful world?
CHAPTER VIII.
Marjory did not leave the house for some days. She was disgusted with
everything. She had no heart to encounter the shining of the ceaseless
sunshine out of doors, and the gay scenes upon the Links--gay yet sober,
with a Northern brightness. They seemed to tantalise and mock her in the
heaviness of her heart. And yet when she considered calmly (or tried to
do so) she had so little foundation for this excessive and fantastic
feeling. So far as Fanshawe went, she might never, she said to herself,
see him again; and though of course she could not help having a certain
feeling of friendship for him, considering the circumstances in which
they had been drawn together, yet, after all, whether he was a
good-for-nothing, or the most useful and admirable member of society, it
mattered very little to Marjory. And in so far as respected this unknown
girl, it mattered less still--it mattered absolutely nothing. Marjory
knew, as all who know the peasant population of Scotland are compelled
to admit, however reluctantly, that deviations of such a kind are
unfortunately much too common, and in general much too leniently judged.
Such painful incidents of rural life had come in her way before, and
shocked and disturbed her without having this paralyzing and sickening
effect. Why was it? Was it her nerves, her bodily health, one of those
simple physical reasons which disagreeable philosophers represent as at
the bottom of all our supposed moral sentiments? This was an explanation
which Marjory hated and scorned, as was natural, and which vexed her
already wounded mind all the more that she could not absolutely put it
out of the question. It might be that suffering and exhaustion had given
to events, which would have affected her little under other
circumstances, a special power to sting. She had to account for her
gloom to her uncle by a headache, that most plausible excuse for all
unrevealable griefs, and she overcame Milly by a quick prayer for
silence--
"Never mind me, dear," she said. "I am worried; my head aches--don't ask
me any questions."
Obedient Milly asked no more, but she crept to her sister's side, and
kept looking at her with wistful glances, which were more inquisitive
than the questions themselves. Marjory was a person of too much
importance to be allowed to be out of temper, or out of heart, with
impunity.
"Your headache is lasting a long time, my dear," Mr. Charles said, after
vainly suggesting "a turn on the Links" by way of remedy. "Don't you
think it would be well to see the doctor?"
And Milly wept a few ready tears at the idea that May might be ill. Thus
Marjory was compelled to give up her headache; but her heartache, which
nobody knew of, was more difficult to get rid of. She went no more to
the Spindle, but strayed listlessly along the country roads, which are
not interesting, and tried her best to forget all about an encounter
which had interested her so much at first, and had wounded her so
unduly. Both the interest and the vexation were, she felt, excessive--a
trick of the nerves, a weakness of the body, a tendency to emotion,
produced by the strain she had sustained for so long.
A whole week had elapsed in this way, when one day she was told that a
woman wanted to see her; "a decent woman, but a poor body," was the
description of the maid. Marjory went down to the court to see this
visitor, expecting some applicant from the poor quarter of the town, or
other petitioner. She was surprised and excited to see that it was the
woman who had caused her so much vexation, the mistress of the cottage
at the Spindle, who stood with an anxious face, expecting her approach.
"Oh, mem," she cried, almost as soon as Marjory came in sight. "Come
back, come back, and see yon poor lass! She's breaking her heart. She's
been worse than ever, crying for you night and day, and since she heard
that I had tell't ye, she's had no peace in her mind. All her cry is,
'Bring back the leddy, bring back the leddy! I canna die till I've seen
the leddy.' We've tried to pacify her a' we could. We've said nae doubt
you were gane away; folk come to St. Andrews for the sea-bathing, and
then they go away; or we said nae doubt the leddy finds it's ower long a
walk; but naething would content her; and at last I came away, seeing it
was my fault, to try if I could find you. And oh, mem, maybe I was
hard-hearted yon day. We mauna be unforgiving. She's but a bairn, so to
speak, and it was a gentleman that deluded her with his flattering
tongue. When it's a gentleman it's a' the harder on a poor lass; and
they have such deceiving ways. When I was young myself, there was a
student lad, a minister's son, no less----"
"What does she want with me?" said Marjory, coldly.
"Oh, mem, how can I tell ye? whiles a poor creature like that will take
a yearning; it may be for one thing, it may be for another. Sometimes
it's for meat and drink; but this poor thing is no of that kind. You've
spoken to her soft and kindly, as I dinna doubt is your nature, and she
canna bide that you should think ill of her."
"How can I do other than think ill of her," said Marjory, "after what
you said?"
"Well, mem, I canna tell. You maun hear her story; one says one thing,
and another another. I canna tell the rights of it; but this I maun say
that she's no just a common lass. If there are any excuses that a lady
like you would think excuses, you may be sure she has them; and it would
break a heart of stone to see her there, whiles in her bed, whiles on
her chair, greeting and praying, 'Oh, bring the leddy back!' I canna
stand it, mem," said the woman, wiping her eyes, "I canna stand it, and
if you saw her, neither could you."
Then a curious sensation came over the proud young lady, who had been so
deeply disgusted. It was as if some frozen spring in her had suddenly
melted; her whole heart seemed to give way. A kind of yearning desire to
obey the call thus made upon her, overcame all other feelings in her
mind. She made a brief, ineffectual stand against this flood of
unaccountable emotion.
"I do not see what good I can do her," she said. "I have no right to
judge her, and I don't judge her; but what can I do? If I can help her
in any way, you have only to tell me; but I, whom she scarcely knows,
who know nothing of her, why should I go to her? What good could I do?"
"Na, mem," said the woman earnestly, "that's mair than I can tell. It's
just a fancy. I'm no saying it's more than a fancy; but ah, you ken
yourself, sometimes all the world is no so much good to us as just
something we have wished for and wanted; some bit thing that was nae
solid advantage. Oh! if you would but come! You're a leddy well kent and
much thought o', that can take no harm. It could not harm you; and oh!
the comfort it would be to her!"
"Did you know me?" said Marjory, not knowing how to delay a little
longer, and to make a last effort to stifle the melting of the heart in
her own breast; "or did she know me? How did you trace me here?"
"Poor thing, she knows nobody," said the woman; "and neither did I ken
ye, mem. I ken few strangers. I found ye out by your description. I
spoke to a friend of mine, a fisher's wife, that comes whiles with her
creel to the door; and as soon as she had heard me out, she said,
'Unless I'm sair mista'en, I ken the young leddy;' and, sure enough,
she brought me to this door; but now I ken ye, Miss Heriot. My man has a
cousin that lives at Comlie, and mony a time I've heard of the Laird's
family. Oh! Miss Heriot, come out with me! She's in her bed, yon poor
lass. Come and give her a little life, and hear her story. The sight of
her would melt a heart of stone."
Marjory's was not a heart of stone, and it pled with her, more strongly
than did this intercessor. She had seen the girl only three or four
times, and had spoken to her but twice; though that had been enough to
rouse in her a vague but powerful sentiment, for which she felt there
was no adequate foundation. Now, however, this sentiment rose into a
certain passionate force; she dismissed her visitor with a vague promise
to go some time or other; but the moment the woman was gone, the
pleading voice within awoke with double force, and gave her no rest. It
interfered with her inevitable duties; it made her silent and
pre-occupied, unable to respond to her little sister's constant
questions, and the remarks of Mr. Charles, who chose to come home for
luncheon upon that day of all others, and was full of the doings of the
new ladies at Pitcomlie, whom somebody he had met had been telling him
doleful stories about. Mr. Charles's brow was puckered with anxiety, and
his niece did not give him the sympathy he hoped for. "I do not know
what is to come of the old house, or what I can do," he cried. "No doubt
I am joint guardian; but how I am to fight against these two young
women, or keep them from having their way--it's a position I never
anticipated, never anticipated, May."
"No doubt." She was thinking she heard the cry "bring back the leddy!"
and Matilda and her sister had no interest for Marjory, even though they
were turning upside down her father's house.
"For you see," said Mr. Charles, with his perplexed look; "though I am
joint guardian, so is she; and you may say what you please, May, when it
comes to be judged between two people, and one of them a pretty young
woman, there's no tribunal yet invented that will hold the scales of
justice altogether even. I might do the best for the boy and his
inheritance; but she's his mother, and has nature on her side. The
claims of nature might not tell so much if she were not bonnie; but the
two together are irresistible. I do not know if I have your attention--"
"Oh yes, uncle!" said Marjory. But she was not, in reality, paying any
attention. Her mind was away, speeding along the coast towards the
Spindle Rock, and the lowly cottage under its shadow. Mr. Charles went
back to his golf somewhat disappointed at the want of interest with
which his plaints had been heard, and with a secret uneasiness in his
mind as to the cause of Marjory's abstraction. He ran over all the list
of men whom he had asked to dinner, in the accidental manner suggested
by Miss Jean, with an anxious self-inquiry whether any of them might
have to do with it. The idea was not a pleasant one. He had obeyed the
old woman's suggestion because he could not help himself, and with a
secret certainty that nothing would come of it; but the thought that
something might come of it was not agreeable. It confused him in his
playing that afternoon; he made such a failure on the putting green as
had not been known to be made by an experienced player for many a day,
and covered himself with confusion. "It's all these young women," Mr.
Charles said to himself ruefully; as, indeed, many another man has felt,
if not said.
"May I come with you, May?" said little Milly wistfully. This was
another difficulty to be got over. "I never go with you now; and at
Pitcomlie I never was away from you."
"At Pitcomlie there were no links," said Marjory, smiling; and with a
promise to walk with her in the evening, she disposed of her little
sister. The afternoon sunshine was blazing over the coast when she set
out finally on her long walk. A whole fleet of red-sailed fishing-boats
were out at sea, and dropping forth from the sheltered embrace of the
little harbour; a brisk little wind was blowing from the west, a genial
breeze which never disturbs the Firth, or brings up foaming waters in
the bay. The sun shone with that soft and tempered light which rejoices
the heart, without affecting unpleasantly the physical frame. Marjory
hastened on, tracing the turnings of the coast, ascending and
descending, now on the crest of the cliffs, now at their feet. She had
no eyes for the landscape, no ear for the soft splash and murmur of the
waves; her heart beat with anticipations for which it was impossible to
give, even in imagination, any reasonable motive. Nothing that she could
hear could affect her personally, and yet the emotion which possessed
her was too strong to be entirely sympathetic. She said to herself that
it must be some tale of pathetic shame for sin at the best, which
awaited her; some story which might rouse her pity, but which would
probably repel and disgust her at the same time. What better could she
look for? But she hastened as if to hear news of the greatest personal
importance, with a thrill in her veins, and a quite unusual palpitation
in her heart.
Just before she came in sight of the Spindle, a very unlooked-for
encounter happened to Marjory; she had heard steps following her for
some time, but was too much pre-occupied to notice them; nor was it
until she heard a voice from behind addressing her that she thought at
all on the subject. When she heard herself called, she turned round
hastily, and to her great surprise found herself face to face with the
young woman whom she had seen at Pitcomlie, and at the family
burying-place. Her aspect, however, was changed; she it was now who
accosted Marjory; and there was an amount of anxiety in her round face
which changed its expression entirely; she kept calling, as if this
anxiety had excited her beyond all ordinary habits of self-control.
"Miss Heriot, Miss Heriot!" she cried, as she came forward, stumbling
among the whin-bushes in her excitement. "Where are you going, where are
you going?" A certain sharp sense of amusement, mingled with anger, a
perception of the ludicrous inappropriateness of the question, as
addressed to herself by a person who had steadily refused to afford her
any information as to her own movements, struck Marjory, amid all her
impatience. She smiled as she turned round, and waited for a moment, in
answer to the urgent appeal.
"Where am I going?" she said.
"Ay, Miss Heriot, where are you going? You may think I've nae right to
ask!" cried the girl, breathless; "but you're a leddy, and I'm but an
ignorant lass. Maybe I have something to hide, but you have nothing. Oh,
for the sake o' a' that's merciful, tell me! it's straightforward and
simple to you, but no' to me. You're going for your diversion, or for
kindness, or for I kenna what; but me, I'm travailing and working for
life and death; for the life or death of a poor sorrowful creature
that's perishing of grief and shame, and has done nothing, nothing to be
so sore punished!" she cried, with sudden tears.
Marjory had stopped, arrested, in spite of herself, by the passion in
the girl's voice. Her heart softened unawares towards this penitent
opponent, who had refused all explanation on her own part, and yet
demanded it with such confidence. "I am going to the cottage at the
Spindle," she said. "You have no right to ask, nor to interfere; but I
tell you because you are in trouble; because you seem to think I have
something to do with it."
"No!" said the girl, pausing in her breathless course; "no you; but them
that belong to you. Oh, dinna be angry, dinna upbraid me! It maun be
God that's brought you here. When I heard of the leddy, something told
me it was you; but I wouldna believe it. I wanted to do a', a' mysel';
to bring her up from the gates o' the grave, to give her back her good
name, to be her Saviour in this world. Eh, the Lord's hard upon us
whiles! He'll let you do all the foolishness you please; but if there's
one great thing, one good thing that ye would like to do, and then
die--oh me, oh me! He brings in other folk; when your heart's full of
hope, and ye see your way clear before ye--He brings in other folk!"
Here she sat down and covered her face and wept. That these tears sprung
from some disappointment connected with herself, Marjory divined, though
she could not understand how this could be. She stood by for some time,
respecting the strong emotion which she did not understand. At last,
however, she went up to her, and laid her hand softly on the young
woman's shoulder.
"If I am to help you in anything," she said, with a sudden inspiration,
as unaccountable to herself as all the rest, "do not stop and cry, and
lose precious time; but come, like a brave girl, as I am sure you are,
and show me the way."
"I will!" cried the girl, springing suddenly to her feet. "I will! there
is enough for both you and me."
The cottage door stood half open; everything was still about; there was
at first no one to be seen. A lonely place, musical with ripple of
waves, with soft sough of the quiet winds, with those mysterious
breathings of nature which make for themselves a language in solitary
places. The two anxious and excited human creatures, one full of a
sorrow and enthusiasm which had taken possession of her whole being--the
other almost as much excited with that suspense of uncertainty,
curiosity, and wonder which is equally enthralling--brought their
painful life into the stillness, like creatures of another sphere,
dispersing the natural sentiment of the place.
"There is no one here," said Marjory, unawares; but her voice produced a
strange echo, a low cry from the half open door, and immediately after
the figure of the sick girl appeared, holding herself up by the door,
and gazed out eagerly. Her face was suddenly suffused with colour and
life as she saw them.
"Oh, come in! oh, come in!" she cried, with pathetic entreaty, tottering
forward with extended hands. The other young woman brushed past Marjory
without a word, and threw her arm round her sister.
"Bell, you'll kill yourself!" she cried.
"And what if I did?" said the other, softly; "if you will but let me
tell the lady. I must tell the lady. Oh, come in, come in! do not pass
by the door."
"I am coming," said Marjory; her heart strangely divided between
sympathy and the involuntary repugnance which again made itself felt
within her as she approached the girl who had "gone astray." It is hard
for a delicate-minded woman, brought up in all feminine traditions, to
overcome, without long training and some strong motive, this
involuntary shrinking. She followed the sisters into the cottage with a
strong thrill of repulsion, which almost tempted her to turn her back
upon the sufferer. But she restrained herself, and entered after them
into the dim little room. The sick girl had been seated near the open
door, in a chair with pillows. Here her sister placed her again,
propping her up. She was breathless with her exertions, but,
notwithstanding her weakness, kept her anxious eye fixed upon Marjory,
with an anguish of eagerness which fascinated the other, and held her
fast. When Marjory sat down by her, this anxious gaze somewhat softened;
the terror went out of it; she looked at her more calmly, her eyes
lingering on her face.
"You do not come near me to-day," she said. "You're kind, but I can see
the difference. You have come for Christian duty, but no so soft, no so
sweet as when you came last and knew nothing. Oh, lady! you've judged me
in your heart, and it's no just. You have not waited to hear what I had
to say."
"No," said Marjory, "that is true; but I don't judge you. It is not for
me to judge you, or any one. I have been disappointed--but God knows
your excuses; how can I know them? I am very sorry for you," Marjory
added, sympathetic tears coming into her eyes as she saw the large drops
that veiled the luminous dying brightness of the other's.
"Oh, my bonnie Bell," cried the other girl. "Never heed her; they're
all hard, hard, there's nobody that understands but me."
Bell did not make any answer. She fumbled with a black ribbon round her
neck, pulling out slowly, with an effort which showed how great her
weakness was, something which was hidden within her dress.
"I've never taken it from its place," she said, "because he put it there
himself. He hung it round my neck, and he said, 'Some day, Isabell, some
day I'll put it on your finger.' It's aye been there since. Why should I
put it on my finger when he's no here to do it? Rings and ornaments are
no for me. Oh, lady, your heart's moved! Agnes, she's saying something.
My heart beats, and I canna hear."
"She's saying nothing but your name," said Agnes, almost harshly,
watching with a keenness that lost not a gesture or motion of the lips,
the proceedings of the visitor. And, indeed, all that Marjory felt able
to say was a startled wondering repetition of the name, "Isabell,
Isabell, Isabell!"
"Here it is," said the poor girl, panting with the effort, and holding
out in the palm of her worn hand, with a piteous mingling of tears and
pride, a ring attached to her ribbon. "Naebody has seen it till now.
I've carried it next my heart. He was not the one, oh, he was never the
one to bring shame on them he loved! I wasna his equal--him a gentleman
that made the heart glad to see him, and me an ignorant creature that
knew nothing. But I took his fancy. Oh, lady, maybe it's because you
are a lady and kind, that I think you're sometimes like him, the turns
of your voice and the way you put your hands. I took his fancy. When you
came and sat under the Spindle Rock, and saw me sitting at my door--some
way, oh, mem," she cried, with a pathetic apology, "I took your fancy
too!"
"Go on, go on!" cried Marjory.
But Isabell knew no reason for haste. She looked at the others
wondering. They were excited, but she, poor soul, had ceased to be
excited. A kind of pensive shadow of happiness stole over her as she
traced out the story of her love, and sought that simple apology for her
lover.
"I took your fancy too," she repeated, softly. "I watched, and watched,
and wished you would speak, but it was you that came the first. That was
just as he did; but men are no made like us. Yours was kindness, but his
was love. Oh, lady, dinna hurry me; my heart's fluttering as if it would
break forth; it's like a bird in my breast. I'm his marriet wife."
"Whose wife?" cried Marjory, rising up. She came forward in her
excitement, her tall figure towering over the others. Her passion of
anxiety and wonder took almost the form of anger. "Whose wife?" she
repeated, involuntarily taking hold of the ring. "Is this all you have
to make you so? Oh, woman, do not make me curse the dead in his grave!
Is this all? Did he deceive you so?"
"What does she say--what does she say? Oh, my heart's fluttering! Was
that all? I am his marriet wife," cried the girl. "I am his marriet
wife!"
Marjory turned her eager eyes to the other, breathless, unable to speak.
Agnes had her arm round her sister, supporting her. She was defiant, as
always, but somewhat subdued by the command in the eyes of the lady,
whom she felt to be her rival.
"It was a private marriage," she said, hurriedly. "No the minister; poor
folk are no like leddies. It wasna right, but it's nae shame. They were
marriet--before witnesses. He took her, and she took him. It's a thing
that's done among the like of us."
Marjory stood stupefied in the centre of the little dim room, faintly
lighted by its green windows. It seemed to her that she could neither
move nor speak. Was it a dream? or was it possible? Could it be? All her
old thoughts at the reading of Tom's letter swept over her mind like a
gust. If this was Isabell, then what was her real position? and what
changes might be involved of which nobody had dreamed? Marjory's heart
began to flutter like the sick girl's. A cloud of confusion seemed to
float round her. She saw the others but dimly out of her hot excited
eyes. Isabell--his wife! "God help us," she stammered, not knowing what
she said. "I don't understand it--I don't understand it! Whose wife?"
Isabell raised her pathetic eyes, wondering and appealing, to her
visitor's face. Agnes looked at her steadily with an uncommunicating
defiance. The one knew nothing of the confusion in Marjory's mind, but
only felt with a painful anguish such as sometimes rends the hearts of
the dying, that this sympathy which she longed for, had failed her--the
other knew, and confronted the lady who was her rival, daring her to
avoid the revelation which was impending, but altogether unconscious and
incapable of comprehending Marjory's thoughts. Neither of them spoke.
And in the moment everything that had happened during the last four
months whirled through Marjory's brain, passed before her eyes like a
panorama. Poor Tom on his death-bed, playing with the something that he
would and would not tell her--then in the last hurried scene of all
believing he had told her, thanking God that he had done it. Oh! the
pitifulness of that thanksgiving for a confession never made! Had he
made it, where would this girl have been now? It might have been life to
her instead of death, it might have saved the life of the old father who
broke his heart for Tom. It might have--God knows what mazes of sudden
fancy she plunged into;--then all in a moment, came back to find herself
crouching down for support in her chair, holding by it, looking at
Isabell's pale alarmed face through a darkness that slowly dispersed.
"What has happened?" she heard herself saying as she came out of the
darkness. She had not fainted nor fallen; but a mist had come about her,
parting her from reality, and engrossing her faculties at the very
moment when the secret she had sought so long looked at her out of her
companions' eyes.
As Isabell's face, however, slowly appeared to her out of that mist,
and she saw the intense expression of suffering and anxiety in it, the
weakness, every blue vein showing, the large circle round those too
luminous eyes, the wistful look in which her whole soul was--Marjory's
heart was touched so suddenly that one impulse swept all other feelings
away.
"Poor Isabell, poor Isabell!" she said with a cry unawares. "He tried to
tell me on his death-bed. It was not his wish to leave you so. He
thought he had told me;" and with an effusion of pity and tenderness
which overcame all doubt, she took the girl's wasted hands into her own.
Wonder overcast poor Isabell's face. She began to cry softly,
overpowered by the sweetness of this accost, but not knowing what it
meant. "Oh, did you know him?" she murmured. "Oh, weel I ken he meant no
harm. Lady, lady, did you know my Mr. Heriot--my man, my dear, dear
man?"
"Bell," cried Agnes, whispering in her ear. "Bell! it's Miss Heriot her
very sel'!"
That evening Marjory sent a hurried anxious note to Fanshawe, calling
upon him to come and help her. She did it by a sudden impulse, carried
away by feelings which she felt incapable of expressing to any one else.
Him only she could confide in, he only could help her in the struggle
that was to come.
CHAPTER IX.
In the meantime, the young women at Pitcomlie, as they were entitled by
Mr. Charles, had been spending their time very agreeably. Verna had got
the house well in hand. She had re-arranged everything. The very
furniture had been changed from one room to another. "We must at once
give the house a character," she said, "so that it may be seen to be
your house, Matty, and not the old Heriots'. There are a great many
old-fashioned things which must be cleared away. We must give it a
character;" and she went about the rooms, pulling the furniture hither
and thither. Verna, unfortunately, though she had zeal, had no
knowledge; she thought the results of a modern upholsterer's work, spick
and span new tables, chairs, and carpets, all ordered without
consideration of expense, would produce something infinitely better than
the present aspect of the room, which had been lived in, loved in,
suffered in, for so many years, and had acquired a human character of
sympathy which makes even wood and velvet poetical. She did not
understand the old inlaid cabinets, which had been Marjory's pride, any
more than she could understand that insane desire for "a view," which
apparently had tempted "the old family" to open its windows so to the
stormy sea.
"One cannot escape the sea at such a place as this," Verna said; "we
must put up with it, though I don't care for it; but to turn all the
windows that way, on purpose, when there is quite a pretty garden
behind, and a sheltered corner, with flower-beds, and all that. I have
written to Mr. Freestone, and he is coming down on Saturday to see about
a new wing."
This talk was carried on for the advantage of young Hepburn, who had
come, as he now did daily, to ask how the ladies were; and if he could
do anything for them.
"A new wing!" he said; "but you will find that highly expensive; and the
house has always been thought a large house."
"Always been thought!" said Verna, with some scorn. "By those who don't
know what sort of a house my sister has set her heart upon. I do not
think it a large house; but it is a very good sort of foundation
to work upon. By the time Tommy is of age, he is sure to be Master
of the Hounds, High Sheriff of the county, or, perhaps, even
Lord-Lieutenant--for I suppose the Heriots are well known to be one of
the best families in Fifeshire; and then, of course, he will require
room to give balls and other entertainments; he will be very grateful to
me, you may be certain. My plan is to pull down the old house--"
"To pull down the old house!" Hepburn repeated, in growing
consternation.
"And to build on the additions there," Verna continued calmly. "I have
it all in my head. Unfortunately, I can't draw very well, but I have
made a kind of an elevation, as they call it. The end of the new wing
will come just where the old tower does; and the new drawing-room, which
will be fifty feet by forty, will look out upon the lime-tree avenue. It
will be delightfully shady, and we can have the flower-beds close under
the windows. Then upstairs we can have some new rooms; it will be a
great improvement. The drawing-room here is not a bad room, but it is
dingy; and so are the dining-room, and library. In short, I don't doubt
it was very nice for the old people, Mr. Hepburn--the old gentleman,
who, I suppose, never saw much society; but my sister is young, and, of
course, will recover her spirits--"
"Do you think she will?" said the sympathetic Johnnie. "Are there not
some gentle natures that mourn for ever?"
Verna looked at him with a doubtful glance, dubious for the moment
whether she should help him to a little real insight into her sister's
inclinations, or whether she should keep up the pathetic aspect of
affairs. And it appeared to her that the latter was so very much the
most advantageous mode of action, that, though the temptation to reveal
the truth had come strongly upon her for a moment, she hastily repelled
it. "Yes, indeed," she said, shaking her head; "that is very true; but,
dear Mr. Hepburn, my sister is very young; we cannot expect that she
will always be as she is now."
"Ah!" said Johnnie; "but we may hope, at least--I mean, she can never
be more perfect than with that sweet air of resignation; that look as of
one whose existence has already passed into another world."
Oh, what a temptation it was for Verna to give him a little sketch--such
as she could so well have done--of the real Matty! Anyone who has had to
sit by and hear a fool elevated into a saint by some still more foolish
worshipper, will understand her secret exasperation. But there were a
great many things to be taken into consideration. In the first place,
Matilda's melancholy aspect was much her best one--when she cried she
did not require to talk and commit herself, as otherwise she must have
done infallibly; and, in the second place, Verna knew that to attempt to
keep her sister in subjection, without affording her the relief of a
worshipper, was hopeless, and young Hepburn ranked high in her list of
ways and means. She shook her head accordingly, subduing herself, and
acquiesced in this noble picture of Matty; but added: "You must
remember, Mr. Hepburn, how young she is; and even if she should not care
for society for herself, she must, some time or other, see the advantage
for her children. And we all have a taste for fine rooms and handsome
furniture," Verna added, with a princely air. "It is a weakness, no
doubt; but the Bassetts are all famed for it. Matilda will never be
happy till she has given a character to the house."
All this would have been infinitely comic to any man who had not been
captivated by Mrs. Charles Heriot's afflicted beauty. But young Hepburn
was like most people in that condition; he accepted, as the most
dignified truth, what would have appeared the most transparent nonsense
in other circumstances. He did more than this; he allowed Marjory's home
and kingdom, in which he had worshipped her since ever he could
remember, to be spoken of as "good enough for the old people," and
acquiesced in the fact that the Bassetts required something more
magnificent, and that the house must have a character given to it,
before it could become a fit habitation for Mrs. Charles and her sister.
He was not a fool, nor unfaithful to his traditions; he was a great
lover of poetry, the most intellectual person, by a long way (except the
Minister, whose intellect took, as was right and natural, a Biblical
form,) in the neighbourhood of Comlie. Few men in the East Neuk were to
be compared to him in the way of accomplishments and general
cultivation; but yet he was guilty of this foolishness and meanness
without in the least being aware of it--or, at least, with an uneasy
consciousness which he would not permit himself to be aware of. And yet
his heart was not false to the ideal which had been his highest vision
of excellence all his life. Had he spoken of Marjory, it would still
have been with enthusiasm--though with that servility, which is common
to men in love, he allowed it to be necessary that Mrs. Charles should
"give a character" to her house. When Mrs. Charles appeared, however,
and he had the honour so often accorded to him of escorting her round
the garden (which Matilda, too, much preferred to the cliff) he made a
gentle remonstrance against Verna's energetic measures.
"I hear that there are to be several changes," he said, timidly. "Miss
Bassett has been telling me about a new wing."
"Yes," said Mrs. Charles. "That is Verna's way. She always likes to be
pulling things about. I declare I think she was quite pleased to see
that ugly old ruin, that she might pull it down and make everything
tidy. It is a fancy she has."
"But--do you think the old house--ugly?" said Hepburn, still more
timidly.
Mrs. Charles was leaning on his arm; she was looking up at him with
those pretty blue eyes, into which tears were ready to come at a
moment's notice--a sweet dependent creature, seeking support and
sympathy. Johnnie Hepburn knew a great deal better on this point than
she did. Had the old house of Pitcomlie been his, he would have
worshipped every stone of it. He knew all its associations, historical
and otherwise, to the family; but yet he dared go no further than to ask
humbly whether she too thought it--ugly? His mental servility was such
that, if Matilda had said "Yes," boldly, no doubt he would have
acquiesced.
"Well, isn't it?" said Matilda, with a momentary feeling that she might
be committing herself. "Verna thinks so, I'm sure. And then it is of no
use; and what is the good of keeping an old place without a roof, or
windows, or anything, full of rats, and I daresay snakes, and all sorts
of creatures. That is what I hate about ruins. I suppose there are no
scorpions in this country?"
"No, nor snakes either," said Hepburn, relieved. "I see now why you
dislike it. There is nothing of the kind indeed; and old Mr. Charles
Heriot used to keep the ruins in capital order. The old house has so
many associations, you know--to the family."
"Oh yes, to the old family, I daresay," said Matilda; "but I don't know
anything about their mouldy old ancestors. Verna has such a pretty plan
that she drew herself--a beautiful long drawing-room, with a nice range
of windows opening into the garden, and those new ribbon flower-beds
that are so pretty, just like the border of a shawl, close under them.
You must see the plan. Verna has quite a genius for that sort of thing,
and she says it would give such character to the house."
"But then Miss Bassett is not the lady of the house," said Hepburn. "She
cannot feel as you do, who are the representative of the Heriots. Of
course she does not care about the associations as you must do."
"Oh no; she can't do anything at all unless I like it," said Matilda,
"of course. I let her do a great many things, because she likes fuss and
bustle, and I don't. I let her manage the servants, and order the
dinner, and all that. But of course it is only because she is my sister.
She has no power over anything unless I say she may have it. Everybody
must know that."
"It is like you," said Johnnie, admiringly, "to put yourself aside so
as to indulge your sister. It is exactly what one might expect from you;
but perhaps in happier circumstances, when you feel a little more
interest in these secondary matters----"
"Do you think she takes too much upon her?" asked Matilda, quickly. "Oh,
you need not be afraid to speak! She is my sister, to be sure, but we
have been separated so much, and I quite know Verna's faults. It is
quite her way to take too much upon her. If you think she is setting
herself up as the lady of the house, or anything like that, I shall put
a stop to it at once."
This put Johnnie into an unfortunate position, for he could not allow it
to be supposed that he was finding fault with Verna, or undermining her
with her sister. He said hastily:
"Oh, no, I had no such meaning. I thought perhaps--if you were to
exercise your own judgment you would be kind to the old house. We are
fond of all traces of antiquity here; and I have a special love for
those old gables, and the roofless walls, and narrow windows--"
"Ah!" said Mrs. Charles, archly, "we know why that is. Because you were
so fond of the old family. And of course Marjory was devoted to all that
old stuff."
"No, indeed!" said Hepburn, blushing and stumbling in his words; "indeed
you misunderstand me. I admire the ruin for itself, and I like it for
its associations, without--Of course I have the highest respect for Miss
Heriot."
"Oh yes, indeed--the highest respect! I like that!" said Mrs. Charles.
"I wonder what Marjory would say if she heard you? Oh, yes, even if you
did not blush and look so conscious, we have heard all about it, Mr.
Hepburn. When is it to be? And I wonder if she likes you being here so
much? If I were in her place I shouldn't, I tell you frankly. If I were
in her place----"
"Pray don't speak so," cried poor Hepburn, really distressed. "I am not
so fortunate as to be able to hope that Miss Heriot takes any interest
in what I do. Very much the reverse. She has always been like the moon
and the stars, quite above my sphere."
"Oh, you are a great deal too humble," said Matilda, quite excited with
this congenial subject, "but you ought not to come here so much if you
want to please Marjory. I am sure she hates me. That sort of superior
solemn kind of woman always hates us little things. Perhaps because the
gentlemen like us," Mrs. Charles added, with a momentary giggle. Then
remembering her rle, "Dear, dear," she said, with a sigh, "to think I
should talk such nonsense! as if what gentlemen thought mattered any
more to me."
Hepburn could not but press gently to his side the soft little hand that
rested on his arm. How charming her simplicity was, her naturalness, the
light-heartedness of her youth cropping up in spite of her grief!
"I hope, however," he said, "that you do not think us quite unworthy of
consideration--for that would be hard, very hard upon us."
"Oh, no," said Matilda, "indeed I always say frankly that I like
gentlemen's society much the best. Women are so jealous of you, and so
nasty in their ways. I don't pretend to be very clever, but I do like to
be with some one who is clever. And one feels at once the superiority
when one hears gentlemen talk. It is so different from our
chitter-chatter. Isn't it now? I like to have some one I can look up
to," said the woman, who was a fool, looking up, with all the skill of
her folly, into the face of the foolish young man who was intellectual.
Oh, poor Johnnie! He had a dim notion in some corner of his mind that
what she said was silly, and yet he was ready to fall down at her feet
and worship her. The silliness quite achieved his downfall. He had been
wavering, all but conquered; but now the final coup was given to him.
He murmured something in sudden delirium, he did not quite know what.
Neither did Matilda know what it was; but she knew that she might
henceforward guide him at her pleasure through all the ways of
imbecility. She had snatched him from Marjory, too, which was a great
addition to the pleasure. Marjory was clever, and Verna was clever; but
here was something they could not do.
The conversation was interrupted at this beatific moment by the
appearance of Verna, important and full of business as usual.
"Dr. Murray is in the drawing-room," she said, "and you must come and
see him, Matty. They are the first people that have done more than leave
cards; and you would not see them when they called last time. He is the
clergyman. You must come now."
"Clergyman? I suppose you mean the Scotch Minister," said Matilda. "Why
should I go? I have nothing to do with him. You don't suppose I shall go
to his miserable old conventicle. Go and see him yourself, Verna. You
understand that sort of people. I am engaged; am not I engaged, Mr.
Hepburn?" she said, smiling upon her new slave. But Johnnie was not
destitute of the prejudices of a man born in the East Neuk.
"Don't you think you could see him?" he asked with hesitation. "He is a
man of some distinction. He is a very well-known man, and he was a great
friend of Mr. Heriot's--"
"Oh, one never will hear an end of the old family," said Matilda, "but
if he is such a great person I suppose I must go. I always thought a
Scotch Minister was a kind of Dissenter--oh, do tell me, Mr.
Hepburn!--just for the poor people, a sort of man that would not take
the liberty of calling. I am so ignorant, don't be disgusted. I know I
am silly; but I will pay such attention to what you say."
Johnnie led her in, and expounded to her how matters stood. He gave her
a sketch of Scotch ecclesiastical history, which was quite brilliant, so
eager was he to make himself understood; and Mrs. Charles clung to his
arm, and looked up at him, and said "Yes!" with little notes of
admiration. What a quick pupil she was! he thought. Needless to add that
Matilda was just as wise at the end as at the beginning, and, in short,
paid not the slightest attention. It was thus that they entered the
drawing-room. Verna followed closely behind. When Matilda appealed so
sweetly to her companion, "Am not I engaged, Mr. Hepburn?" a thrill of
alarm had passed through Verna's soul. Could it be possible that the
word meant more than met the ear? Had the flirtation which Verna had
encouraged, by way of diverting Matilda and keeping her occupied,
already come to a serious issue? It was incredible. Charlie was not yet
six months dead, poor fellow; but the sister, who knew Matty, was
alarmed, and followed closely, with all her senses about her, watching
and listening. A mixture of wonder, admiration, contempt, and partial
envy, filled her mind. Nobody knew so well as she what Matilda was; to
think that any man should be such a fool! Verna, it must be remembered,
used very plain expressions. And yet she admired her sister for this one
thing which she could do, and which Verna herself could not do. She
admired, and wondered, and half envied. How did she do it? And how was
it that other people could not do it? And oh! what a fool the man was!
CHAPTER X.
Mrs. Murray was standing in the middle of the drawing-room in a state of
dismay. The change which had come over it was greater than the actual
transformation. One soul had gone out of the place, and another, a
totally different soul, had come in. I suppose if this could be done
with our bodies, we should cease to recognise even those familiar
garments of flesh and blood. The furniture was the same, the old walls
were the same, and yet the place was different. The Minister had found
on the table, spread out to invite attention, Verna's new plan, made out
in very bright colours, which caught the eye--and was reading to his
wife the words "new wing, on the site of old tower," with a tone of
consternation impossible to reproduce. The good people had come with
friendly meaning to do what they could for the two young strangers, whom
they were sorry for as having been thus suddenly thrown into a new
country without any knowledge of its habits and traditions.
"Depend upon it, my dear, it is chiefly gaucher," Dr. Murray had
said, with a very broad accent on the last syllable. "Half of what is
called rudeness is just shyness--and so it must have been in this case."
The excellent Doctor said this as a compliment to Mrs. Charles's
beauty, which precluded the idea of impertinence on her part. Mrs.
Murray had not seen Mrs. Charles, and therefore was unaffected by her
beauty, but she accepted the suggestion as possible. Marjory was no
doubt hasty, and Miss Jean crabbed, and very likely "the young women at
Pitcomlie" were only gauches--not intentionally disagreeable. But when
Matilda entered, leaning on young Hepburn's arm, Mrs. Murray was
confounded. Johnnie Hepburn! he whose hopeless devotion to Marjory had
been known over all the country--who had written verses under so thin a
disguise that no one could possibly mistake it, to her, in the
"Fifeshire Journal"--who had tormented all her friends with offers of
service, and who finally had come here upon Marjory's business a
messenger from her! Matilda did not relinquish his arm till she had
reached the centre of the room, when she performed a curtsey to her
guests.
"Excuse me if I put up my feet," she said, as she placed herself on a
sofa. The Minister's wife could do nothing but sit and look at her, so
entirely was she taken by surprise. Naturally it was Dr. Murray, as the
most important person, who spoke first.
"I hope you have quite recovered from the fatigues of your journey, Mrs.
Charles Heriot?" he said. "Sad as it was, and sore as this home-coming
must have been, I hope you have now settled down. It is a favourable
time of year for this part of the country, and I may say, under
Providence, that it's a very good season. We have had more bright
weather than ordinary, and everything is looking very well. I hope you
are beginning to like your new home?"
"Yes, I suppose it has been good weather for Scotland; but not at all
like what we have been used to. I think sometimes I shall die of the
cold," and she muffled herself closely in the shawl which she had thrown
off on coming in, "and the children feel it so very much."
"Oh, but it's new life to the children, my dear! You'll soon find that,"
cried good Mrs. Murray, "though yours are very young to be sure. My
eldest daughter's children have just come to the Manse, from the Bombay
Presidency. Poor things, they were white enough and miserable enough
when they came, but since then they have flourished every day."
"Oh, indeed," said Matilda, with a stare; "but my children have always
been taken such care of; and they feel the cold very much."
As if our bairns were not well taken care of! Mrs. Murray said to
herself, and she was wroth in her heart, and concluded that this was
more than gaucher, whatever the Doctor might say. The Doctor was not
quite so easily discouraged.
"When you have been here a little longer," he said, "and have got used
to our ways, you will find it a pleasant neighbourhood--a very pleasant
neighbourhood. St. Andrews is not too far for a drive, and there are a
great many very agreeable families--"
"Oh, I shall never care for the Fifeshire society. They must be so
stiff and so dry," said Matilda; "and then they are all such friends of
the old family, and set against us--"
"My sister means," said Verna, "that people have not been very nice
since we came. We have had a great many cards, but nobody has really
paid us a visit, except yourselves."
"They would think she was seeing nobody," said Mrs. Murray, softly, "and
very natural;" but once more the Doctor made himself the spokesman,
drowning the gentle voice of his wife.
"I have always heard," he said, "that there was a natural stiffness
about our Scotch manners; but Mrs. Charles may be assured, and I take it
upon me to say so, though I'm not a rash man by nature, that all that
will soon disappear before her face. I hope it was not impertinent to
look at the plans on the table. They are, perhaps, for some house in
England?"
"Oh, no, indeed, for this house," cried Verna, delighted. "This
drawing-room, you see, is not much of a room, and that horrible old ruin
close to us does so frighten my sister."
"Frighten her! why should it frighten her?" cried Mrs. Murray. "You're
not meaning the old house?"
She turned to Hepburn with a look of dismayed inquiry, and he dared not
say anything. How could he say a word that would cross that beautiful
sensitive creature? but at the same time he had the fear of ridicule
before him, and of the two people both looking at him, before whom he
did not wish to show how foolish he was. He compromised, and fell
between two stools, as was natural.
"Mrs. Charles has taken a--repugnance to it. I have been telling her it
was on a mistaken idea. Snakes and scorpions don't exist in ruins here.
That is why she is nervous," faltered Hepburn.
"Oh you naughty Mr. Hepburn," cried Matilda; "you know you confessed you
did not care a bit about the ruin, except for----. But I will not tell
upon you--you confessed it was nothing but association; and as I never
associated with anybody here----"
Dr. Murray was too much absorbed to notice this last speech; he was
solemn, and not to be trifled with.
"Do you know, Madam," he said, "that this is a very serious thing you
are thinking of doing, a very serious thing indeed. Father and son have
preserved the old house of Pitcomlie as long as I can remember. It was
habitable in my young days--"
"That's true," said Mrs. Murray. "When I came here a bride, the old
Laird--not the late Mr. Heriot, but his father, who died soon after--led
me on his own arm to the best room, that was over the great door. The
old lady of Pitcomlie was dead, and he had no woman-person, except the
servants, in his house. It was a very handsome room, and but for its old
age it's that still; and I would do a great deal myself before I would
see it pulled down."
"I assure you," said Verna, "there is no other way of doing--and then to
us, as my sister says, it has no associations; besides, it is not
beautiful, and of no use; and it is there the new wing must be built."
"Does Mr. Charles know?" asked the Doctor solemnly.
"Oh, please don't talk of Mr. Charles!" cried Matilda, vaguely
perceiving that her side was having the worst, and beginning to cry; "it
reminds me so of my poor dear Charlie. I cannot bear to hear the name.
Please call him old Mr. Heriot, or something. When I think how I am left
alone to struggle with everything, and poor, poor dear Charlie, who
never would let the wind blow upon me! Please don't talk of the old man
by his name--please!"
Mrs. Murray's kind eyes were quite moistened by this appeal.
"No, my dear!" she said soothingly; "no, my dear! Well, well do I know
the feeling; and when I mind that dear boy--what a fine fellow he
was--just the age of my Robert! Many and many a time I have held him in
my arms. Oh, my dear, I beg your pardon!" cried the kind old woman,
rising--with the tears dropping from her eyes, to kiss the young widow
on her sofa. Matilda did not know what compunctions were expressed in
this caress; and, to tell the truth, she submitted with a very bad grace
to the salute, which she rather thought was a piece of presumptuous
familiarity on the part of the Minister's wife towards herself, a lady
of property. The Doctor, however, this time resisted the beauty and the
tears, and was less easily moved than his wife proved herself. Beauty
is a fine thing, and tears are touching; but an assault upon
property--property which, to a certain extent, is national, the
antiquities which give importance to a parish--is not to be permitted
even on such considerations. Dr. Murray was alarmed. If this was done in
the green tree, what would be done in the dry? The Heriots of Pitcomlie
were the chief heritors in the parish; and what if they should take upon
them to interfere with the church or churchyard?
"I am sorry," he said stiffly, "to have roused such very painful but
natural feelings. I will endeavour to be more guarded again; but what I
would ask is, does he--of whom we speak--know about this proceeding--or
rather, I should say, this intention on your part? If he does not, I
fear it would be my duty to tell him--"
"Could he do anything to us? he has no right," cried Verna, "to
interfere."
"I hope he could; I hope he has!" said the Doctor. "He is joint guardian
with the mother; and it will be my duty to let him know."
"I will not have old Mr. Heriot interfering!" cried Matilda. "He has
nothing to do with us. Poor Charlie put him in his will only out of
compliment--"
"Hush!" said Verna softly, giving her a look; "do you think really he
would mind? Do you know I thought they would have been sure to do it
themselves, but for money, or something? I hear that old Mr. Heriot was
for ever paying his eldest son's debts; and I thought, probably, that
was the reason why the ruins were allowed to stand. But if you are sure
he would object, why then I will put all the plans aside," said Verna
magnanimously; "and wait until he comes."
"Why, Verna, your heart was set on it!" cried her sister.
"Not so much set on that as on keeping right with the other guardian,
and keeping you right!" said the magnanimous Verna, whose eyes sparkled
with resolution. Dr. Murray was somewhat stiff in his response, but
still he was very laudatory; and Verna bowed and smiled, and accepted
his praises.
"It is better in every way to take no rash step," said the Doctor; "if
by any accident--which Heaven forbid--the lands should pass to another
heir--"
"How could that be?" said Verna, suddenly turning pale to her very lips.
It did not occur to her that the fragile lives of her little nephews
were the slight threads that bound her to this kingdom, which she had
been assuming should be hers for life. A sudden precipice seemed to open
at her feet; she stood aghast for the moment, gazing at him with eyes
dilating, and pale cheeks. Then she recovered herself, and said hastily,
glancing at Matilda: "Ah, I understand! but you should not suggest such
a thing before their mother;" and placed her hand upon her beating
heart.
"It is a thing that must always be taken into consideration," said Dr.
Murray. "You forget, my dear young lady, that one in a succession is
quite different from the possessor of independent property, which,
perhaps, he has acquired for himself; he can alienate nothing, and he
has no right to destroy anything. The next heir--"
"Oh, please," cried Verna, with unaffected alarm, raising her hands in
an attitude of supplication; "don't make me unhappy with your next heir!
I shall do nothing more--indeed I shan't--till Mr. Charles comes. It was
not my sister; it was I who wanted it. Please, please don't say any
more!"
But even after the visitors were gone, Verna could not shake off this
uncomfortable impression. She went about all day with the words echoing
through her head, and filling her with a hundred fancies. As it
happened, both the children were ailing with some innocent baby-ailment.
Verna went to look at them a dozen times in the course of the evening;
she felt their foreheads and their pulses, and gave them their medicine
with her own hands. Their father and uncle, both vigorous young men, had
been cut off within a few weeks of each other; and why should these tiny
children escape the dangers to which so many stronger people succumbed?
The next heir! What loss, what misery and ruin, was in the suggestion!
The poor little babies themselves and their mother seemed to Verna to
have but a secondary part in it; but to herself, it would be
destruction--an end of all her hopes--at once of the actual and of the
ideal. She put the plans in the fire that very night with heroic
resolution, and blotted out from her mind those dreams of a great
drawing-room, and even of a snug bed-chamber, sheltered from all the
winds, in which she had indulged. These were glorious visions, but they
were not worth the risking of her power and influence. She said to
herself that she knew when to draw back, as well as when to advance, and
spoke of them no more.
Meanwhile young Hepburn, much against his will, had felt that decorum
bound him to take his departure when the Murrays did; and
notwithstanding various signs from Matilda, propriety prevailed. He
walked down towards Comlie with the Minister and his wife; and, as usual
in such cases, his virtue was very indifferently rewarded.
"I hear you are a great deal at Pitcomlie, Mr. Hepburn," Mrs. Murray
said, looking at him.
She had never addressed him so formally before. That painful attempt to
convert Johnnie into John, which we have all of us made when the
Johnnies of our acquaintance grew into men, had been her greatest effort
hitherto; but now she looked him in the face with a disapproval which
there could be no mistake about; and he felt the chill, being highly
sympathetic and susceptible to all the risings and fallings of the
spiritual thermometer.
"Yes," he said, uneasily; annoyed to find himself blush, and with a
desperate attempt at carelessness. "Sometimes I can do little things for
them; they don't know anybody, nor the ways of the country--"
"That is very well seen," said Mrs. Murray, with emphasis; "but Mrs.
Charles is very pretty," she added; "a bonnie creature! and that goes
further than anything else with some folk. Men are so easily led away,"
she went on, reflectively; "even my old Doctor, that is a very wise man
in his generation, and should know better--"
"What are you saying about me, Mary?"
"I was saying you were wiser than most men, Doctor," said the Minister's
wife, "and yet not so wise but what you are led away by a bonnie face,
like other men."
"It is not, however, the bonnie face in this instance," said Hepburn,
feeling his mind much lightened by being united with the Doctor in a
broad and general accusation. "It is the sad position, the melancholy
circumstances. To see so young a creature left solitary; arriving among
strangers, with little children dependent on her, and no one to sustain
her--"
Mrs. Murray was too tender-hearted to resist the pathos of this picture.
"And that's true!" she said; "that's true. Poor thing! She may be a
little carried away by her new position; but I cannot think she's
without feeling. No, she's not without feeling. What she said about old
Mr. Charles was very true."
"That is all very well," said the Doctor; "but we cannot allow such
proceedings as these young women contemplate--not if I had to appeal
myself for an interdict to the Court of Session. An admirable specimen
of old domestic architecture, really in very good preservation, though
the roof is gone in some places--and fully described in my account of
the parish. No, no; it will never do. If you have any influence with
them, John (the Doctor had never said Johnnie in his life), you should
let them know seriously that this kind of thing is quite out of
character--quite out of character! I have always defended the mother's
rights in the way of guardianship; but an attempt like this makes me
doubt."
"Well, Doctor, I must say I wonder at you," said Mrs. Murray; "because a
young woman does not understand your domestic architecture, as you call
it, you begin to doubt whether she should have the care of her own
bairns! I cannot see the connection."
"Perhaps not, perhaps not, my dear," said Dr. Murray; "but it's very
reasonable, for all that."
Hepburn felt with secret content that he had escaped in the midst of
this discussion, and he came boldly to a pause at the next corner, to
take leave of his companions. But he was not so safe as he supposed.
"I am going to write to St. Andrews to-day," said Mrs. Murray, as she
gave him her hand. "I will tell Marjory that you are very kind to Mrs.
Charles, and go to see her every day. It is very kind, though it is,
perhaps, a little dangerous; but then, to be sure, you have a great deal
of idle time on your hands."
This shot was double, hitting both ways, and sent the unfortunate young
man away in a fever of indignation, suppressed wrath, and uneasiness.
There could be no doubt that he had a great deal of spare time on his
hands; but few people like to be told this. And he was not anxious that
Marjory should be made aware of his daily devotions at Pitcomlie. He did
not return there, as he had intended to do, but took a long walk in a
contrary direction, and reflected with much annoyance upon this unlucky
encounter, and all the comments of which he would be the object.
"After all, I have a right to go where I please," he said to
himself--which was as true as anything could be, yet did not reveal a
comfortable state of mind. "And I do not know how they could get on
without me," he added, also to himself, a whole hour after, with a gleam
of complacency in the midst of his uneasiness. But he was not prepared
to give up his allegiance to Marjory, or to meet again even in
imagination the smile with which she had recognised his first
infidelity. He wanted still, like so many other people, to keep both
delights, his ideal and his foolish fancy, both together. Indeed, it may
be said that Mrs. Murray's threat had as serious an effect upon Johnnie
Hepburn as that other appalling threat of another heir had upon Verna.
Both of them felt, with a thrill of alarm, that their position was an
assailable--nay, a dangerous--one, and that it was impossible to tell
what an hour might bring forth. And both of them were moved
instantaneously to the adoption of a more prudent course. Verna
sacrificed her plans for the new wing, and Johnnie sacrificed the
enervating delight of another hour's philandering. Thus they propitiated
Fate; which, however, seldom accepts such sacrifices. The chief sufferer
by these prudential measures was Matilda, who, being impervious at once
to reason and to sentiment, did not understand her sister, and was much
annoyed by the withdrawal of her attendant, who amused her, if nothing
more. She was the person really sacrificed, and that without seeing any
reason for it. She yawned through the afternoon, until benign Providence
sent her a soft slumber, which carried her through the time till dinner;
and certainly it was hard, though natural, that she, the only one who
had no responsibility, should thus be made the principal victim.
CHAPTER XI.
Marjory's letter was brought to Fanshawe before he had left his room in
the morning. This room was in the Albany, and though a most comfortable
chamber, was not luxurious, nor of a character to have called forth the
strictures of any reasonable Mentor. There were no opera-dancers on the
walls. Fanshawe had long got over the period of artistic taste which
delights in opera-dancers, if indeed he had ever gone through it. The
few prints on his walls were good. To be sure there was a racehorse or
two, but of these, of late days, he had the grace to be ashamed; and
over his mantel-piece he had quite lately hung a print of one of
Raphael's Madonnas, in which he thought he saw a resemblance to Marjory.
It was a fantastic resemblance, wholly existing in the imagination of
the beholder; but such compliments of the heart have been paid before
now even to plain women, and Marjory was not plain. It seemed to
Fanshawe--to carry out the fantastical character of the idea--that it
was only in his best moments that he saw this likeness. Sometimes he
looked for it vainly, and called himself a fool to have entertained such
a notion; but at other times it would shine out upon him, filling him
with a kind of heavenly pleasure--that pleasure which glows in a man's
heart, and makes him feel his own nature exalted in a consciousness of
the excellence of his love. Marjory's little notes were very rare
delights, and this all the more so for being utterly unexpected. He had
written to her a long letter only two days before, and he had expected
no reply. Was it possible that this could be the answer? The question
was all the more interesting to him because he had delicately implied in
his letter an inclination to visit St. Andrews. He had heard so much of
that ancient borough; he had been quite excited by the account some of
his friends had given him (he said) of the charms of the place; and
London was empty, void, null, and unprofitable; he had never seen it so
vacant, so uninteresting; he could not believe that he had ever found
any pleasure in such a mental and moral desert. So he wrote, not without
a certain eloquence. The centre of the world had shifted; it was no
longer in London, but in St. Andrews; this, however, though he implied
it, he did not say. And to receive so rapid an answer seemed to him a
fortunate sign. He jumped out of bed in haste, and clothed himself, that
he might read it with due respect. But soon the vague delight of
anticipation on his face changed into something more serious. Marjory's
note was singularly different from the diffuse and much implying
epistles which he was in the constant habit of addressing to her. In
this there was not a word more than was absolutely necessary. It ran as
follows:--
"I have made a discovery which is of the very deepest importance
to us, and to the memory of my poor brother Tom, who was your
friend. I have no right to ask your help, but I do, knowing you
will not refuse me. Come to me, I beg of you, for Tom's sake. I
write in great haste to save the post. Oh, Mr. Fanshawe, come!
"M. H. H."
Across this brief letter was written, very much blotted, a single line.
"I have found----" He made out as much as this, but the last letters
were so blotted that he could not decipher them. It looked like a name.
Whom had she found? or what could have happened to excite her so? But he
scarcely paused to ask himself these questions. He was too late for the
day mail to Scotland--how he cursed himself for his indolence!--and had
to wait the whole day through till the evening. At one time he thought
of telegraphing to her; but there lingered a hope in Fanshawe's mind
that perhaps she had sent for him of her own impulse, and that
"everybody" was not in the secret, a hope which he loved to cherish. He
waited accordingly, most drearily, trying to get through the time as he
best could, and finding it drag so that the day seemed to him as long as
all the preceding year. He went from one club to another, by way of
getting through the time; he went and made all sorts of ridiculous
purchases; he looked at his watch about a million times; indeed, he kept
dragging it in and out of his pocket, and watching the slow fluctuations
of light in the afternoon, like a man possessed by one sole idea--which
was a perpetual calculation how soon it would be nine o'clock.
Fanshawe arrived next day at St. Andrews, with a mist of excitement
about him, through which he seemed to see but dimly the actual features
of the place. He watched the long lines of the Links flying past the
windows of the railway carriage, as he had seen all the intermediate
plains and hills of the Scotch border and Midland counties since
daybreak, with a strange sense that he himself was making no progress,
but that they were rushing past and away from him. When he saw at last
the group of spires which ended those long lines of grass, and stepped
out upon ground which did not fly under his foot, it was as if he had
dropped from the clouds into some mystic country which could not but
bring him the uttermost weal or woe, yet was unknown to him as
fairyland. He felt a tremour in his very frame as he stepped into that
strange world, where it seemed impossible to him to conceive of the
common accidents of every day, where there could be nothing, he felt,
but great emotions, passions, excitement--events which he could not
foresee, changes which he dared not anticipate. To fall into the
ordinary stream of people arriving at a railway, calmed him down to some
extent, and he set out to walk into the town without any self-betrayal.
But he had not gone far before he saw a slight tall figure, clothed in
black, detaching itself from the groups on the Links, and coming towards
him with a step and bearing which he could not mistake. He stood still,
restraining himself with difficulty from the cry of joy that seemed
ready to burst from his lips. They say that love is but an accident in a
man's life, while it is everything in a woman's; but it would be nearer
the truth to say that a man's absorption in this dream cannot last,
while a woman's may. Nothing could be more absolute than Fanshawe's
absorption at this moment in thought of the woman thus approaching him.
Adam, when he saw Eve, the only human companion for him, could not have
been more entirely bound and limited to the one being. This man saw
nothing else, heard nothing else, felt nothing else in heaven or earth.
He had asked himself sometimes whether he was at all, what is called, in
love with Marjory Hay-Heriot. He asked himself no questions now. He did
not care for what she was going to tell him, for what her business was,
for the discovery affecting her family, for his friend's memory, or
anything else. He felt, saw, heard nothing but her. He did not seem even
to have strength enough in himself to go to meet her. The very sight of
her had caught him as in a trance of rapture. He felt that he could have
wept over the hand she held out to him, like a baby, and mumbled it like
an idol-worshipper. That he did neither, but only grasped it, and gazed
at her with eyes full of speechless joy, seemed to him the most
wonderful power of self-control. But Marjory's eagerness was of a very
different kind. As always, one of the two was at a disadvantage. He
thought first and only of her; she thought of a great many other things,
and then finally of him. Common consent allots this state of feeling to
the man, but common consent is often wrong. It depends upon which of the
two, man or woman, is the most deeply in earnest. "L'un qui se laisse
aimer" is not always of the masculine gender, as a great many people
know.
Marjory came up to him with an eagerness and satisfaction which would
have been--oh! how delightful--had there not been other causes for it.
She held out her hand to him, and then took his arm as if he had been
her--brother. Yes, a great deal too much as if he had been her brother;
but let that pass; it was very pleasant all the same, and then she said,
"How good of you to come! but I knew you would come. I felt myself safe
in appealing to you."
She had thought then of appealing to some one else! This was not
satisfactory; but Fanshawe was too happy at that moment to insist upon
having everything his own way.
"Could there be any question about that?" he said, smiling at her with
that look of imbecile emotion which no woman can mistake. Marjory,
however, was too deeply absorbed with her own private anxieties to pay
much heed to his looks. She said nothing more that could give him an
opening for the disclosure of any personal feeling; but rushed into her
story at once, a proceeding which was flattering, yet unsatisfactory. It
was with an effort that he brought himself to attend. Even though it was
the voice which most interested him in the world which spoke, herself,
her presence, the sensation of her vicinity, the glimpse of a new world
about him--a world entirely identified with her, a new scene of which he
knew nothing save through her, strange people passing who sent her
greetings from over the way, smiles as she passed them--did so entirely
occupy and bewilder the new-comer, that it cost him as serious an effort
as he had ever made in his life to understand what Marjory was saying to
him, or even to listen to what she said. She told him such a story as
might have caught the ear of any man capable of listening, but yet
somehow it did not catch Fanshawe's. Her hand on his arm, her head bent
forward, so much more eagerly than he had ever seen it before, even the
fall of her dress, the very hanging sleeve that touched him, the veil
that once fluttered across his face, all and every one of these things
dissipated his mind. He had no intellect at all to speak of at that
moment, and hers was in the liveliest action. By moments, a half comic
sense of his incapacity to come up to her requirements seized upon him.
He grew rueful and humble as he was compelled over and over again to ask
for new explanations.
"Forgive me, I did not quite catch what you said. Will you tell me that
again, Miss Heriot? I am stupid. I did not quite make out--"
After a great many of these interruptions, Marjory began to feel a
little check upon her enthusiasm, and to grow chilled in her warm
expectation of sympathy.
"I fear I am making too great a call upon you," she said coldly,
drawing back with a perceptible diminution of warmth; and there can be
no doubt that for that moment the accusations against Fanshawe which she
had opposed so warmly rushed back upon her mind all at once, though with
a generous effort she thrust them away from her. The light failed all in
a moment out of her eager upturned face, her head returned to its
ordinary pose of quiet and proud decorum, something changed even in the
touch with which her hand held his arm. Fanshawe woke up to this with
sudden alarm. He roused himself in a moment from the haze and torpor of
happiness in which he had not known what he was doing--or rather he
leapt out of it suddenly, startled by the sense that his happiness, if
he did not rouse himself, might slip out of his hands.
"You find me very stupid?" he said, "I am sure you must think so; but I
have some excuses I cannot tell you of--and there is one that I can tell
you; I have been travelling all night."
"To be sure, I should have thought of that," said Marjory, but she did
not resume her former tone; and poor Fanshawe, knowing it was so
different a reason which had made him dull of comprehension, had to
accept the excuse which he had given for himself, of being weary, though
he felt it the most miserable of excuses. He had to put up with it,
though he felt that it gave her quite a false impression of him, and
brought him low in her eyes, a thing which people are compelled to do
often, yet which is always hard. They walked on together accordingly,
Marjory, with a little impatient sigh of submission, giving up her great
subject for the moment; and talked of the journey and its fatigues, and
the time occupied, and what the traveller thought of the country he had
passed through, &c., &c. He was perfectly able to understand whatever
she said to him now; fully roused up, with his intellect restored to
him, and all his senses. But she was courteously, gently silent,
accepting what he chose to say to her--to the poor wretch's infinite
misery and confusion, need it be said?
Mr. Charles caught a glimpse of them from the window of the club. He was
sitting quietly discussing a match; but when he saw this sudden
apparition, he started up and went to the window.
"Bless me! that's very like Fanshawe," he said to himself; and after a
long gaze, which assured him that it was Fanshawe, and no one else, he
retired, much perplexed, to his chair, and henceforward left the most
exciting game that had been played for years to be discussed by the
other speakers. "It's not that I have any objection to him personally,"
Mr. Charles mused, not knowing what to make of it; and then he asked
himself what it was he had heard of Fanshawe?--that he drank, or
gambled, or something? What was it? Thus a lively scandal had crept up
in Mr. Charles's mind by means of the very simple and passive one
promulgated by Mr. Seton. He was much troubled. If Marjory should really
show a liking for one whose reputation was compromised in any such way,
what was he, her uncle and guardian, to do? To be sure, she was old
enough to judge for herself, which was a great relief to his mind; and
the chances were very strong that she would prefer her own opinion to
his, in any circumstances. But still Mr. Charles saw very stormy waters
before him, on the supposition that Marjory liked Fanshawe, and that
Fanshawe gambled or drank. He took his way home in an anxious state of
mind, and found that his fears were so far justified. Mr. Fanshawe had
sent his bag to the "Royal," but he had walked across with Miss Heriot
to dinner. He was very conciliatory, asking many questions about golf,
and doing his very best to make himself agreeable. If he had not been
such a faulty person, he would have been a great acquisition to the
little party. But then, Mr. Charles asked himself, was it right to
countenance the introduction into Marjory's society of a man who gambled
or drank? What would Miss Jean say? He felt himself so weak in this
respect, that he instinctively resorted to her judgment, as the only
standard he knew of. If it was on Marjory's account (and what more
likely?) that Fanshawe had come--and if Marjory liked him, what then was
Mr. Charles to do? He had not (he said to himself) a father's authority;
he would not for the world make the girl unhappy; and yet how far would
this be from marrying her well? "Confound marrying!" Mr. Charles said,
with unusual emphasis, when he found himself left alone after
dinner--the unexpected, and, so far as he knew, uninvited guest having
left him "to join the ladies," at a very early period. He had never
married himself; and Marjory was very well off, and had everything her
own way--far more, probably, than she would have with a husband. If she
did anything to change this beatific state of affairs, the blame would
be on her own head. Mr. Charles washed his hands of it for his part. But
yet he could not wash his hands of Marjory, nor of Miss Jean and her
requirements; and there never was old bachelor disposed to a quiet life,
yet anxious to please everybody, whose mind was more painfully
bewildered and held in suspense.
Fanshawe hastened to the drawing-room, more anxious to regain his lost
ground than even to conciliate the uncle, though that, too, seemed to
him very necessary. He found Marjory seated in her usual place in the
deep, narrow window, with a background made up of pale sky, a gleam of
deeper-coloured blue, which was the sea, and a pale shaft of the ruin
between, as graceful and light as Gothic art could make it. Her profile
was marked out against these deepening tones of blue, and the grey
time-bleached canopy work of the old Cathedral enclosed it like the
picture of a saint. This was how he felt it, being, as the reader
perceives, in an excited and exalted condition of mind; for in reality,
Marjory was neither like a Saint nor a Madonna, being too human, too
modern a woman for any abstractions. But if men in love did not fancy
such things, what would become of poetry? He drew a chair to her side,
approaching as near as he dared venture, or rather as near as he could;
for little Milly, her sister's shadow, sat on her foot-stool with her
golden locks in a glory round her, leaning upon Marjory's lap, and
dividing her from all new-comers.
"I am not so stupid as I seem," said Fanshawe. "I have my wits about me
now. Will you tell me all about it again?"
"Not all," said Marjory, laying her hand upon little Milly's head. Poor
little Milly! She had been in the highest spirits about Fanshawe's
arrival; and the wretch felt her so dreadfully in his way! He restrained
his impatience, however, as he best could, with a sigh which roused a
certain sense of the humour of the situation in Marjory's mind.
"I hope you have quite recovered from your fatigue," she said.
"Do not be too hard upon me," said poor Fanshawe. "It was not fatigue.
My head was turned with being here, and seeing you again. But tell me,
now? I have shaken myself up, and come back to ordinary life. We are
still mortal; we have to tie white ties, and dine on fish and mutton, as
if we were on common unenchanted soil, and not in Fife at all;
therefore, I am capable now of listening and understanding. Tell me as
much as you can."
This speech roused Marjory to a certain girlish levity, notwithstanding
the seriousness of the situation.
"It is a new thing to hear Fife spoken of as if it could be enchanted
soil," she said, with a smile, which felt to Fanshawe like a stray ray
of sunshine. And then her face grew graver, like that of the Virgin
Mother in his picture. "All I have to say is--about her," she added,
her voice sinking almost into a whisper; so low as to tantalize Milly,
who was listening with all her ears.
"About whom?"
"You did not understand me? I feared so, Mr. Fanshawe, I know now what
poor Tom meant when he was dying, when he thought he had told me. I have
found Isabell!"
CHAPTER XII.
"Agnes, this gentleman was one of my brother's friends; you may say
everything to him that you have said to me."
This Marjory said in her own drawing-room in St. Andrews, where she
stood between Fanshawe and the homely stranger, who had attracted so
much of her attention and curiosity before she knew why it was. The
girl's appearance was unchanged; she stood with a certain suppressed
defiance still in her aspect, before the lady whom she had distrusted,
and whom even now she felt disposed to approach with caution. She was
Isabell's sister, but she was not like Isabell. The refinement and grace
of the other were altogether wanting to her; she was in perfect keeping
with her homely dress, her rustic manners--even the air of
half-irritated, half-distressed antagonism with which she looked at her
novel companions. Agnes Jeffery was in no way superior to her condition,
except in so far as she was superior to all conditions in the force of a
vigorous and loyal nature; she looked from one to the other with
doubtful eyes.
"You may ken the gentleman, Miss Heriot, but I don't; I dinna feel
justified in disclosin' the affairs of my folk to every new person that
may come in. It's no our way; maybe when folk are more frank, and tell
everything, it's easier for them; but it's no our way."
"You trusted me," said Marjory; "and this gentleman is as I am" (she did
not think of the meaning that might be put upon her words--not at least
till long afterwards, when they filled her with confusion; but Fanshawe
did, being more interested in these words than in any revelation the
stranger could make to him). "He saw my poor brother Tom die; he heard
him--as I told you--make an effort to reveal all this to me; he has done
everything for us, and he will help us now. You may tell him as you told
me."
"Is he anything to you?" said Agnes gravely, searching Marjory's face
with her eyes.
And that young woman, utterly disconcerted, caught another glance at the
same moment--a look which was full of the most wistful entreaty, yet
just touched with fun, and an involuntary sense of all that was
laughable in the question. Fanshawe felt as if life and death were
involved for him in the reply; and yet he could not quench that twinkle
of mischievous consciousness, which poor Marjory felt, too,
notwithstanding the gravity of all the surrounding circumstances, and
the solemnity of the question. Her eyes fell before the double look
fixed upon her; her face flushed deeply; she cleared her throat, and
faltered in uttermost confusion. It required all his anxiety,
supplemented by all his self-control, to keep down the laugh which
almost mastered Fanshawe's muscles and faculties. If he had laughed, woe
betide him; for in moments of emotion, no one likes the idea of being
laughed at; and Marjory's temper was something less than angelic. She
conquered herself with an effort, and answered at last steadily.
"Mr. Fanshawe is my friend," she said; "he is the friend of the family;
he is (this Marjory said proudly, remembering Seton's report of him,
remembering Mr. Charles, and bearing her testimony with a certain
consciousness of doing something to set him right with the world), one
of those men who will work and suffer, if need be, for their friends--as
you have worked and suffered, Agnes. He will not weigh what is enough or
too much to do. Of all my friends, and we have many, he was the only one
whom I felt I could appeal to--who would pause at nothing. Is that
enough for you? It ought to be; for it is what you have done yourself."
Agnes looked at him with growing surprise, and at Marjory's excitement,
which reflected itself in Fanshawe's astonished face. The girl divined,
as Marjory herself did not, that he was bewildered, abashed, even
humbled by this praise. He stole round to her side, and took her hand
and kissed it humbly.
"What can I have done to make you say this?" he cried; "how have I
deceived you? I did not mean it. I have done nothing to deserve this."
The girl's eyes were very sharp, enlightened by the habit of observing
others. And she was not sympathetic enough to care for the natural
emotion which she was clever enough to perceive. She said with that
disregard for them, as soon as she was herself satisfied, which is
common to the uncultivated mind:
"Miss Heriot, I'll ask no more questions. If you'll sit down, and let me
speak, I'll tell you all there is to tell. Maybe I would not have come
had I known what you wanted; but I'll tell you now."
This brought the others to a very abrupt stop. Fanshawe withdrew,
feeling himself somewhat snubbed, if truth must be told, and in a state
of mind--in respect to this girl and her sister--very different from the
attitude of enthusiastic devotion in which Marjory had depicted him. But
he listened, nevertheless, feeling himself pledged to an interest which
was more deep than he really felt. What was Tom Heriot to him? But
Marjory was everything; therefore he made an effort, and threw all his
attention into the new tale.
"I take it for granted," said Agnes, with that brusque tone of
suppressed excitement, sometimes scantly courteous, which often
characterizes the Scotch peasant, "that you have told the gentleman all
that my poor Bell told you; she did not do it with my will; but since
it's done, and she's called in the help of others to right her, instead
of her ain folk, I have no further call to resist. You have told the
gentleman how they were married--"
"Married!" said Fanshawe, with a slight start.
"What did you think else?" said the girl, turning upon him with sudden
defiance. "Did you think it was a light lass, of no account, that you
were to hear of? for if sae, I'll go away and trouble you no further.
It is clear that you have not been prepared to hear of my sister Bell."
"Agnes, you must not be so hasty," said Marjory, humbly. "Mr.
Fanshawe--I told you--have you forgotten--last night--"
Fanshawe had not forgotten last night, and was not likely to forget it;
but he had, it must be allowed, received the information given him with
less seriousness than it deserved. He had to make the humblest and most
abject apologies to both of the somewhat stern judges before whom he
stood--Marjory, who was abashed by the dullness of her pupil, and Agnes
who was all in arms. After this interruption, however, he was on his
guard, and the narrative proceeded more smoothly. It was not of a very
novel character. Tom Heriot had married Isabell Jeffrey, not entirely as
the heir of Pitcomlie should have married its future mistress, but yet
lawfully, according to the customs of the country, and to traditions
fully accepted in the class to which she belonged. They had pledged
themselves to each other as man and wife in the presence of the people
in whose house they had met, a man whom Heriot had employed to take
charge of his dogs while shooting in the district from which the sisters
came, a mountain village in Perthshire. The marriage had been concealed,
as such marriages generally are, until the last moment, when it had been
necessary to avow it for the sake of poor Isabell's character. But by
that time Tom Heriot was dead, and could no longer be appealed to--and
even the mother, utterly cast down by the shame of her favourite child,
had refused to believe the unlikely story.
"There was nobody but me, nobody but me," said Agnes, warming with her
tale, "that kent my poor Bell would never lie. My mother; my mother is a
decent woman, of a decent honest family. Lightheadedness or shame never
was heard of in her kith or kin; all douce, steady folk, constant at the
kirk, and mair thought of than the very Minister himsel'. It made her
wild. From no believing at first that anything was wrang--which was
natural--for wha could believe it? she went off in a mad way to no
believing Bell. I can excuse her, for my part. If I had not trusted Bell
from the very first, I would have killed her with my hands. John
Macgregor and his wife had gone away, nobody kent where. There was no a
creature to stand by her to say it was true. Oh, Miss Heriot! you've
heard Bell's story, but no mine. You can never ken the days that passed,
and the weary nights--her in a way to want a' the comfort that kindness
could give her, and lifting up her white face a' the time without
support or help, to say to them that would na believe her, 'The bairn is
my man's lawful bairn, and I'm his wife.' Oh, I'm no heeding," cried
Agnes, "though there's a man here! I'm no one to speak o' such things
before a gentleman. But to see her in her trouble, aye crying out in her
pains, 'I've naething to think shame of, mother, there's naething to
think shame of!' I'm hard," said Agnes, stopping suddenly, "but no so
hard as to withstand that."
"You were always her support and comfort," said Marjory, taking her
hand, and with tears in her eyes.
"Was anything else possible? I kent our Bell, ay, better than my mother.
She was aye delicate. She never could stand what I could stand. She
would aye read her book when she had a moment--no like me that am just a
country lass--and oh, so bonnie! When gentlemen came by, they would make
errands for a drink of water, or to warm their feet, or to light a
cigar, or the like of that, just for the sake of a good look at her. Mr.
Heriot was a pleasant gentleman. He had aye a good excuse. He would have
this question and that to ask my mother, as if it was her he was
wanting. The Lord forgive him," cried Agnes, "if he meant to deceive!
for he is dead and gone, and canna be punished--and I wouldna wish him
to be damned for ever and ever, though he would weel deserve it, richly
deserve it--if he wanted to deceive!"
Notwithstanding all her interest and all her sympathy, this was hard for
Marjory's proud spirit. She moved uneasily in her chair, she grew hot
and flushed, her brow contracted, her foot beat upon the carpet.
"He did not mean to deceive," she cried, impatiently. "I know he did
not. He thought he had told me. Such a thing was not possible--"
"I hope so," said Agnes, composing herself. "But he kept Bell without a
written word, not so much as a 'wife' in his letters, nor signing
himself her husband--no a single word. They had good reason to think
she was deceived. And the little bairn was no sooner born--ye havena
seen him, Miss Heriot; he's like your bonnie little sister with the gold
hair--than a friend saw in the papers that Mr. Heriot was dead in
England. Oh, that terrible time! Sickness is ill, and grief's warse, and
shame the warst of a'; but a' three at once upon one bit delicate head,
a' three! and neither consolation nor support, neither pity nor
fellow-feeling! Ye may think I'm whiles no very civil nor respectful to
them that's above me. I canna help it; my heart's bitter at you
a'--bitter! bitter!--at them that lead the poor and simple astray, and
leave them to bear the wyte--them that go away and enjoy themselves, and
live--or even that go and die--and leave other folk behind to pay the
price. It's them I hate."
"But the people who could have proved all this?" said Fanshawe. "Surely
you speak too strongly. If there are people who can prove it, why blame
Mr. Heriot? He was snatched away from this life; he had not time for
anything. But if it rests on the testimony of witnesses--"
Agnes turned round to look at him, with the colour gradually rising over
her face. The look of defiance was still there, but over it, as it were,
like another surface, was a flutter of painful hesitation and
humility--humility which was compulsory, and all the harder on that
account. She looked at him with a dilation of the eyes expressive of
such mental strain and painful exertion, as he had scarcely ever been
conscious of witnessing before, and with a thrill in her voice,
answered him steadily, looking him all the time in the face.
"It rests on my sister's word, Sir, which is as the word of an angel out
of heaven; for we've nae testimony--nae testimony! It rests upon
Isabell's word."
Fanshawe's countenance changed. He could not help it; he was not used to
conceal his sentiments; but almost before he was capable of realizing
this new and strange avowal, the girl had started to her feet.
"I am going home, Miss Heriot!" she cried. "You meant nae harm, but
ye've given me another stroke--and we've borne enough from you and
yours--"
"Agnes," cried Marjory, arresting her. "You cannot go away from me;
whatever happens, we must work this out together. What has any one
done?"
"Look at him!" cried the girl, with pale indignation. "Oh, this is what
I kent would happen if I was made to leave my ain way--to go among
gentles, and make them believe, and summer and winter every word! He
thinks it's a lie. What does he care for our Isabell and her bairn? He
cares for you; and he thinks that what I'm telling you is a lie!"
Fanshawe did not contradict her. He looked at Marjory gravely, with a
certain anxiety in his glance. He thought, as was natural enough, and as
men so often think in respect to a woman's judgment, that she had been
led away by her feelings. He made her a little warning sign with his
head.
"If, as you tell me, her own mother did not believe this story, is it
wonderful that I should hesitate?" he said. "I do not think it is a lie;
but I fear she may have been deceived."
"By Tom?" said Marjory. She was almost as indignant as the other. "If
Isabell has been deceived, then Tom--my brother, has been a---- What can
I say? Is there a word bad enough--vile enough?"
He was cowed between these two young women. He dared not say, as he
might have said elsewhere, that men do not form the same harsh judgment
of such deceptions. He made a gesture of deprecation, holding up his
hands in entreaty.
"You are too hard upon me", he said. "I did not mean to blame either
side; but if this is so, why cannot these people--the witnesses--be
produced?"
"Let me speak to him, Miss Heriot," said Agnes. "Maybe the gentleman
thinks it's a' my invention from beginning to end? and it's me that must
speak. I've been to seek them, Sir, a' over Scotland, from one end to
another. I've been directed here, and I've been directed there. I've
gone after them night and day. I've written letters to them. I've sought
out their friends. The little infant is three months auld, and all that
time I've been on the road. I had left my place for Isabell's sake; she
didna tell me why, but since I've found it was for him, that it might
not be said he had a near friend in service. All the little siller I
had, I've spent seeking them; and, oh, I canna find them, I canna find
them!" cried the girl, suddenly breaking down, and bursting into
passionate weeping. "I've prayed the Lord on my knees, and He'll no send
them; and I cannot find them; and my bonnie Bell will die before I can
clear her name!"
Her voice had risen loud and shrill in the height of her emotion, and
now she sat down and covered her face, struggling with her sobs. It was
not in Fanshawe's heart to remain insensible to this outburst. He sat
looking at her with a guilty face, as if he were the author of her
distress.
"Can I do anything?" he said. "Is there any way of helping her to find
them if they are to be found?"
But there was not in his tone the enthusiasm for the search which
Marjory had expected to move him. The very sound of his voice chilled
instead of invigorating her. While Agnes slowly recovered her composure,
Marjory informed him in detail of the inquiries which had been made.
These were very primitive, unskilful inquiries. The girl knowing of few
means of procuring information except the simple one of going to ask for
it, had wasted a great deal of time and much labour on a comparatively
narrow round. She had indeed written to various people whom she believed
to be Macgregor's relations to ask information about him, but the idea
that he and his wife might be reluctant witnesses, or adverse altogether
to the establishment of the truth, had made her distrustful of letters.
"How could I tell that they would not get out o' my way, if I sent them
word I was coming?" she said. "How was I to ken that they werena
enemies? And even if they were friends, they mightna like to take that
trouble, or their maisters mightna like it. Few folk like to take
trouble; and when you just send them a letter--Na, na, I went mysel. I
would never trust to that."
In short, poor Agnes had distrusted everybody. She had distrusted Miss
Heriot up to the last moment. She distrusted her still, notwithstanding
Isabell's better instinct. She looked at the two together at the present
moment with a watchful eye, not half sure that they were not plotting
something against, rather than in favour of her search. When she heard
them speak of the loss of time, her heart swelled within her. She who
had done everything so carefully, so warily, letting nobody know,
treating everybody as enemies, making so many subtle, simple schemes to
entrap the missing witnesses, was it possible that, after all, she had
been letting the precious moments slip out of her hand, the last days of
her sister's life? Agnes was glad to go away, leaving the last and only
possible traces of the missing Macgregors in Marjory's hands, to go out
to the silence of the long seaside walk, and to cast her troubled mind
abroad to seek out new means of working. She knelt down under the shadow
of the Maiden's Rock, in a crevice of that natural tower, and poured out
all her passionate heart in an impassioned prayer. "Oh, bring them to
me--bring them!" she prayed, demanding a miracle with pathetic
earnestness. There are circumstances in which it is more painful to
receive help than to be kept without it. Agnes, poor girl, endured the
aid which had fallen upon her with a proud agony of submission, feeling
that her heart was torn asunder by the necessity. She had so set her
heart upon doing it all herself; she had taken pleasure in her hardships
and wanderings, her long walks up and down, and the painful inquiries
that never came to anything. And oh, if all this had been but a loss of
time! She tried to contradict the thought, though a consciousness that
it was true would keep creeping chill upon her. But oh, if the Lord
would but step in and direct her, and make her find them now! If He
would but prove that the race was not to the swift nor the battle to the
strong! If He, the last resort, the final resource in everything, would
but bring them to her--put them, as it were, in her hand! Agnes opened
her eyes, and clambered down from the rocks, her heart aching with the
hope that she might yet meet with strangers on the way, and find that
her prayer had been answered. But there was no one to be seen on the
long stretch of seaside path, not a soul anywhere. And thus in her
humiliation she went slowly home, feeling as if this work, the work that
might save Isabell's life, was taken out of her hands.
CHAPTER XIII.
The two who were left behind were not much more comfortable than Agnes.
Marjory, for her part, could not but feel somewhat humiliated too. She
had appealed to Fanshawe in the fervour and exultation of her heart,
just after she had been roused by the blame she had heard of him, into,
perhaps, an unjustifiable adoption of his cause. When he had been
blamed, she had asserted his good qualities so indignantly, that faith
in what she had herself said had moved her to put him to the test, with
a generous and proud confidence. He might be good for nothing, so far as
himself was concerned; but he was good for everything to his friends.
And lo! at the very first touch, he had been found wanting. He had taken
twenty-four hours even to understand the story; and now, when he
understood it, he displayed no desire to take up the cause of the
injured, no readiness of belief in her, no wish to exert himself in her
service. She could not but see that to secure her own society, to be
near her and associated with her, Fanshawe would interest himself in
almost anything; but that was a very different matter from the generous
interest she had expected, and the active help she had desired. She had
thought nothing less than that he would go off instantly, scarcely
asking a moment to breathe and repose himself, in search of the missing
witnesses; and lo! he never suggested the possibility of looking for
them at all; he did not even seem to consider himself involved in any
way in the matter--as, indeed, he was not, Marjory proudly confessed to
herself. She was disappointed, mortified, cut down in her own
estimation; though why she should have been so, simply because he had
failed her, it is difficult to say. Marjory did not utter her
disappointment in words, but she adopted a still more effectual way of
showing it. She ascended into regions of lofty politeness which froze
the very soul of the visitor within him. She addressed him as she might
have done a potentate who had paid to an inferior power the unexpected
honour of a visit. She carefully banished all allusion to the business,
which yesterday had occupied and excited her so much, from her
conversation--and turned that upon trivial subjects, upon the passing
events which figured in the newspapers, upon St. Andrews, and the ruins,
and golf. Poor Fanshawe was utterly and dismally crushed by this
treatment. For an hour after Agnes's hasty departure, when it had been
put in force, he held out under it as best he could, pretending to wish
to hear about the Cathedral, and the Castle, and the old town of St.
Rule. It was when she suggested a visit to the antiquities after lunch,
in company with Dr. Smith, who knew so well how to explain them, that
his fortitude failed. He went up to her side with something like
timidity.
"It was not for the ruins," he said, half reproachfully, half timidly,
"that I came."
"Well, perhaps not," said Marjory; "but when you are in a place where
there are interesting ruins, you are bound to visit them, don't you
think?"
Fanshawe made no direct reply; but slightly encouraged by her tone, drew
a chair near her.
"And it was not for golf I came."
"I suppose not, seeing you do not know anything about it. Nothing but
utter ignorance," said Marjory, beguiled to a smile in spite of herself,
"could have excused the extraordinary questions you put to my uncle last
night."
"Were they extraordinary questions?" he said, still more encouraged.
"No, I did not come for the golf, nor for the sea, nor for St. Andrews,
nor for society. I came, because you sent for me; an inducement which
would have taken me to the end of the world."
"Pray don't remind me how presumptuous I have been, and foolish," said
Marjory, reddening, "to send for you, without considering whether you
would agree with me about the importance of the cause."
"Miss Heriot, I agree with enthusiasm that I am at your service, always
and everywhere."
"Pray, pray, Mr. Fanshawe! don't make me feel more ridiculous than I do
already. Let us talk of other things."
"Why should not we talk of the one that interests you most--of that you
sent for me about?"
"Because, simply, it does not interest you," said Marjory, looking at
him with a smile--that steady, forcibly kept-up smile of incipient
quarrel which is so far from agreeable to encounter.
Poor Fanshawe was in despair. He ought to have been pleased, on the
contrary, had he had his wits about him; for such quarrels never arise
between indifferent persons. He started up from his chair, and made a
rapid course round the room, and seized upon the brief notes of address
and reference which Agnes had left.
"I will go away, then, and execute your commission," he said, in an
altered voice; "since that is all you wanted me for. It is too good for
me, I allow, that you should employ me at all, and for that I am
grateful. But I think you are a little hard upon me," he went on. "You
make no allowance for the feeling I have in seeing you drawn into such a
connection; placed in the position of sister to a girl who--and brought
into constant contact with this sister. I have that to get over before I
can approach the subject dispassionately. You do not know what sort of
people such women are."
"Do you?"
"God forgive me, Miss Heriot--I have been as other men!" he said,
reddening like a girl. "No, by Heaven! I don't know, except by report
and common acceptation; not much--"
"I do," said Marjory, calmly; "I know these two women, and I know the
class from which they spring; but that is not the question. I have
formed my opinion strongly on the subject. I do not ask you to make it
yours."
"It is mine, with all my heart--anything you believe," said Fanshawe,
very wretched, and yet once more with that glimmering of fun which
spoilt the pathos of so many a fine situation. Marjory, at this moment,
was not inclined to see any humour in it. She went on severely, and with
a tremendous courtesy which shrivelled him up.
"I could not, of course, ask you, whose experience in every way is much
greater than mine, to adopt my opinion; and nothing but a momentary
hallucination, which I hope you will be so very kind as to excuse, could
have made me think of transferring to you my work. I beg your pardon for
it. It is the absurd way in which we are accustomed to have things done
for us--the difficulty a woman finds in moving anywhere without a host
of explanations. But pray forgive me; feeling as I do, it is my business
to complete poor Agnes's work, and clear up the matter, whatever it may
cost me. Of course, there is no reason in the world why I should not do
it myself."
"You reject my assistance, then!" said Fanshawe, ruefully. "You take it
out of my hands? Miss Heriot, is that fair?"
"I do nothing of the kind," she said; "it is a very important question
to me; but not, as stands to reason, with you. You had never heard of
the Heriots six months ago, Mr. Fanshawe. It is the most absurd thing in
the world to suppose that their interests could be of supreme importance
to you."
And she held out her hand once more with that steady smile of polite
offence and mortification, for the papers which he still held. He stood
for a moment irresolute, looking at her; then he drew out his watch.
"Yes," he said; "I see I have just half an hour to catch the next train.
I am off, Miss Heriot. The notes are vague enough, but still possible.
'Suspected to have gone into service as a porter at one of the hotels in
one of the Channel Islands; but may have gone to Australia or New
Zealand.' That was a puzzler, I allow, for our friend, who did her
journeys on foot. You shall hear from the nearest of these places as
soon as possible; and in the meantime, I may as well, I think, send
advertisements to all the papers for John Macgregor--that is worth
trying."
"But, Mr. Fanshawe, I must not--I cannot--accept such a sacrifice."
"You will say good-bye to me," he said, holding her hand; "and think of
me--say once a day, will you, Miss Heriot? Let me see, the best time
would be in the afternoon, when one is apt to get low. Think of me
then--say from four to half-past four," he said, with once more that
gleam of fun in his eye. "And I hope I shall not have to go to
Australia." Then he made a momentary pause, and looked at her wistfully
again. "Will you come to meet me?" he said. "When I come back?"
"Mr. Fanshawe! I beg, I entreat!"
"But you must promise," he said, with a short laugh. "Good-bye; till we
meet again."
What was till they met again? the kiss on her hand? This question, the
imbecility of which can only be explained by her extreme agitation, was
the only thing that fluttered through Marjory's mind in that hasty
moment, which was over like a dream. She ran to the window and threw it
open, and gazed after him. He was gone, actually gone--upon his
errand--which might lead him heaven knows where; no doubt she had sent
for him with this very purpose; but though she had felt the most
sensible mortification when he appeared unwilling to undertake it, yet,
nevertheless, his sudden departure quite stupefied Marjory. It put
Isabell and Agnes, and their whole story, completely out of her head.
She sat down at the open window and watched him as long as he was in
sight, and it was with difficulty that she restrained herself from going
after him in the strange state of excitement into which his sudden
departure threw her. All this was without any action of her mind at
all--a sudden whirl of involuntary feeling, nothing more.
But it is impossible to describe the consternation of Mr. Charles when
he heard of the departure of their visitor. This was when he returned to
luncheon, which he did at the cost of some personal inconvenience--for
he had to return to the Links for a match at three o'clock. It was sheer
benevolence that brought him, and fear least Marjory should feel herself
uncomfortable--thus receiving a stranger, "and no man in the house." The
announcement, however, took him entirely by surprise. "Mr. Fanshawe
away!" he said; "bless me, Marjory, what has taken him away? What did
the man come for, if he was to go away so soon? I was just saying to
myself to-day, if he was the same as he was at Pitcomlie, we might have
a difficulty in getting rid of him; and here I find he's off! Maybe, my
dear, it was your fault?"
She was annoyed with herself for blushing; but she answered calmly
enough: "I do not think so, uncle; he took me very much by surprise."
"Well, my dear," said Uncle Charles, "you must manage your own affairs,
and no doubt you'll do it well; but you must mind that though he's a
very pleasant person, and was very serviceable, we've heard but a poor
account of Mr. Fanshawe. I cannot say I recollect, just at this moment,
what it was I heard--"
"Whatever it was," said Marjory, with some heat, "I do not believe it,
Uncle Charles."
"Well, well!" said Mr. Charles once more, in a tone of soothing; "I do
not bid you believe all you hear, my dear; still it should not be
altogether neglected; that's not wise; in short, far from wise. To tell
the truth, if he is not away in a pet about something I know nothing of,
I'm not sorry, for my part, to be alone to-day. I am vexed by some news
I have from good Dr. Murray. I will have to go over there."
"Has anything gone wrong?"
"These young women," said Mr. Charles, shaking his head; "I doubted it
from the appearance of them. These young women are behaving themselves
very strangely, my dear; they are turning everything upside down. From
what I hear, they are meditating meddling with the house; pulling
something down, or putting something up, I cannot tell which; but it's
a thing that must not be allowed--nay--so far as I'm aware--guardians
have no such power. I mean to speak to Mungo Barmaster this afternoon,
and see what he says. But the end of it will be, that I shall have to go
over myself," said Mr. Charles, as if there was in that suggestion
something very terrible and decisive. He knitted his gentle brows, and
repeated once more, with a wavering swing upon his long legs, "I will
have to go over myself."
Here another impulse seized upon Marjory, which she obeyed suddenly in
her excitement, by way of relieving her own highly wrought feelings.
"Uncle Charles," she said, "there is something on my mind which I would
like to tell you. I do not know what you may think of it, whether it may
trouble you or please you; but anyhow, it is not a thing we can be
indifferent to. I once showed you a letter I had found among poor Tom's
papers."
"Among Tom's papers! Ay! do you say so? I've no recollection--"
"Yes, uncle; think! you must remember. It was from a woman."
Mr. Charles roused himself at once.
"A thing that should never have come under your eyes! I said so at the
time. Try to forget it, May. Some women I have seen have a morbid sort
of curiosity about such persons; but not you, my dear. Try to put it out
of your mind."
"You mistake, uncle," said Marjory, gently. "I thought you were mistaken
at the time. It is more important than you think, I have seen her--"
"You!" cried Mr. Charles, stammering with sudden anger. "You! Now this
beats all! If your brother was coarse enough to think of such a thing,
you, Marjory, a delicate young woman, you should have had more feeling."
The implied blame brought the colour warmly to Marjory's cheeks.
"Hush! Uncle Charles. I knew at the time you were mistaken."
"Which is likely to know best, you or I?" said Mr. Charles, with not
unnatural exasperation. "May, I am not your father, and I have no real
authority; but still you obeyed me when you were a little bairn, and I
am your nearest friend. There must be no more of this, no more of this!
A young woman has no right to compromise herself."
"Wait, uncle, till you hear me; it is more important than you think. I
met her by chance, not knowing who she was. She is very ill--dying. She
did not know me any more than I knew her; but I have come to know her
story. Hush! wait, Uncle Charles--She was Tom's wife; and she has--a
son--"
Mr. Charles turned pale; his lower lip dropped in his surprise, as if he
had been struck by sudden illness. He shook so that that pencil he held
between his fingers dropped.
"What--what?" he said. "Nonsense! it's raving, it's madness! I'll not
credit a word of it; it's some story made up. May, May, tell me it all
over again; what does this mean?"
"It means," said Marjory, with sudden composure, which came to her she
could not tell how, "that unless we take care to clear it all up, and
prove the truth or falsehood of this story, there will be a disputed
succession in our family to be fought out; perhaps when we are no longer
living; but, one day or other, it will certainly be fought out."
"Bless me! bless me!" said Mr. Charles, walking about the room in great
agitation. "What is this? what is this? A disputed succession, a wife
and a child--did you say a child, or a son? And, God bless me! if it's
true, what kind of a woman must she be that he never dared acknowledge
her? He knew how his father wanted him to marry--and a son! Did you say
a son? This is the most astonishing piece of news, Marjory," Mr. Charles
added, coming up to her, "if it can be relied upon, that I ever heard in
all my life."
"I thought it would startle you; but you do not think now I could have
helped taking an interest, Uncle Charles? When I heard of the child----"
"God bless us!" said the pious philosopher again. He was too much
excited to remain still. He walked up and down the room, repeating
broken sentences to himself. "But the mother must be come of very
indifferent folk; she must have little to recommend her; she must be
some girl that has known how to take care of herself. And then the story
may not be true; you must take into account, May, that it's very likely
it may not be true."
"That is exactly what I think we must find out--without sparing either
money or trouble, Uncle Charles."
"Lord preserve us!" said the old man; "and in that case the other little
bairn would have nothing to do with it? and these young women--Marjory,
my dear, I see the hand of Providence in this. Does she give full
particulars? has she proof? I would not say a word, nor interfere one
way or another, without strong and clear evidence. Has she proof?"
"Yes," said Marjory, out of the fulness of her heart. She had no need
herself of any proof of Isabell's story. Her face was guarantee of that;
and she had a second visionary confidence, as strong or stronger than
her trust in Isabell--which was that Fanshawe would find all that was
wanted. Thus she took upon herself to answer, as it were, for both of
these persons, in her warm affirmation, rather than for the abstract
truth. As a matter of fact, the evidence, she knew, was not forthcoming;
but Marjory believed in her, and she believed also in him.
"And these young women at Pitcomlie;" said Mr. Charles, with a gleam of
momentary triumph. He was ashamed, however, of his emotion almost before
he had expressed it. "That is, my dear," he said, "if there is any truth
in the story; which is a thing I scarcely believe."
CHAPTER XIV.
The confidence which Marjory thus injudiciously, and on the impulse of
the moment, shared with her uncle, was premature and indiscreet. No
doubt it is hard to shut up a discovery of importance in one's own
bosom, and for a woman accustomed to all the continual intercourse and
confidence of domestic life, to carry on a series of secret operations,
is almost impossible; but the relief afforded was not so great as she
had hoped. Mr. Charles could think of nothing else. He questioned and
cross-questioned--who was Isabell? what were her people? where did they
come from? how did Marjory know that they were respectable or
trustworthy? how had she made acquaintance with them? To these questions
she could give but scanty answers. Mr. Charles groaned when he heard of
the irregular marriage. He shook his head till it ached with the
movement.
"In all our records," he said, in piteous tones, "I do not believe, May,
that such a scandal has ever happened before. We've had none but
virtuous women, my dear, none but good women, and clever women, May. It
has always been our strong point. God bless us! and all to end in two
fools like these young women at Pitcomlie, and a---- I humbly beg your
pardon, my dear."
"Uncle, this girl, who is dying, is like a saint."
Once more Mr. Charles shook his head.
"I never heard yet of a saint that made an irregular marriage," he said,
"and as for her dying, my dear, if she's really the heir's mother, far
the best thing she can do will be to die. A woman like that would be a
dreadful sort of apparition at Pitcomlie. Whatever her people are, they
cannot be in a position that would do the infant any credit. Lord
preserve us! am I speaking of my own family?" cried Mr. Charles, feeling
the wound go to his heart. "One a fool, and the other a---- Poor
fellows, they've gone to their account--but there must have been some
imperfection in those two lads, my dear, though they were your brothers;
there must have been some imperfection. They say the wife a man chooses
is the best revelation of his own character. You need not be angry, my
dear; I am saying nothing against the poor boys."
"Let us say nothing at all about it, uncle, till we know."
"That's easy said, that's easy said, my dear. You may be able to put it
out of your mind, but I cannot. The whole future of the family! Perhaps
I had better see the girl, May, and examine her myself?"
"Uncle, she is ill."
"I'll do her no harm, my dear," said Uncle Charles; and he resumed the
subject in the morning, to Marjory's dread. He had been brought up to
the law, and he had some faith, as was natural, in his own knowledge.
"If I once hear her story, I will see at once what is to be made of
it," he said; and as he had been further stimulated by another letter
about the proceedings, or intended proceedings of Miss Bassett, the old
man was much in earnest. It was the agent of the Bank in Pitcomlie who
had sent him this information, and Mr. Charles had come down to
breakfast with his hair standing on end, at all the audacities that were
contemplated. "I know no precedent--no precedent," he said, with his
forehead puckered into a hundred lines. "They say women are
conservatives; but I never heard of rebels like them, when they take
that lawless turn. A man would think twice before he would meddle with
an old-established house; he would think that the past might have its
rights, no to speak of the future."
"I don't think folly is of either sex," said Marjory, who was not fond
of hearing her own side assailed; "though Verna is not a fool----"
"Verna!" cried Mr. Charles, in his indignation, "she is out of the
question, May. I might stand something from your brother's wife. She's a
foolish creature, but she's not without good points--at all events she's
pretty, which is aye something; and she is poor Charlie's widow; but the
other young woman! Do you know, my dear, it's my duty to see this girl,
and hear her story myself?"
All that Marjory could do was to effect a compromise--to go herself and
prepare poor Isabell, putting off Mr. Charles's visit for another day.
Mr. Charles accordingly went out, though late, and hung about the Club
all the morning, talking with every lounger who came in his way (and
their name was legion). He told nothing, he was quite convinced; and
yet, oddly enough, a vague impression that some story about the House of
Pitcomlie--some romance in real life, such as now and then fills every
county with lively interest and delight--was about to be made known to
the world--came into existence. There were various versions of it
instantly created by the conversationalists of the Golf Club.
"I don't know what's afloat among the Heriots," said Mr. Morrison, of
St. Rule's; "auld Charlie is going about like a clucking hen; he has
some mystery under his wing, that's sure. Either it's some new claimant
turned up from Australia, like the one they're making so great a fuss
about in London, or----"
"I don't see how that can be," said Major Vee or Captain Eff. "All the
Heriots and all their comings and goings are too well known in Fife, and
besides, there never was one that disappeared, or did anything he
oughtn't to have done."
"They're a fearfully respectable family," said another golfer, with a
great emphasis on the adjective; "but Tom Heriot was thrown away upon
them. He was not of that mould. If anything's gone wrong, or there's a
chance of revelations, I back Tom to be the hero. He was never one of
your cut and dry men, foredoomed to be a Laird, and do his duty."
"He was a simple ne'er-do-weel," said Mr. Seton, "like his friend
Fanshawe, whom I saw in the town the other day, by the bye. They were
an excellent pair. And there's a sympathy among that sort of people.
Miss Heriot, who is as proud as Lucifer, and looks down upon most
people, was hanging upon that fellow's arm. If it's some peccadillo of
Tom's, no doubt Fanshawe was in it."
"I don't see what Miss Heriot could have to do with any peccadillo of
Tom's," said another speaker. "Whatever you may say against women,
toleration of their brother's peccadillos is not one of their faults.
But Mrs. Charles, I hear, is making a bonny business at Pitcomlie,
pulling down the house to build some fine castle or other. That's
enough, I should say, to account for old Charlie's troubles. He's like a
hen on a hot girdle, fluttering about everywhere. God be praised, he's
engaged for a foursome at three o'clock with old Adam of St. Edgar's,
and the two Wolffs. A bonny time they will have of it. I saw him lose a
putt yesterday that an infant might have played. And talk of
putting----"
Here the speaker went off into golf, and left the Heriots. Mr. Charles,
however, fulfilled the prophecy in every respect. He produced the most
unchristian temper in the partner of his game, and gave his opponents an
opportunity for gibes innumerable. Up to this present date a description
of the worse putt ever made on the Links, as perpetrated on that unhappy
day by Mr. Charles Hay-Heriot of the Pitcomlie family, is told for the
edification of beginners. The reader, who knows the reason why, will not
blame Mr. Charles. He could not, as he acknowledged, get all these
complications out of his head. His placid soul was torn by so many
unforeseen calamities. The existing state of affairs was bad enough, and
the personal contentions which lay before him, the struggle with "these
young women," in which Mr. Charles felt it quite possible that he might
be worsted, would, had there been nothing else, have been enough to
embitter his peaceful days. The other question, however, came into it
with a painful excitement. It did not obliterate the first, as it ought
reasonably to have done, since, if the second story was true, Mrs.
Charles could have no authority or place at Pitcomlie. Some minds have a
faculty for getting all the annoyance possible out of their
surroundings, just as some others get all the sweetness possible. Mr.
Charles hugged both to his bosom. He groaned over the possibility of
having to insert a name never heard of before, and the record of an
irregular marriage into the genealogical papers of the Heriots, which
had not known such profanation from the time of the Jameses. Talk of the
whaling captain, indeed, who had vitiated the blood of the Morrisons!
perhaps it was a judgment upon Mr. Charles for his remarks on that flaw;
for this was a thousand times worse than any whaling captain. And yet
while he groaned over the prospective humiliation, he afflicted his soul
at the same time with thoughts of how he was to manage Mrs. Charles and
her impertinent sister, who took so much upon her, and yet was not so
much as related to the Heriots. The one misery was incompatible with
the other; but yet he took the good, or rather the evil, of them both.
The existence of this doubting, questioning, perplexed, and perplexing
companion by her side was no addition to Marjory's comfort. She
postponed her visit to the cottage for motives which she scarcely
ventured to define--foremost among which was a vague reluctance to meet
Agnes again, and to discuss with her the work which she had taken out of
her hands. In every such enterprise there comes a moment of
discouragement, of painful difficulty, of disgust even, with
circumstances which at first filled the mind only with pity and
fellow-feeling. Marjory felt that she would gladly have turned her back
on the matter altogether; she would fain have forgotten all about it
from the day when she first saw the patient face of the sick girl at the
cottage door. What had she to do with it? Such an intruder is usually
rejected, or at least held at arm's length by "the family." A
msalliance is seldom acknowledged or insisted upon by the sister of
the man who has made it. Sometimes it occurred to her that it was even
unmaidenly on her part to have interfered in the matter; after all, such
a marriage was, she said to herself, no marriage at all--unblessed by
religion, unhonoured by publicity, a secret expedient to make guilt less
guilty--was not that all that could be said for it? and yet what a
difference this poor formula made! Without it the girl was a lost
creature, covered with shame; with it she was surrounded by the sanctity
of a woman wronged, almost a martyr; and yet it was nothing, nothing! a
mere expedient to make guilt less guilty. This was only one of a
hundred ways in which Marjory contemplated the subject; and hers was a
woman's view of the matter altogether, though not less forcible on that
account. The sting of these thoughts was that they had never occurred to
her before. She had committed herself in many ways--to Isabell; and
still more, to Fanshawe; she had filled the girl with false hopes, and,
perhaps, still falser hopes had been raised in the man's mind by her
appeal to him. She had sent him out against his will, against his own
idea of what was needful--and now she repented! This is the danger of
possessing an impulsive temperament. Such disgust and discouragement
seldom come until the world has been set on fire by the hasty spirit.
Marjory felt (for the moment) that she would gladly have turned her back
upon it all now; she would have liked to go away to the end of the
world, and get out of sight and hearing of everybody who could remind
her of this chapter of her existence. So she thought; and the fact that
she could not have taken three steps in her flight before compunction
and a revival of all her anxious interest would have seized her,
dragging her back again, had really nothing to do with the question. She
kept away from the cottage, fearing any intercourse with the sisters,
whose cause, for the moment, she felt herself to have abandoned. And it
was not until she was roused from this curious discouragement, by the
sight of an advertisement in the second column of the "Times," calling
upon John Macgregor to disclose himself, that she was roused to
something of her former feeling. This took her by surprise; to her
consciousness all progress had been arrested, and everything stayed by
the change in her mind; she had done nothing, and she had concluded that
nothing was being done. But the sight of the advertisement roused her;
she saw that she had set forces in action that could not be stopped, and
whatever her own languor might be, she had no longer any right to keep
still. As soon as she had realized this, her disgust evaporated like the
dew on the grass, and good sense and judgment regained the upper hand.
John Macgregor might still be in Scotland, notwithstanding Agnes's
failure, and in that case, the "Times" was a very unlikely vehicle of
communication with him. She bestirred herself instantly, with a glow at
her heart, which, after all, was not immediately caused either by
devotion to her brother's memory or regard for Isabell. Who was it that
had called Fanshawe good-for-nothing? Marjory laughed softly by herself
at the ludicrous inappropriateness of the word--good-for-nothing! She
had heard his voice as it were in the dark, calling out to her, telling
her he was at work, encouraging her to go on. Marjory filled all the
Scotch papers with advertisements during the next week; she demanded
John Macgregor from all the winds; but still she did not go to the
cottage. Now that she had fairly re-commenced work, it seemed to her
that she must wait until she had something to tell.
One day, however, a sudden thought came to her of Isabell's dying
condition, and of the possible consequences of suspense, unbroken by
any ray of hope. She set out towards the Spindle on a dreary afternoon,
when the clouds hung low, and the sea was black with rising wind. It was
the heaviest time of the day--that hour when life runs lowest--when
Fanshawe had bidden her think of him. The few vessels visible were
struggling between two dark leaden lines of sky and sea; nothing was
cheerful or encouraging in the external surroundings. The waves came in
with a threatening rush round the Spindle; the wind sighed with a sound
of rain; and though she had not expected Isabell to be outside on such a
day, yet a sense of unreasonable disappointment arose in Marjory's mind
at the absence of the well-known figure from the cottage-door. The door
was closed, and no one was visible about. In all the earth and air there
seemed no living thing, except in the few ships--big and little, which
struggled across the horizon.
"Oh mercy! to myself I said,
If Lucy should be dead!"
The thought was natural enough, so far as Isabell was concerned, but it
filled Marjory with remorse as she hurried forward. If Isabell were to
die before, one way or other, this matter was cleared up!--it was but
too likely she would; but the thought seemed to lend wings to Marjory's
feet.
In the little cottage chamber, however, which she thought so still,
there was pain enough to demonstrate life, could she but have known. It
was a dark little room at all times, for though there were two windows,
these windows were little casements composed of very small and very dim
panes of greenish glass--one in the front of the house towards the sea,
and the other to the back. A smouldering fire burned in the grate, at
which stood Isabell's mother in her white mutch, making tea for her
invalid. Isabell herself lay in the box, or press-bed, fitted into the
wall, which is universal in such cottages. From the airless wooden
enclosure her pale face looked out strangely, most unlike, in its
pathetic beauty, to everything about. The mother's back was turned, but
between the fire and the bed sat Agnes, her ruddy, comely countenance
overcast with vexation and care. She was doing nothing, her head was
thrown back listlessly, and her hands laid in her lap. They were brown
hands, bearing the traces of toil, and their idleness had a certain
pathos in it. She sat, too, almost in the middle of the room, as if she
had thrown herself down by chance, not knowing, or not caring where. As
the mother went and came she stumbled over Agnes's foot, or her chair,
and uttered a little querulous exclamation: "Canna you sit in a corner?
canna ye get something to do?" she said. "I canna bide to see a woman
doing naething; take John's stockings, if you'll do nothing else."
"I have nae heart for stockings, or anything else!" said Agnes with a
sigh.
"Eh, woman! if I had been like that how could I have brought you all
up?" said the mother. "Seven of a family, and no a penny nor a penny's
worth in the world. Do ye think I hadna often a sair heart? and many a
time darena sit down, for fear I should be ower tired to rise again.
What are your bits of trouble to that?"
"Do you call yon a bit trouble?" said Agnes, pointing to her sister's
bed. The mother's countenance darkened; she turned towards the fire
again, turning her back on her sick daughter. "I dinna call that trouble
at all," she said; "that's sin and shame."
"Eh, mother, ye're hard, hard! will ye never believe it--not even since
you've seen Miss--her man's sister. Will ye no believe her, even now?"
"Dinna speak to me of her man," said the old woman indignantly, pouring
the boiling water upon the tea with a certain vindictive movement. All
this conversation was carried on in an undernote, that Isabell might not
hear. "Her man has been a bonnie man to her; whatever was his meaning;
he's brought her naething but misery and shame. What had she to do,
giving ear to ane o' thae gentlemen with their false tongues? Gentlemen!
I wouldna give an honest man for ten gentlemen--and so it's seen. Give
her her tea; I havena the heart to look at her white face," said the
mother, turning away; she went and sat down noiselessly in the room, and
put up her apron to her eyes. How many different kinds of suffering were
shut up there together, all separate, and keeping themselves apart!
The tea was made in silence--the one cordial of poor women's lives--and
then the little group subsided once more into their places.
"Have you any word from John?" said the mother, this time loud enough
for all to hear.
"I have aye word from John," said Agnes, with a tone of indignation;
"whatever happens, he never misses his day."
"But you've come to nae settlement yet about what's to be done. It's a
wise bargain you've made, him and you--as wise almost as some other
folk; to wait--till when?"
"Till I'm gone, mother!" said Isabell. "Oh, if you would have patience!
I'll no be long. I feel the wheel breaking at the fountain, and the
silver chain being sundered, as the Bible says. When I'm gone, there
will be nae motive for keeping up all this trouble. I've been making a
terrible stir and commotion, I know that; no for me--and yet I mustna
conceal the truth--I had some thought for myself, too; to die so young
is sore enough without shame. But if God will have me bear shame, I must
put up with it; and you must put up with it, Agnes. John's a good man;
he'll never upbraid you with your poor sister, that ye did so much for;
and you'll take my bairn. He'll never ken he had a mother but you--and
you'll be good--oh, you'll be good to him! No, why should I greet?" she
went on, looking with apparent surprise at a tiny drop that fell on her
coverlet; "we must accept what God sends."
"Oh, hold your tongue, hold your tongue!" cried the mother; "God never
sent wickedness. I'll no be contradictit in my own house--though, to be
sure, it's no my house, for that matter. We were a' proud of your bonnie
face, and your genty ways; and our pride's had a fa'; yes, you may see,
even your bonnie leddy that you were so sure of--your man's sister, as
ye say--has come back no more. She's given ye up like a' the rest; and
everybody will give ye up--till you humble yourself, Bell, and put away
all your pretences, and do what Magdalen did. But naebody in heaven or
earth will show mercy to a lie."
"Mother, you're that hard that ye make me sick," cried Agnes. "It's no a
lie."
"Let her prove it, then!" said the mother solemnly. She was in accord
with Mr. Charles, with Fanshawe, with all others except Marjory, who had
heard the tale. As for Agnes, she started up from her seat as if unable
to bear any more.
"I maun be away again," she cried; "I canna stand it longer. If your
grand leddies and your fine gentlemen will do nothing for her, I'll take
up my work again, myself--and I'll clear ye yet, Bell. I'll away to
Edinburgh this very day, and see John; maybe him and me can think of
something else. I'm 'maist glad they've failed ye!" cried the girl, with
tears in her eyes; "for now I'll never rest day or night till I've done
it myself."
"You'll think first what you're doing," said the mother; "going to visit
a man that has no heart to marry ye; mind what's happened to your
sister, and take heed for yourself."
"Oh, woman!" cried Agnes, turning upon her wildly--while poor Isabell,
struck by this unexpected assault, lay back upon her pillows feebly
sobbing; and it was at this moment that Marjory knocked at the cottage
door.
CHAPTER XV.
There could not have been a more striking welcome than the celestial
glimmer of light which came over Isabell's countenance at this sight.
She stayed her weeping with an effort, she held out her thin hands; she
looked at the new-comer with pathetic delight.
"Oh, you've come, you've come at last!" she cried with an unconscious
reproach. She was so weak that the fit of weeping which she had
restrained, interrupted her by an involuntary long-drawn sob now and
then, like the sobbing of a child and Marjory thought that this sobbing
too was her fault.
"I thought you would never come," said Isabell, "it makes me nigh well
to see you. Oh no, Miss Heriot, I'm no worse; I'm wearing away, wearing
away, but no faster than everybody expected. Oh, it does me good to see
you--to say your name."
"Did you ever hear of me--from--Tom?" said Marjory with hesitation, yet
with a generous desire to make up for her late failure in interest. She
had not melted into any familiarity as a more gushing nature might have
done. Poor Isabell! this gave her an excuse to weep quietly, to expend
her half-shed tears.
"Oh, I never called him by that name," she said, "I daredna'. It was
aye his desire I should, but I never could say anything but Mr. Heriot.
I liked to say it; it seemed like himself, grander than me, far above
me--I was never anything but Isabell. Yes, Miss Heriot, he said once how
good ye were, and that, whoever was hard, you would be kind. He called
you May--is that your name?"
"Yes, that is my name." Marjory could not unbend altogether, could not
tell this girl, though her heart yearned towards her, to call her by
that name, to call her sister, as so many effusive girls would have
done. She answered quite simply and shortly without further expansion.
Was it true that she would have been kind whoever had been cruel?
Marjory had not much faith in herself so far as this was concerned. She
remembered the horror which had taken possession of her when she had
thought of this young woman becoming the mistress of Pitcomlie. All such
feelings had fled away now; but yet she could not feel that Tom had any
reason for his confidence in her. "I came to warn you, my poor Isabell,"
she said, "my uncle is anxious to come, to speak to you about all this;
you must know that it is a very important matter for us. He is the only
one remaining who has any right to interfere, and he wishes to come, to
question you. He is an old man, and very kind; but he will not be
satisfied unless he sees you himself; if it is not too much for you--"
"Oh," cried Isabell, with a long-drawn breath, "naething's too much for
me! I'll be glad, glad to tell him all I can, to do anything I can to
satisfy him or you. It's hard to tell the truth and find nobody to
believe you; but all I can do is to tell him, and leave the rest to God,
Miss Heriot. Eh, what cause I have to trust in Him! A while ago I
thought I never would hear the name again; and now there will be Heriots
a' about me--you that are my kindest friend--and this gentleman. If it
was not too much trouble, oh, might I see the bonnie little lady with
the gold hair that Agnes says is like my baby? He's a Heriot too," said
poor Isabell, with a wistful upward glance at Marjory's face. She was
trustful, but yet afraid. She made a little fluttering movement towards
something beside her in the bed, something that Marjory had not seen
till this moment, and only divined now. "He's a Heriot too," the young
mother pleaded, "oh, may I let you see him? If I once saw him in your
arms I would be happy--"
"Bell!" said Agnes, in a voice of angry warning, "you said the bairn was
to be mine, John's and mine--no an hour ago before this leddy came, you
said it. It's her mainner and her voice and her flattering ways that
have taken your heart."
"It's no that," said Isabell, "I'm doing you no wrong. You will be a
mother to him, and he'll ken no other mother; but I would like Miss
Heriot to take him just once in her arms, just to give him a kiss for
his father's sake, just to see if he's no like his father. If it was no
more than that--no to take him from you that have the best right--"
"My daughters, mem, are not civil to me," said the old woman coming
forward for the first time. "You hear the one say that's it the other
that has the best right; yet this bairn was born under my auld roof, and
put first into my auld arms, me that bore his mother, and bred her up by
the toil of my hands and the sweat of my brow. They think I've naething
to do with it; that I'm to sit by and hear him given away from one to
another and never say a word."
"It's John and me," said Agnes breaking in, "that can do best for the
bairn."
"And who will love him best?" said the old mother, "you will have bairns
of your ain. You will push him by and make no account of him. He will
have the orphan's fate. He will eat the bread of tears, he will have to
bide in his corner, and haud his tongue, and walk wary, wary, lest worst
should befall him."
Here Isabell turned with a cry to the unconscious infant at her side.
They pierced her gentle soul with a hundred poisoned arrows without
meaning it. Poor people do not build up foolish pictures of possible
recovery round their dying up to the last moment, as some of us do. They
never throw any sort of doubt upon that certain and near approaching
termination. Not even a charitable suggestion that she might live to
watch her child's growth was made by any one; nor did Isabell expect it.
Perhaps on the whole this was the most real kindness, and it was the
only treatment she had ever been used to; but yet in her delicate soul,
she felt the want of tenderness without knowing how it was.
Meanwhile Marjory sat by bewildered, and listened to this dispute in
confusion. She tried to interrupt them more than once, but their eager
voices were too much for her. The strife was a generous strife in its
way; but was it possible that they did not know if his mother's marriage
was proved what the child must become at once? She interposed at last as
calmly as she could.
"If all the proof is obtained that will be necessary," she said, "if the
marriage is proved, and everybody satisfied" (at these words Isabell
turned round, took her hand and kissed it gratefully, while her mother
retreated to the furthest corner, persistently shaking her head, and
uttering sighs that were deep enough to be groans), "then I think our
family will have to be consulted. It is not quite so simple as you
think. There will be something also for us to do."
The old woman came back from her corner of the room, and Isabell turned
wistful, smiling, beaming upon the speaker.
"Oh," she said, "it was what I aye hoped, but I daredna ask. My wee man
will not have the hard life we've all been born to? Oh, I'm joyful,
joyful of that! not for the money, Miss Heriot; but if you knew the
difference of him and you, folk that have been gently nurtured as they
say in books, from the like of us; gently nurtured, that's what I would
like--learned to speak soft, and think of others' feelings, and move
quiet and be like him and you. Without money that cannot be; if he's to
be brought up to work for his living like the rest, that cannot be."
"If you mean the rest of my bairns, Isabell," said her mother, hotly,
"your wean will be real well off if he's like them. An honest working
man may look any gentleman in the face. I've aye trained ye up to that."
"Ay, mother," said Isabell, "that's very true; but a gentleman's son is
no like a ploughman's son; and oh, if my boy might be like his father!
They'll no let me speak of his father; but Miss Heriot, I may to you."
"Yes," said Marjory, faintly. A fastidious cloud had come over her
again. Tom, poor Tom, had not been to her an ideal being; it seemed to
her that his education, and the result of it, might both be improved in
a new human creature. But poor Isabell thought differently; a new world
opened before her eyes, which were full of tears, grateful tears, made
sweet by an unexpected and unlooked for gladness.
"Oh, if I could live to see it!" she sighed, with a quivering smile. It
was the first time that such a possibility had occurred to her. She
threw a wistful glance into the future, which she must never see, and
for one moment longed to live. Then for another moment the tears turned
salt and bitter. "But that mayna be," she added, still more low. No, she
could not live to see it; but still this sunset gleam had given a gentle
radiance to her life.
"A little siller is aye a good thing. I'm very glad the bairn's
provided for," said the old woman, looking at Marjory keenly. Pride kept
her from further inquiry; her ears were keenly open, and her mind intent
to find out more fully what was meant; but she would have died sooner
than ask a question. Somehow, however, this simple speech of Marjory's
changed the aspect of affairs to Isabell's mother. It gave a probability
to the story of the marriage, which it had never hitherto possessed in
her eyes; the moment that money is involved it gives reality to
everything. The old woman's feeling was very different from that vague
sense of beatitude with which Isabell herself regarded the possibility
of her child's future wealth; but Marjory was instantly aware of the
deepened interest, the increased disposition to believe the story true.
She went on to comment on what news she had of the search in which
everything was involved.
"The gentleman you saw," she said, addressing Agnes, and feeling, to her
great annoyance, that she blushed, "has gone off in search of these
people. He is to go to Guernsey; first and in the meantime we have put
advertisements in all the papers for John Macgregor."
"Adver-tisements!" said Agnes, with dismay. "To give him notice that he
may get out of the way and hide himself."
"Why should he get out of the way and hide himself?"
"It is how they aye do," said Agnes, obstinately adhering to her own
theory. "Whenever a man is wanted for anything, that's what aye happens.
And I would do it myself. If there was an adver-tisement for me in the
papers, I would leave my place, or change my lodgings in a moment. Eh,
that would I! I would not let myself be taken in a net. And John
Macgregor's no a fool--no such a fool as to come for an advertisement.
Na, Miss Heriot, it would have been better to have left it to me."
The mother drew near, also interested in this question. It was the first
time she had taken any distinct interest in it.
"I ken naething about it," she said, "but putting a man's name in the
papers is like sending a hue and cry after him. I ken John Macgregor,
though I put nae trust in him. Ye'll never tell me that he'll be brought
back by that."
"No," said Agnes. They both came near, and stood by shaking their heads;
while Isabell, with a face which gradually grew more and more keen with
anxiety, raised her eyes to Marjory, and put her thin hands together.
"It's my last hope," she said.
Perhaps there was just enough of old-fashioned prejudice in Marjory's
own mind to agree with them a little, and she knew how strong that
prejudice was amongst this class. But somehow the protest thus made
against her proceedings roused in her again the fastidious and fanciful
disgust which only occurred to her mind after she had thrown her whole
heart into this effort.
"Well," she said, somewhat coldly, "if what I do is unsuccessful, you
can then take it back into your hands. We can only adopt the means we
think best. It is not my place to interfere at all; all my friends have
told me as much."
"Oh, dinna say that!" said Isabell, with appealing eyes. They all fought
over this patient, unresisting creature. To all of them it was a
secondary matter--to her it was life and death. In the pause that ensued
she was driven almost to despair. All that her imagination could
conceive she had already done. She had told her tale, she had opened her
heart, she had thrown herself upon their sympathy, she had appealed to
them by every argument in her power. The only thing yet remaining to her
she did now. With a sudden movement, which was almost too much for her
weakness, she lifted the infant by her side, and thrust it, without any
warning, into Marjory's arms. Partly it was a simple artifice to prevent
the possibility of a refusal, and partly it was the hurry of weakness
which made this act so rapid. "This is--his bairn," said poor Isabell,
falling back upon her pillow, and closing her pale eyelids. The tears
stole softly out from under those lids, the hectic colour faded from her
face. She turned her head aside, as if to avoid seeing the failure of
her last experiment. And the others stood looking on with keen interest,
with feelings vaguely quickened, with a sense of reality in the whole
matter such as they had never felt before.
Marjory was disconcerted more than she could say. She was not used to
young children. She had almost a repugnance to this morsel of humanity
suddenly thrust into her arms--this creature, which should have come
into the world amid the clamour of rejoicing, which should have been its
mother's pride, the hope of an old family, the inheritor of wealth and
influence, and a kind of power. At the present moment it was its
mother's shame; it was the shame of the dead man who had made no
provision for it in this world, who had allowed it to be supplanted in
his heedlessness, and made its future insecure; and over the child's
existence a certain cloud of shame must always hover: legitimate indeed,
but legitimate only by that expedient to make guilt less guilty--making
only a hairbreadth escape from humiliation and ignominy. The baby was
fast asleep; it was warm and downy like a little nestling taken suddenly
out of the nest. Even the rapid movement did not disturb its utter calm.
It lay on Marjory's lap, among the circle of agitated spectators, rapt
in an absolute tranquillity which went to the heart of these women. The
old mother began to weep. Agnes stood by with hungry eyes, ready to
snatch the child from the stranger, who was as closely related to it as
she, but who was an interloper, having nothing to do with it, she felt;
while Marjory sat still, without touching it, with the long white dress
streaming over her black one, looking into its sleeping face. Another
scene came over her with a flood of recollection, mingling itself
somehow in this one, giving to it an added effect. Once before an infant
like this had been placed in her arms by a dying mother. The child was
Milly, who since then had been as her own child to the elder sister; and
the tears rushed all at once like a stream in flood to Marjory's eyes
as she recognised the likeness. It was as if Milly had been sent back
again into babyhood; little rings of soft golden hair clustered about
the baby head, the little face was waxen in its paleness, but every
feature was like Milly. She kissed it with an enthusiasm which carried
away all her repugnance.
"I will bring Milly to see you to-morrow," she cried, hastily; and then
as she looked other likenesses stole upon her. A shadow of her father's
face before suffering bowed him down, and of both "the boys," in those
nursery days which came up so clear and fresh like a picture before her.
Both the boys! Charlie most, perhaps, whose own child was not like him.
Marjory's tears began to fall heavily on the little white nightdress
made by poor Isabell's failing fingers with all the nicety which love
could suggest. She forgot how all three were watching her eagerly,
waiting for every word she said. She held the child close as it lay in
serenest sleep, unconscious of her scrutiny, its pearly little hands
spread out in that ease of perfect repose which denotes at the same time
perfect health and comfort. "He is a true Heriot," she cried, "God bless
him!"
"And God bless you!" said pale Isabell, from her bed, with a gleam of
joy over her worn face, which looked like sunshine. Agnes walked away
with a trembling thrill of jealousy and keen displeasure. But the mother
drew nearer.
"If the bairn is provided for, it will aye be something," she said.
Who could have divined what a strange little scene was going on in the
dim cottage room, where so many different emotions surrounded that one
passive and peaceful thing which slept through all--the little creature,
possessing nothing in life but the soft, almost noiseless breath which
rose and fell, regular, measured, unbroken, like a soft strain in music?
Certainly the other group approaching the cottage thought nothing of it
as they straggled across the rocks, each taking his own way, and
occupied with his or her own thoughts. They reached the door just when
Marjory had risen and was replacing the sleeping baby in the warm nest
from which he had been taken. She was stooping over the homely bed.
Nothing could be poorer or more humble; but Marjory had forgotten all
this. Her pride and pangs of revulsion had all gone from her; so had any
doubts or difficulties that had ever crossed her mind.
"You must live, you must live, Isabell!" she was saying, scarcely aware
of what she said.
And the poor young mother lay back upon her pillows with the countenance
of one beatified. She shook her head quietly, but a wavering light had
come into her face like the far-off glimmer of some lamp of hope that
flickered somewhere in the distance. She had given herself up to death
with that gentle resignation which is peculiar to the young and the
poor; but she was young, and perhaps a voice powerful enough, the voice
of a great joy, might yet call her back from the dangerous brink.
It was at this moment that a loud summons came to the door. It startled
them all, and Agnes and her mother had a brief but earnest discussion as
to whether the applicants should be admitted. Marjory paid but little
attention for the first moment. She drew her shawl round her, and wiped
the traces of tears from her eyes, and rose to go away before the
visitors, if there were visitors, should appear. But her attention was
roused when she heard what voice it was which asked admittance when the
knocking had remained for some time unheeded.
"Is there any one in? Open the door, open the door!" said the new-comer.
It was Mr. Charles. A murmur of other voices with him came in like a
faint chorus; and once more quickly and eagerly came the knocking at the
door.
CHAPTER XVI.
Mr. Charles had been seated all alone in the library of his house, a
room which confused him much, seeing that it was a library, full of
books, such as they were, yet not his, nor like anything that could have
been his. Had he been condemned to sit much in this room, it would have
been impossible for him to rest without remodelling and changing it; but
thanks to golf and the club, he was not tempted to remain for too long a
time at one sitting. This day, however, accident, which interferes with
golf as much as with other things, had broken up one of the most
promising matches ever arranged, and left Mr. Charles disconsolate. He
came home to seek Marjory, and found Marjory gone; even little Milly had
her own engagements; and he was thus left to himself. It gave him a
realization of the time which might come, if Marjory were to marry, for
instance, and he childless, daughterless, with nobody to make any house
feel like home, might be left to the cold comfort of George's Square. He
did not like the idea. He sat down in the library, as we have said, with
a statistical work before him--dry reading, but he felt still more dry.
He was out of his element, absent from his favourite surroundings,
alone; and everything was against him. How could he tell if he should
ever again find himself comfortably established in his sunny old tower,
in the room which he had garnished and arranged so carefully with all
the accumulations of his life? "These young women" were about to pull
down his old tower about his ears; or if they could be stopped in that,
here was this other story, this strange marriage of Tom's, this peasant
aspiring to the name of Heriot, with her child, who would bring into the
old house the unknown qualities of some nameless race. And Marjory, with
her head full of this nonsense, leaving him just at the moment he wanted
her most, to mix herself up with such a business! And Fanshawe, an
English ne'er-do-weel--Tom's friend, no doubt, and not a bad fellow, but
far from the sort of person to match with Marjory--brought into it, head
and shoulders! No wonder Mr. Charles was put out. The statistical book,
too, indulged in statements about Fife which made every drop of blood in
his body boil separately; statements which he could not absolutely
contradict, yet which he felt were untrue, and would not have believed
had an angel from Heaven proclaimed them. He was reading something
particularly offensive about the fishers of the East Neuk itself, and
fuming over it, when the maid came to the door to say that some one
outside was asking for Miss Heriot.
"They're awfu' disappointed to hear she's no in," said the woman. "They
have the look of decent folk, as if they had come a long way. Maybe you
would see them, Sir, and no disappoint the poor bodies? Miss Heriot is
aye awfu' polite and ceevil to poor folk."
"Miss Heriot, I hope, is polite to everybody," said Mr. Charles. "You
may show them in if their business is urgent. But stop; if it's only
charity, or that sort of thing--"
"Eh, no, Sir; they're no folk to want charity," said the woman, dismayed
at the suggestion.
And, half unwillingly, half pleased to get quit of himself and his
loneliness, and the statistics, Mr. Charles closed his book, and
prepared to receive the strangers. There was a little controversy at the
door, as he could hear, as to which should enter first, which was quite
audible. The woman would have yielded the pas to her lord; but while
her modesty was slightly artificial, that of the man was perfectly
genuine in its unalloyed loutishness.
"Gang you in, gang you in first; you've aye a word ready, right or
wrong; and me, I canna speak," the bass voice grumbled, as the little
struggle ended in the most natural way, and the wife appeared at the
door.
This amused Mr. Charles to start with; and it was with benevolent
kindness in his look, that he invited his visitors to approach.
"Miss Heriot, my niece, is out. Come forward, come forward. You can tell
me your business," he said.
The pair came in accordingly; a rustic pair, she advancing with bashful
self-possession, he hanging behind in her shadow. They were middle-aged
people; the man grizzled and ruddy, the woman a comely housewife, with
a cheerful countenance which belied her timid gait. She advanced to
within a few paces of the library table, at which Mr. Charles sat.
"You see, Sir, we've come a long way. It's no but what we would have
waited for the leddy; but my man there was struck to hear it was a
leddy, and thought maybe that in any case there would be mair comfort to
his mind in seeing the maister--"
"Na, Jean; na Jean," said the man; "that was nane of my thought; it was
your ain."
"And what matter which of us it was?" said the woman, "the gentleman no
heeding about us; and it's mair decent-like to put it on the man, the
head of the house. He thought, Sir, it would be mair satisfaction to see
you, being a responsible person, than a young leddy, that's apt to take
fancies in their heads."
"That may be, that may be," said Mr. Charles, not displeased; "though
Miss Heriot is not one of that kind; but you were not to be expected to
know. I'll be glad to hear your story, and do what I can for you."
"Oh, Sir, we're no folk that are wanting anything," said the woman;
"we're well enough off, for that matter. My man is gamekeeper with Mr.
Eclles, of the Langholm, and much thought of; with a cottage and a coo,
and as little to complain of as we can expect in this weary world. My
eldest lass is in service, and the second lad, he helps his father; and
as for him that's out in the world----"
"Was it about them you wanted to speak to Miss Heriot?"
"No, Sir, I canna say it was," she answered, with a slight air of
offence. "It was something altogether different; no concern of ours, as
my man says."
Here the man interposed, plucking at her shawl.
"Jean, say it was in the papers, and be done wi't. What's the use of so
many words?"
"Bravo!" said Mr. Charles; "you are a sensible man. Now, let us hear it;
and be so good as to be brief, my good woman, for I must be on the Links
at half-past four."
Mr. Charles grew quite energetic and brisk as he spoke. There is nothing
an idle man loves like this playing at business--those fictitious bonds
of engagements, appointments, and all the pretences at an occupied life,
which when they are real, constitute a heavy bondage. He seemed to feel
himself a most important member of society as he specified the hour at
which he must be gone. The man obeyed this suggestion, once more nudging
his wife; but the woman, with livelier instinct, saw through it.
"We might come again," she said; "another day, maybe, when the gentleman
is no engaged."
"I can give you my time till a quarter-past four," said Mr. Charles; and
then there followed a little consultation between his visitors, a
controversy as to how to state their case.
"It was about an advertisement in the papers. There's nae telling the
meaning of an advertisement. It was something that was to be to the
advantage of the person--"
"Ah! you are John Macgregor then," Mr. Charles said, with instant
brightening up of all faculties, and great internal contentment that he
was the first to hear.
"I'm no saying that. It's ane we have heard of--ane we ken, mair or
less," said the woman; "a poor man that's aye busy, and has little time
to spare. We were to find out for him what it was about. Hold your
tongue!" she said, turning round upon her husband. "Am I the one to
speak, or am I no?"
"Oh, ay! you're the one to speak; but you've ower mony phrases," said
the husband, muttering.
The wife turned round upon Mr. Charles with an air of compassion.
"Ye'll no mind his grumbling, Sir. It's my man's way. He has real
sensible thoughts, but an ill way of expressing them. A' that comes from
me is really from my man; but the words aye fail him--"
"They don't seem to fail you," said Mr. Charles.
"Na, never!" muttered the husband behind backs.
"The Lord be praised!" said the woman; "what would become of the house
and the bairns if there was not some person that had sense enough to
speak when there was occasion for't? But as I'm saying, this man in the
advertisement--It's a long way off for him to come, and as we were in
the town for our ain concerns, we gave him our word we would ask. It's
maybe about some poaching business; though that's a queer thing for a
young leddy to take in hand."
"Does not the young lady's name suggest to you what the business may
be?" said Mr. Charles, rousing up to this little conflict of wits, and
feeling a sensible pleasure in thus being thrust as it were into the
very front of the battle.
The two looked at each other.
"I told you so," said the woman.
"Then speak out; I'll no do it," said the man.
"Well, Sir," resumed the wife, "I ken just this much, that John
Macgregor was ance in the service of a Mr. Heriot, a poor young
gentleman that's dead, I hear? Eh, Sirs, to think how the young and the
goodly die, and auld dry sticks aye live on and flourish! There's a man
in our ain parish, sixty if he's a day, married upon a young lass--"
"That is not the question," said Mr. Charles with some heat, not liking
the turn these remarks had taken. "If we were to keep to our business
we'd get on all the quicker. This man was in the service of my nephew,
Mr. Tom Heriot?"
"No altogether in his service. He keepit his dogs; he did an odd thing
about the lodge now and then; he was just a serviceable person about the
place."
"Well, well," said Mr. Charles, "since you know so much about him, you
will probably know that something is supposed to have happened in Mr.
Heriot's life there, about which his friends are anxious to have
information."
"Now what could that be?" said the woman, putting up her hand to her
forehead, with that natural artifice which we call theatrical. It was
exactly what commonplace actors would have done in the endeavour to look
puzzled, and full of candid simplicity. "What could that be? I'm no so
instructed in Mr. Heriot's life as I might be. John, ye'll may mind
something? But if you'll tell me what it is, Sir, I'll tell our--friend;
no that's he just what you would call a friend."
"Your memory is so good that I am sure you could recollect were you to
try," said Mr. Charles. "Of course, as it is my niece that wants to
know, not me, I am not authorised to make any explanations."
"Eh me, what a pity the young leddy's no at hame!" said the woman with
ingenuous regret.
"But," resumed Mr. Charles, "you know that there are sometimes
connections which a young man forms, unpleasant things for the family.
Young men will be young men, you know--and what's perhaps only the fancy
of a day may leave results behind, and may bring great trouble into a
family. If you had it in your power now to prevent a great deal of
disturbance and heart-burning, and perhaps a law-suit, and the
succession of an old estate from being disputed--I cannot tell--perhaps
you know nothing at all about it--"
"Oh, my man kens a great deal more than he says. Now what can it be
about, John?" said the wife.
In the meanwhile John was undergoing internal struggles of a very severe
description. He was a large brawny man, more slow in speech and heavy
in aspect than men in his position, rubbed up into sharpness, at least,
by contact with imperious sportsmen, generally are. He twisted his limbs
so that he seemed all shoulder, he screwed up his features till he
seemed all mouth.
"I'll no do it," he burst forth at length, "I'll no do it! I'll no wrong
a poor lass, nor be mansworn!"
"What does the haverel mean?" cried Jean. "John!" shaking him violently,
"you're falling into ane of your ill turns. Lord save the man! if ye
dare to lay a finger on me!"
"I'll no do it!" cried John, stretching forth his arm with a clenched
fist at the end of it, which might well have made the weaker creatures
beside him tremble. Even Mr. Charles felt a nervous tremor go over him.
Finesse and intellect grew pale in presence of brute force thus
displayed.
"Gently, gently, my good man," he said, "you'll be forced to nothing. To
tell what you know, that is all anybody wants of you. The law you know,
if the worst comes to the worst, will make you do that; on the other
hand, if you will give your information to the family and prevent going
to law, it will be to your advantage; you see the difference; the court
will give you nothing; that's all I have to say."
"Oh, dear me, dear me!" said the wife, wringing her hands. "Oh, John, is
there nae way you can please the gentleman? You'll no be mansworn, my
bonnie man! you'll no wrong the lass. Poor silly thing she's nigh her
last by this time; and if the gentleman is that anxious and was to make
it worth our while? Often and often we've spoken of Canada, John. The
lads would soon make their fortunes there with their talents. It would
be to swear naething; it would be but to hold your tongue and that's so
easy to some folk! the gentleman would be content if ye were but to hold
your tongue. And where's the harm? Isabell, she canna live if she was to
be made a queen--and it's no for your auld wife that you would throw
away all the bairns' prospects? Oh, John, my bonnie man!"
The "bonnie man" paused irresolute; needless to say that the pair had
entirely misconceived the object of the advertisement, and the service
sought from them. They had not thought it possible, or rather Jean had
not thought it possible--for John's mind did not readily exercise itself
on an abstract question--that "the family" could have any wish but to
nullify, if possible, the irregular marriage; "no to get ourselves into
trouble" had been the principle of the pair from beginning to end of the
transaction, and they had kept themselves out of the way of Agnes, whose
search after them they had heard of. "We'll get ourselves into hot
water, and you'll lose your place, and muckle Agnes Jeffrey can do to
make it up to us," Jean had said. To swear falsely was a crime which
neither of the two could have wound themselves up to; but to be silent!
that was another matter. The tongue is an unruly member, doing much harm
in the world; but to say nothing how good it is! Had Mr. Charles been a
cynic he would have watched this self-controversy to an end, and no
doubt enjoyed it, as knowing how it must infallibly end; but Mr. Charles
was no cynic; he preferred to interrupt the struggle before it ended in
the subjugation of John's wavering virtue.
"Look here," he said suddenly and sharply, "and hold you your tongue,
Mrs. Macgregor, I'm speaking to your man. You were present when my
nephew, Tom Heriot, married a girl up in Strathmore, Isabell--what was
her name? They took each other as man and wife in your presence? Answer
me aye or no, is that true?"
"I was there too," cried Jean astonished. "I'm as sure a witness as him;
we were both together in our ain kitchen, no heeding the two young
fools. I said to Mr. Heriot, 'dinna do't'--but wha was to make the young
gentleman mind me?"
"Then it's true? You've told me a lie to begin with, woman, and you were
willing to tell me another. Man, it's for you to answer. Your name is
John Macgregor, and it's true?"
"As sure as death, as true's the Bible. I'm no a man of many words like
her, but naething would have made me mansworn!" said John, in the
pleasure of being personally appealed to. "And I'll no deny my name.
John Macgregor's my name, ance gillie to the laird in Strathmore, then
odd man about the Moors doing whatever turned up--then--"
"It's a speat when it comes," said Jean composedly, folding her hands
upon her bosom and regarding Mr. Charles with a vindictive pleasure,
"you've brought it on yoursel."
"This then is what is wanted of you," said Mr. Charles hastily. "To
prove this; not to go away, as you thought, and hold your tongues, and
dishonour a woman, and wrong a bairn; what you've got to do is to prove
this. Hold your tongue, woman--"
"Eh, Mr. Heriot!" cried the irrepressible Jean, "I've heard of the
Heriots that they were kind; but, oh, what a blessed family to uphaud
the marriage and right the lass! And it'll be something to our John's
advantage," she added insinuatingly, "just the same? for though it's
hard to haud your tongue it's sometimes just as hard to speak out and
say a' the truth; and if we were to get ourselves into trouble in our
new place--"
"Make your wife hold her tongue, John!" said Mr. Charles. "You can go to
the kitchen, both of you, and get something to eat; and then I'll take
you out to see the young woman--I'm meaning Mrs. Tom Heriot, my nephew's
wife; and we'll settle this business--as it is not a pleasant
business--once for all."
"We're to go and see--Isabell?" asked Mrs. Macgregor, faltering.
"I said Mrs. Tom Heriot, my nephew's wife."
"Come, Jean, haud your tongue; the gentleman wants none of your
clavers!" said John, giving a vigorous tug to her shawl.
But Jean lingered; she took a few steps towards the door, and then
turned back.
"Ye'll no say naething to Isabell of what we were speaking o'--nor of
the proposition to gang to Canada and hold our peace. Oh, Sir, you'll
no say anything?"
"It was your proposition, Mrs. Macgregor, not mine!" said Mr. Charles.
"Aweel, aweel, Sir, what does it maitter? How was I to know you were
such a good gentleman? Eh, so few as is like you! but you'll no say
anything? It was a' from a good motive--for my ain bairns' sake, and to
keep dissension out of a family, and to pleasure you--"
"Go away, go away!" said Mr. Charles with a smile, which he tried hard
to conceal; and a short time after he set out with his two strange
companions for the Spindle, to find the cottage where Isabell was. This
was the interruption which broke in upon Marjory when deeply touched and
half-weeping, she sat with Tom's child upon her lap, and her heart going
back into her own childhood--when Tom, too, was a child. The knocking at
the cottage door was not a more harsh interruption of the stillness than
was the other interruption, which was about to come into this sad yet
exciting chapter of her life.
CHAPTER XVII.
Meanwhile Fanshawe had been passing his time very uncomfortably, on the
whole, wandering about the Channel Islands the first part of his
journey, and asking himself half dolefully, half with a certain rueful
amusement whether his next stage should be Australia or New Zealand. He
had written to Marjory from London, where he returned within three days
of his precipitate departure; but he had not had courage enough to write
to her since, having felt that he must wait for something to tell. It
would be difficult to describe the effect produced upon Fanshawe's mind
by his late interview with her. She had disappointed him by her
pre-occupation, wounded him by what he could not but feel to be
indifference to himself, and by the almost harsh readiness to take
advantage of him, and employ him in her service, which she had shown. A
man may be very ready to say that he will go through fire and water to
serve the lady of his affections, and may mean it; but when that lady
sends for him abruptly, and lays her commands upon him, calling him
frankly, not for his sake, but because he can be of use--not all the
serviceableness in the world will prevent the man from feeling that this
is hard upon him. That no woman can accept such services without--one
way or other--paying for them, is a consolation which suggests itself
only to the calculating and cold-blooded lover. The generous soul that
offers itself without hire or reward is very apt to despair of
remuneration; but even while taking the yoke upon him, it is
disagreeable for a man to feel that it is not him, but the use of him,
that a woman wants. This was Fanshawe's feeling; he was glad to do all
that man could do for her; but yet to be simply made use of was hard.
And after all, Tom Heriot, and the Heriots generally, were so little to
him in comparison with Marjory! But with these feelings there mingled
some which were very different. He felt a respect for her, because she
was able to resist all that vague fascination which subjugated himself;
he admired her insensibility; it seemed well that a woman such as she,
should be slow to be won--if ever she could be won by such a man as
himself, which Fanshawe felt to be unlikely enough. Sometimes he had
moments of great depression on this score, and felt that the idea was
not one to be entertained or thought of; and then again the atmosphere
of dreams would steal over him, that atmosphere which envelops
everything in a sweet mist and uncertainty, where nothing is sure, and
all is possible. Her very decision, her energy, the way in which she had
sent him forth--though he did not like it--increased his admiration of
her. It was so unlike himself; so much better than himself. And the
little fluctuations of temper, the shades of offence, of withdrawal, of
partial anger, which showed themselves when he did not agree with her,
or was not rapid enough in following her conclusions, were sweet to him,
sweeter than all her excellences. These imperfections gave him something
to forgive in her, something to indulge, to throw the great golden
mantle of Love over, and--no, not to forget. The flaws were the last
thing he wanted to forget; but if there had been any chance for him of
getting free of Marjory's fetters, that last chance had floated away,
when she sent him upon this unpalatable quest. It seemed to him
needless, it was unpleasant; and yet how it bound him with chains, which
he could not and did not wish to break!
Men do not like to feel themselves inferior to a woman; but there are
kinds of inferiority which a man in love may put up with--and to
Fanshawe it seemed that Marjory would be to him what the soul is to the
body, what inspiration is to the soul. This was how he put it, saving
his own pride. It was not that she would do anything for him, but that
she would stimulate him into doing; she would inspire him, he felt; she
would bring all his buds of meaning into flower, and work within him a
realization of those intentions which arose so often in his mind, and
came to nothing when they rose. Through all his journeys he kept
thinking of her in this strain. She would be his inspiration. He could
do something--something vague, he did not know what--but something worth
doing, under the impulse which she would give him. What would she say?
Would it be possible for her to accept a rle in life which was so
little encouraging as that of trying to put energy into him? Fanshawe
did not ask himself this question--neither did he ask many more, which
it would have been very well worth his while to ask. How, if she married
him, they were to live; what he could do to make their marriage
possible; where and how they were to establish themselves? these
questions did not enter his mind--partly, perhaps, because he was still
in the reverential stage of love, thinking of her vaguely as something
better than all created things, yet impetuously too, as of something
which could not be done without, which was necessary to existence. But
perhaps it was, on the whole, because of his prevailing character of
good-for-nothing that he was able to elude all the practical questions,
and to let his love absorb him without any notion of how he could make
the after-life possible. Besides, he said to himself, if ever the
question crossed his mind, he could do nothing at this moment; she
herself had made it impossible for him to do anything. Had she not sent
him away from all the uses of life, from all the efforts which he might
have been making towards something better--on this wild goose chase--for
her? This afforded him an answer to every objection of his own thoughts,
and with a certain humorous sense of the cleverness of such a response
to all criticism, he used it in imagination even to herself. "What could
I do? how could I do anything? You sent me away from rationality to hunt
for a needle in a bottle of hay." This was the imaginary reply which he
made to her imaginary fault-finding. Ah, if the matter were but so far
advanced as that! Then he would find a hundred answers, a hundred
excuses. The only thing he would not be able to find--though this part
of the subject he managed to elude cleverly--was any reasonable ground
upon which to ask Marjory Hay-Heriot to marry him, or any feasible way
of providing for her, should she be willing to share his fortune.
With these thoughts in his mind, and those other thoughts carefully
excluded from it, he wandered about the smiling isles which are enclosed
in so wild a sea. He went, as he thought, to every inn over their whole
extent--from the smallest to the largest--encountering endless
experiences (which were not all disagreeable), and seeing a great deal
of novel life. And he found nothing--no Scotch face nor Scotch accent
even met his eyes or ears--or when by accident they did, they belonged
to some one who denied the name of Macgregor, and was not to be
identified in any way with the man he sought. He was retiring
disconsolately from his last attempt to discover this undiscoverable
personage, and questioning himself ruefully as to which was the nearest
way to New Zealand, when some one came up to him on the pier where he
waited for the steamer--a ruddy, red-haired young man or boy, not more
than twenty, freckled up to the roots of his hair, and with a shrewd but
innocent face. He was one of the porters on the pier, and Fanshawe
instinctively stole his portmanteau out of the way, to keep it from the
clutches of this predatory personage. He was very much astonished to see
the individual in question pushing towards him, evidently with a
purpose; and still more startled when the youth addressed him.
"You were asking, Sir, for ane of the name of Macgregor?" he said,
interrogatively.
Fanshawe turned sharply round upon him.
"I was doing so," he said; "what of that? Have you anything to tell me
about him?"
"I'm him," said the young man, "that's a'."
"You are he!" said Fanshawe, in dismay, gazing at the youthful
countenance with a kind of horror. The lad put his hand to his hat with
a comfortable smile, which told how far he was from any consciousness of
offence.
"Ay, deed am I. I'm from Perthshire as my native place, and I've been
here a year. Whatever you want wi' me it can be nae harm, for I've a
conscience vide of offence; and folk tell me you've been looking for me,
Sir, all through the island. There's no question ye can put that I winna
answer. I'm feared for nothing. I have a conscience vide of offence."
Fanshawe was amused in spite of himself. "You might perhaps suit my
purpose better if you were not quite so blameless," he said. "It cannot
be anything so young as you that I want. Is your name John?"
"No," said the lad, "my name's Willie; but wait a bit, Sir, we'll maybe
shuit you yet, a' the same. John's no my name, but it's my father's; and
he's no so young nor so innocent as me. It might be him ye wanted?"
"Does he live here?"
"Na, he's no sae foolish as that, or sae enterprising, if that's a
better word? He's weel off at home, and has nae inducement. He's one of
the gamekeepers to Mr. Eccles, of the Langholm. Before that we used to
live up in Strathmore, in the parish of Drumglen, no far from
Stainbyers, where he was aye glad of a job to attend upon gentlemen,
either fishing or any kind of sport, and to take the charge of their
dogs when they had dogs, or of their horses--and keep guns and rods in
order--or even to give a hand at the lodge."
"That will do," said Fanshawe, in sudden delight. "Give me your father's
address."
But here the lad paused. "He's in a responsible position now," he said,
"a man with a great trust; he's risen in the world. If ye could tell me
what you wanted with him, I'll write. It might be something that wadna
be consistent with his position. I'm but twenty; I'm no heeding what I
do; but my father's had a hard struggle with the world, and now he's got
the better o't, he maunna compromise himself. I'll write and get an
answer if you'll tell me what it is you want."
Fanshawe had to exercise all his eloquence to overcome these delicate
scruples. The lad was his mother's son; but finally he got the
information he wanted, and departed with a light heart in the steamer,
carrying that precious address (already found out, though he did not
know it) carefully enshrined in his pocket-book like a treasure. He was
on his way to Marjory with this information on the very afternoon in
which Mr. Charles trudged along the shore with his long legs,
outstripping his companions. It would have been wiser, no doubt, to have
gone and sought out the Macgregors at once, but Fanshawe, who was
thinking little of the Macgregors, and much of Marjory, preferred to go
to St. Andrews to let her know how promptly he had executed her
commission. Travelling is not rapid in Fife; he had to make his
impatient way through a network of railways, one interlacing the other,
and leaving the unfortunate traveller an hour's waiting here and there,
at all sorts of out-of-the-way stations. His feelings during these
delays need not be described; but he was compelled to submit, as all
forlorn Britons are compelled to submit, to the vagaries of the railway
companies. But for this he would have reached St. Andrews with his
address, in time to join the party which had forestalled him. His
information, of course, was not of the least importance by the time he
reached his destination. He was just a few hours too late, as people so
often are; but luckily he was unaware of the fact, and waited for
Marjory in the room which was full of her presence, with a flutter at
his heart, which prevented him from thinking very seriously of anything.
He sat down by the window where he had seen her sitting, and looked out
upon the sea and sky against which he had watched the outline of her
features, thinking it like the picture of a saint; and all the
surroundings, which were full of her, filled up the heart of the man
with such a soft enchantment that for a long time he was not even
impatient. She was not certain to be gracious to him, but the scene was
gracious, full of her breath and influence, and permitted him to wrap
himself in the shadow, as it were, of her presence, embracing him gently
with all the corners and all the draperies that were fresh from her
touch, enveloping him in all the nameless associations of the place in
which she lived. For a long time he yielded himself up to this
fascination, finding a subtle pleasure in it which stole all his
strength from him, until the long shadows of the evening began to
deepen, and the maids came to communicate their wonder to him. The
dinner hour had arrived, and not even Mr. Charles had come home. They
had gone by the shore towards the Spindle, both Miss Heriot and her
uncle. Could anything have happened? Love is always fanciful, and takes
fright upon any pretext. Could anything have happened? Fanshawe rushed
out of the house in the subdued light of the evening, and set out over
the cliffs at a pace which few people could have kept up with, fearing
he knew not what, and not venturing to ask himself what he feared.
At the same hour, on the same afternoon, another visitor was entering
St. Andrews, coming down from the higher ground inland upon the
picturesque old town, and looking out anxiously for the first sight of
its towers and ruins. Of all unaccustomed travellers this was Miss Jean
Hay-Heriot, from the High Street of Comlie, in a black bonnet big enough
to take in her lace "borders"--with her keen eyes noting everything
along the unaccustomed road, which yet she knew so well. To visit St.
Andrews at all, was a wonderful effort on her part; but to visit it at
so late an hour that she and her old horse and rusty coachman must be
compelled to pass the night "in a strange place," was more wonderful
still. The reason of her visit was, however, natural enough. Mr.
Charles's mysterious intimations and hints of a mysterious something
which was yet to be disclosed in his family, had already travelled over
the length and breadth of Fife, with that amazing celerity which is
peculiar to gossip of all kinds. It had reached Miss Jean's ears that
day after her early dinner, when the Minister himself had "stepped
across" to communicate the strange news, which he had learned at a
meeting of Presbytery, in the most direct manner, from the Reverend
Simon Stutters, of Kinnucher, who had it from Mr. Morrison, of St.
Rule's, who had it from "auld Charlie" himself. The story, as was
natural, had taken form and shape in these several transmissions, and
now narrated circumstantially how Tom Heriot had been entrapped by the
arts of a gamekeeper's daughter in the Highlands; how this designing
creature had flirted, and held off and on, till she wound him up to the
pitch of consenting to marry her privately; how then he went off in
disgust and misery, and though popularly believed to have died of an
injury to the spine got in the hunting-field, had in reality succumbed
to the severer malady of a broken heart; and how there was now a baby
produced, who was said to be Tom's heir, to the great trouble of the
family.
"I hear there's a great body of witnesses all ready to swear to it,"
said Dr. Murray; "but our old friend Charles, Miss Jean, as I need not
tell you, is not of a very determined character, and perhaps if there
was a bold front put upon it, we might hear another story. The worst is,
there's nobody that I know of, unless it was a man of business, that has
energy to take the matter up."
"Energy!" said Miss Jean, "it's not energy that's wanting. Marjory's a
young woman, and will think it's not her place to interfere; but I'm not
young to speak of, and I'll not see the old house pass to a gamekeeper's
daughter without rhyme or reason. Hey, Bell! go and call John out of the
kailyard, and bid him dress himself, and put to the horse. I'm going to
St. Andrews; and put me up a change of linen, and a clean cap. Charlie's
an old fool! but I hope you'll no say that I'm not a determined
character, Doctor. I'll know the rights of this before I'm a day
older--and she'll be a clever lass, cleverer than I have ever seen one
of her kind, if she imposes upon me."
"My dear Miss Jean," said Dr. Murray, "we all bow to your sense and your
experience; but these kind of cutties are often very clever. I would not
encounter one of them myself unless it was strictly in the way of
duty--and you know a lady--"
"Oh, ay! I know your opinion of a lady," said Miss Jean, "which is very
pleasant, and very fine, if we were all under five-and-twenty; but when
a woman comes to be five-and-seventy, as I'm saying, that makes a
difference. Johnnie Hepburn, this will be sore news for your friends up
at Pitcomlie," she added, quickly turning, with a gleam of enjoyment,
to the other visitor, who had been listening with consternation to the
strange story. "Ye'll have a grand excuse to go and comfort Mrs.
Chairles."
"I don't think my comfort is very much to Mrs. Charles," said Hepburn,
with rising colour; "but surely you don't believe, for a moment, that
such a story as this can be true."
"Why should I no believe it?" said Miss Jean. She was profoundly
sceptical, but she could not relinquish the opportunity of demolishing
her adversaries, "these young women" at Pitcomlie. "We're a great
people, Johnnie, and Scotland, though she's small, holds up her head
with the best, and for my part I know none that can hold a candle to
her--"
"That's true--that's very true," said the Minister, "but when you think
of all our spiritual advantages, and what Providence has done for us,
it's a terrible addition to our responsibility. That is what I always
think of--a land that has been so favoured for generations--"
"But," Miss Jean went on impatiently, "whether it is that some weakness
is needful to show that we're always human--these customs about private
marriages are an awfu' snare and burden. It's a wonder to me that half
the families in the land are no rent asunder with irregular marriages.
There's some special Providence, I've aye felt, that must watch over
eldest sons. There never was one in our family that ever I heard of; and
I ask your pardon, Dr. Murray, but Tom Heriot dying of a broken heart
is beyond me; we've tough hearts in our family--they stand a good tug.
He might have taken to drinking, or some other vice, to make himself
amends; but to break his heart! Na--na--that's more than I can believe."
"I tell you what was told to me," said Dr. Murray, "and no wonder, poor
man. What would his father have said? and all his belongings? and the
county that would never have taken any notice of him--and not the least,
Miss Jean, you--"
"Me! He could have put up with the want of notice from me; the world, in
general, is but little regardful of what's said by a cankered auld maid.
Most likely," said Miss Jean with a twinkle of her bright eyes, "he
would have said it was envy because I had never been married myself. But
that's neither here nor there. If it's a determined character that's
wanting, Doctor, I'm away to St. Andrews. Chairlie is as weak as water,
as you say--and Marjory will be a fool, and will not like to move."
"Could I be of any use," asked Hepburn eagerly.
"In the interests of the other heir? Johnnie, my man, you're a fine
lad," said Miss Jean, "and very accomplished. I do not know another man
like you in all Fife for the piano and the like of that; but for a
determined character--na--na--I'll go myself."
"I don't see what the piano has to do with it," said Hepburn angrily.
"Nor I either," said Miss Jean with a laugh, and she rang her bell, and
gave her orders about her change of linen in such simplicity of diction
that her guests took their leave. "Half-a-dozen shifts, Bell, for you
never know what may happen at my age. Lord bless me! am I to learn
new-fangled words to save the Minister's modesty, forsooth--and what's
more modest than a shift? As for Johnnie Hepburn, I don't doubt that he
calls all his clothing by nasty French names. Give me good Scotch that's
aye clean and wholesome; and bring me a cup of tea--and let the carriage
be round in half-an-hour. I'm going on family business--you can say that
to whoever wants to know."
"Eh! it's Miss May that's to be married!" said Bell, clapping her hands.
"You think that's something to be pleased at, you lightheaded taupie?
When Miss May's married, there will not be one person of the name of
Hay-Heriot worth their salt upon this earth--except me," said the old
lady with moisture in her eyes, "and, oh! the old rag o' flesh and blood
that I am! Go quick, and make up my bundle, you gaping thing! Miss May's
no the fool to marry till she sees what's she's doing. I can see to that
at the same time," Miss Jean added briskly as the maid left her. And
with these double intentions she set out, meaning to dine comfortably at
the end of her journey, and to carry confusion to the unrightful
claimants of the old lands. But Miss Jean arrived to find the house
empty, the dinner-table spread but vacant, the servants full of
consternation. Miss Heriot must have fallen over the cliff--she must
have been blown off the Spindle Rock--and Mr. Charles, in the effort to
save her, must have perished too. What so likely, it was known that they
had gone in the same direction, and when no one came back for dinner,
notwithstanding the well-known punctuality of the affrighted house?
CHAPTER XVIII.
Young Hepburn went out of Miss Jean's door with a face full of offence
and a heart full of trouble. He was not thinking much of himself,
however, so that the offence was evanescent; he was thinking of her;
yes, of that Her, who, however hastily, unreasonably, and without
adequate cause, had come to be the representative of womankind to the
young man, superseding Marjory and all ideals. Matilda was not an ideal
woman; he could not worship her in that guise, nor put her into any
shrine. It is needless for me to pause and remark upon the curious
unsuitability of perhaps the majority of mortal unions, the way in which
young men or young women prefer the individual least calculated to make
them happy--and hold to that choice with an obstinacy worthy of the
original folly. Poor Hepburn had been seized with this too common form
of love-sickness; he was not blind; he saw well enough that Mrs. Charles
was unlike anything that he had set before himself, in his days of
imagination, as worthy of love; and already he had begun to say to
himself that an ideal standard was folly; that a real human creature was
above ideals; that to be genuine was best whatever the character of that
reality might be. This was the first stage--afterwards he went further,
and said to himself that women were different from men; that justice
was not to be expected from them, or an appreciation of anything above
the ordinary level of facts; that they were not capable of understanding
abstractions; that they were invincible to reason; and that after all,
it was because she was so undauntedly foolish, so delightfully under the
sway of her feelings, and had so different a way of judging--a method
quite her own, and independent of law and rule--that men worshipped a
woman; Yes, she was not as they are, she was a fool, and yet a
goddess--to be petted, put up with, laughed at, admired, thought more of
and less of than was possible to any other created thing. This was
Hepburn's way, as it has been many another man's, of making up to
himself for having given over his whole being to the sway of a foolish
woman. He made out that all women were foolish, and idealized her
meanness, not being able to fit her to the ancient ideal he had once
possessed. Women, perhaps, when they choose badly, do something of the
same kind; but they are seldom so general in their conclusions. For the
most part, they have a hankering after the ideal, which makes them
always capable of believing in a higher kind of man; but men make their
convenient theory into a general truth which, perhaps, is one result of
their superior power of understanding the abstract. To have loved a fool
is sufficient reason with them to conclude that all women are fools--and
so Hepburn did. No, Matilda was not an ideal woman; she was not like the
high feminine types of being which poets have created; but she was
real, and all women were like her; from the old theory to the new
there is but a step, and this step he had made unawares. He set off now
with a heavy heart to Pitcomlie, feeling that he knew exactly what she
would say, how she would burst out in denunciation of "the old family,"
and declare that it was all a plot to injure her and her child. And
strange as it seemed to him, he knew that Matilda would put real faith
in this; she would have no difficulty in believing that Mr. Charles and
Marjory had hatched an iniquitous plot, and that lawyers and judges, and
a crowd of honourable men, were accomplices in the scheme against her.
It was the way of women. What he should have to do would be to soothe
and to console--and he did not dislike the office. Her theories would be
idiotic, her rage unreasonable; but she would be so pretty in her anger,
so fascinating in her tears; and to soothe them away, to coax her back
to quietness, would be so pleasant! Thus the foolish lover justified
Providence, which provides silly women for the delectation of the world;
he liked it better than if she had been a reasonable creature, and he
said to himself that all women were alike, and that folly was the
sweetest thing between earth and heaven.
Matilda was reclining on the sofa when he went into that drawing-room at
Pitcomlie, which no longer bore the remotest resemblance to Marjory's
drawing-room. The room was strewed with traces of the destructive
tendencies of the little heir. He had been brought down by Verna, who
felt it necessary, from time to time, to demonstrate how much the young
mother was devoted to her children; and it was Verna who had caused
Tommy's gorgeous new rocking-horse to be placed in a corner of the
drawing-room. But on this particular afternoon the young Laird had given
decided indications of a will of his own; he had torn the mane of his
rocking-horse out in handfuls of horse-hair, which was scattered all
over the room. He had thrown about the sofa-cushions, and made ropes of
the anti-macassars; he had cast down several glass vases, and one of old
china, breaking them into millions of pieces. Finally, he had been sent
away in disgrace, howling so as to be audible half way down the Comlie
road, where Hepburn heard his shrieks; he hurried on in consequence,
fearing hysterics, and was consoled to find it was only Tommy. The
pretty mother lay on the sofa, fatigued with the passion which Tommy had
driven her into. There were two patches of rose-red on her
cheeks--traces of her excitement; and she held out her hand
half-irritably, half-languidly to her visitor. "Oh, you have come at
last;" she said, for he had not been at Pitcomlie the day before. Verna
was sitting by with her account-books; she was making up the bills, and
putting her affairs in order, and she was happy. The squabble with Tommy
had not affected her.
"I was obliged to go to Edinburgh yesterday," said Hepburn humbly; "as I
told you--to see my sister's trustees."
"Oh yes, I know!" said Matilda. "Business is always so much more
important than anything else. You men will make any sacrifice to
business--and leave your friends in loneliness, without ever thinking
once--"
"Were you lonely?" whispered the gratified Johnnie; "how good, how sweet
of you to miss me! you never were out of my mind all day."
"Oh, that is what all you gentlemen say," said Matilda, with a little
toss of her head. "As for your Fifeshire people," she went on, "I don't
think much of them. But for a few cards that have been left, one would
imagine there was nobody in the county. I don't know if it is their way
here, or if it is that odious Miss Jean."
"I told you, Matty, when you were so rude to the Heriots--" said Verna.
"Oh, don't talk to me any more about that!" cried Mrs. Charles;
"besides, I never was rude to the Heriots. They chose to take offence
and go away; but was that any blame of mine? Was I to put myself at
their feet, do you suppose, in my own house?"
"Have you heard anything of them lately?" asked Hepburn, with a certain
solemnity in his tone and manner, which he tried vainly to banish. Verna
looked up at him quickly, being more open to impression than her sister,
and was the first to reply.
"Is there anything to be heard?" she said, looking at him.
Matilda's languor was a great deal more safe than the keen alertness of
the other.
He answered, "No, oh no!--I suppose not, since you have heard nothing,"
with some confusion. It was the very best way of broaching the subject;
but his confusion was real, and he did not think of that.
"Since we have heard nothing?" said Verna, raising herself to a very
upright position. She had never been perfectly easy since Dr. Murray had
thrown, quite inadvertently, into her mind that suggestion of another
heir.
"Well," said Hepburn, with some impatience, "I have no double meaning. I
supposed there must be nothing to hear as you have not heard. Otherwise,
I have just been listening to a story--"
"What story?"
It was strange that Matilda kept silent so long; she was cowed, I
suppose, by Verna's harsh and peremptory tone.
"They say," said Hepburn, hesitating, and sinking his voice
involuntarily; "indeed, I do not believe it, I give no credence at all
to it. They say that Tom Heriot was married privately, and that there is
a child--"
"What is that?" said Matilda, rousing up. "Tom Heriot married--and a
child? Oh, what a wicked, wicked story! Oh, Mr. Hepburn, how can you say
so, when you know, as well as I do, that we heard quite different, that
it was all settled when the will was read, and that Tommy was the only
heir--the only, only heir, everybody said. How can you make up such a
story? It is only to frighten me, and make me unhappy. You know you
don't mean what you say."
"Indeed," said poor Johnnie, abject in the penitence for which he had
no cause. "I would not make you unhappy for the world. I thought it
right to tell you as I heard--but I don't believe it. It will turn out
to be a mere invention, of that I am sure; but as I had just heard, I
wanted to find out whether you knew."
"Of course we know to the contrary," said Matilda, laying herself back,
somewhat excited, upon her pillows, satisfied so far with the
explanation, and only angry with Johnnie in a coquettish tormenting way.
But Verna, who had no such confidence, restrained her feelings, keeping
her anxiety under. She was a great deal more anxious than her sister,
and understood much better all that was involved.
"For simple curiosity, Mr. Hepburn," said Verna, "tell us what they
say."
"Oh, it is just what is always said," he answered. "Tom Heriot, they
say, was privately married--married irregularly, as sometimes happens in
Scotland--"
"What sort of a thing is that--before the registrar, or something?"
"Oh, not so formal. In Scotland," said Hepburn, "if two people were to
say to each other, before us, for instance, 'This is my husband, and
this is my wife,' they would be supposed to be married."
"Supposed! but what would that matter? It would be no marriage at all."
"I thought there was always a blacksmith," said Matilda, from her sofa,
laughing. "When there were Gretna Green marriages, there was always a
blacksmith. I have heard of that. It must have been such fun, much
greater fun than an ordinary wedding, with a breakfast, and just the
same things as everybody else has."
"It would be no marriage at all," repeated Verna, with a certain harsh
earnestness. "You hear me, Mr. Hepburn? No marriage at all!"
"Unfortunately, as much a marriage as though it had been done by an
Archbishop," said Johnnie; "that is what they say; but I don't think Tom
Heriot was the man to do it. I don't think there is any fear. I feel
sure that, if there had been anything in it, they would have let you
know first of all. It would be only your right; for there is nobody so
deeply concerned."
"Of course we should have been the first to hear," said Verna, coldly.
She went back to her account-books, closing the subject, and adding up a
line of figures by way of proving to herself how calm she was. The
effort was successful so far as Hepburn was concerned; but Verna did not
convince herself. After a few minutes' absorption in the books, she rose
in a fever of suppressed emotion, and went slowly out of the room,
wrapping herself, as it were, in a cloak of sudden self-restraint. How
she trembled! how cold she had grown suddenly, though it was a day in
Summer! The other two did not notice her, being absorbed in their own
comedy; but this was tragedy to Verna. The fact that she might have
spared herself the trouble of such energetic self-repression, and that
neither of her companions had taken the trouble to think of her at all,
did not affect her, as it might have affected a more sympathetic spirit.
What afflicted her was no sentimental sorrow, but real heavy
misfortune--the loss of a life. Yes, she felt that it was her life that
was threatened, not Matilda's fortune, or the patrimony of naughty
little Tommy; it was she who was threatened, not they. She went out in a
kind of despair, and sat down in a corner of the rocks, from which she
could see the old house against which she had meditated such treason. It
seemed to her that some magical power must attend that wretched old
place. Had she ever prospered since she proposed to meddle with it? She
shivered as she looked at it, feeling as though it were a wizard, or a
wizard's dwelling. Poor Verna! the tears came into her eyes, intense and
bitter. To be sure it was only a report; Hepburn did not put any faith
in it--nay, treated it as a simple piece of gossip; but to Verna, as to
many women, the pain of it was its best authority. It would be so
miserable a change, so dreadful a loss and misfortune, that somehow,
according to the nature of things, it must be true.
In the meantime Matilda, from her sofa, began to claim the sympathy of
her devoted admirer.
"Oh! Mr. Hepburn," she said, "if this were true! What should I and my
poor children do if this were true? I should have nothing--nothing but
my pension and the two children to bring up--boys, too! And oh! my poor
little Tommy! my little heir! What should I do?"
It was on Hepburn's lips to say that she would still have her husband's
portion, the inheritance of the younger son, to fall back upon; but to
console this gentle, disconsolate creature with mercenary suggestions of
eight thousand pounds, seemed a miserable thing to do. He took her hand
instead, and comforted her, and bid her not to fear.
"There are many that would be but too proud, too happy to be of use to
you," he said. "Everything I have in the world--everything! though it is
not much--"
"Oh, Mr. Hepburn! you are too good," murmured Matilda, and then she
proceeded with her complaint. "Verna would leave me, I know," she said,
"Verna has no feeling for anything above account-books. You saw how she
kept adding them up, even when you were telling me of this dreadful
report. That is her sphere--fussing about a house, and having the
control of the bills and all that. I have often said, what a pity it was
that we were not quite poor, for then Verna might have gone out as a
housekeeper and been happy. We never were rich," she added, with that
frankness that went to Hepburn's heart, "but still ladies can't do such
things. It is a pity, though I don't think I ever could be--a governess,
for instance, though I may perhaps require to do something for my poor
children. Oh, Mr. Hepburn! don't be too kind to me. Don't take my hand
and that. It isn't--nice; for you know I am not a young girl, as some
people might think, to look at me; but a poor widow--with no one to
love me."
Here Matilda's tears overcame her--she covered her face with her
handkerchief. She suffered Johnnie to do what he liked with her hand;
and poor Johnnie moved beyond all control, overcome by her beauty and
her tears, and her helplessness; touched by love at once, and chivalrous
sympathy for her weakness and distress--Johnnie did what any such
tender-hearted soul was sure to do. He threw himself on his knees by the
side of the sofa--he laid himself and all his possessions at her
feet--he combated all her feeble protestations, that it was impossible
for her to love again--that it was far too soon to talk to her like
that--that she never, never could forget her Charlie. All these whispers
of resistance, he quenched by other whispers, ever more and more tender.
He would be a father to her children--he would watch over their
rights--he could not bear to hear her say that she had no one to love
her. Did not he love her? Had not he loved her from the first day he saw
her? Gradually Matilda's protests sank lower and lower--and when the new
butler, who occupied Fleming's place, opened the door to bring in his
mistress's afternoon cup of tea, Hepburn rose from his knees, pledged to
a hundred things which the young man in his enthusiasm undertook with
rapture, but which were serious enough when he came to analyse them in
detail. Mrs. Charles smoothed the fair locks which were slightly ruffled
upon her forehead, and laughed a little laugh of bashful consciousness
becoming her new position. "And, oh! you dreadful man," she said, when
they were left alone again, "to go and make me commit myself like this
before six months! I am so shocked, and so much ashamed of myself. It is
all your fault, coming every day and stealing into a poor little thing's
heart. Oh, John! you must promise me--you must swear to me--never to say
a word to anyone for a year at least. I could not bear it. It is not my
fault that I am fond of you--but you must never, never, say a word--"
"How am I to go to St. Andrews then?" said the happy Johnnie, "to look
after the children's rights? What pretence can I make, if I cannot speak
the truth?"
"Oh, I cannot let you go to St. Andrews," said Matilda, "I want you
here, I can't get on without you; and as soon as ever you see Marjory
you will forget me. Oh, yes, you may say what you like, but I know you
would forget me. And to be sure you could always say you were acting as
our friend," she added, looking up into his face with a merry laugh, "a
gentleman may always be a lady's friend. You are my friend, recollect,
in public--only my friend--until it is a year."
She laughed and Johnnie laughed, though with an odd echo somehow about,
which seemed to mock him. But it was the way with women; dear, loving,
tender, soulless creatures, how were they to be expected to resist a
living lover for the sake of a dead husband? it was their way. It was
too delightful to have this lovely thing all to himself, to stop and
make a fuss about ideals. What folly they were! What ideal in the world
was equal to the soft warm touch of that hand which clung to his, and
that face which brightened as he bent over it? How happy he was as he
sat by her, and poured all manner of nonsense into her ear! She was
happy too; flattered, amused, satisfied, and full of a fluttering pride
in the thought that before six months she had again been wooed. To be
sure there were prejudices which might prevent this fact being made
public; but still she had the satisfaction of knowing it within
herself.
CHAPTER XIX.
Marjory was standing by Isabell's bed, putting back the infant into its
place by her side when her uncle and his attendants were admitted into
the cottage. She did not see the start of amazement with which Agnes and
her mother recognised the strangers. She herself did not even remark
their presence. Her mind was full of emotion much too warm and strong to
be easily disturbed from the thoughts that occupied her, and her only
feeling towards her uncle was that of impatience that he had followed
her so quickly. That he should wish to examine into the whole matter
personally was simple enough, and he had even insisted upon it, in his
conversations with herself; consequently she was not surprised at his
appearance, but only annoyed by his haste and want of consideration for
the invalid. If it had been a lady he would never have broke in upon her
so, Marjory said to herself. And she showed her displeasure by taking no
notice of his arrival. She bent over Isabell, smoothing her pillows, and
arranging the white coverlet over her.
"My uncle has come," she said, "you will not mind? He is an old man and
very kind at heart. If he seems a little abrupt it is only his manner.
He is our only relative, he has a right to inquire; you will not be
frightened? Answer his questions as you have answered me. He will be a
good friend to--the child--and to you."
"My friends must be in a better place," said Isabell, with a faint
smile.
"Yes, but we want the other too, for the child's sake," said Marjory.
She was more excited than the dying girl. She began to picture to
herself disagreeable questions which Mr. Charles might ask, suggestions
he might make. He was kind, but he had a different code of civility for
"a country lass" from that which would rule his utterances to a lady.
Perhaps in general he was not wrong in this; but Isabell was not a mere
country lass as he supposed. With a sense of anxiety which was stronger
than seemed called for by the occasion, Marjory stood aside, and allowed
her uncle to approach. Then, for the first time, she noticed the homely
pair who accompanied him, and saw Agnes, flushed with excitement,
standing back in a corner watching them, forcibly keeping herself
silent, but with an eagerness of eye and look which meant something. The
old mother, too, was gazing at them with open mouth and eyes, saying at
intervals, "Lord preserve us a'!" with mingled anxiety and surprise.
This curious consciousness, on the part of the spectators, disclosed to
Marjory that the strange visitors were not mere neighbours, as she had
thought. And she, too, gazed at them eagerly--but ignorantly--without
being any the wiser. Their real identity strangely enough never occurred
to her. She had associated the finding of them with Fanshawe, and with
him alone. It is, perhaps, too much to say that she did not want them
to be found except by him; but certainly she had set her heart upon his
accomplishment of this commission. It would be, she felt, a proof to
heaven and earth that his real character was very different from his
reputation--that he was a true friend--a man to trust and rely upon. She
had "no object" (as she said to herself) in her wish to prove this--but
yet abstractly she did wish to prove it. It was a foregone conclusion in
her own mind. Therefore she had no desire that these should be the
missing witnesses, and the idea did not occur to her, eager and anxious
as her interest was.
"Yes, yes, May, my dear," said Mr. Charles. "I see, this is the young
woman. How are you to-day? I hear you are not so well as could be
wished. My niece, Miss Heriot, has told me a great deal about you. I am
not wanting to be uncivil, my poor girl; but I cannot conceal from you
that your story is very unlikely--very unlikely; without strong proof I
cannot see how it could ever be believed."
He said this standing in the place which Marjory had given up to him,
taking in everything around, the homely scene, the group which filled
the room, rather than the individual whom he was addressing. When,
however, he turned to her at the conclusion of his little speech, Mr.
Charles gave a perceptible start. What Isabell might have been, in rude
health like her sister, it would have been difficult to say, or whether
the refinement and melancholy beauty of her face was purchased chiefly
by grief and suffering; but certainly there was nothing in this pale and
fragile creature, which answered to Mr. Charles's idea of a country
lass. He stammered a little in his confusion. He said, stumbling over
his words, "I--beg your pardon; I am afraid you are--not so well--as I
thought--"
"I will never be well in this world," said Isabell. "I'm going fast,
fast to a better, where a'body will understand. It was Miss Heriot put
that first into my head--where there will be nobody that will not
understand. I'm weak, weak, no able to tell it all over again; and oh,
Sir, what for should I take all that pain, no to be believed? What
matter is it whether God clear my good name or no? He will do it some
time--and right my little bairn. I'm tired, tired--oh, mother, I'm
tired, my heart's beating; and my head's throbbing. Dinna ask me any
questions. I want to rest--"
"Oh, Bell!" cried the mother, coming forward. "Oh, my Bell! tell the
gentleman. Now is the time to say the truth, whatever it may be. And now
I'll believe you, my bairn! I've been hard, and shut my heart.
Now--now--if you'll say it again, I will believe you, Bell!"
The girl closed her eyes, and shook her head gently. "How often have I
told you, and you wouldna believe me, mother? Why now, when my strength
is failing, and my heart sinking?"
"Isabell!" cried Agnes, "speak to them--oh, for God's sake--look at me
upon my knees to you," and she rushed forward into the midst of the
room, and threw herself upon her knees, with tears bursting from her
blue eyes and her hands raised in passionate supplication, "for the
man's sake that's dead, that never loved you half so well as I've
done--for the bairn's sake that I'll be a mother to--Isabell! for the
last time."
Wearily Isabell opened her eyes. "Am I dying then?" she said, with a
feeble smile. "Eh, that would be good news! You would not put it to me
so solemn if I was not dying. I'm wearied, sore wearied; but if it's the
last time I must not think of mysel. My breath's going, mother, and my
heart's fluttering; come and hold me by the hand, and Miss Heriot--where
is Miss Heriot? Must I say it all over--every word? Sir, stand you there
that I may see you. I was a foolish creature, and ignorant--knowing
nothing. I didna pay attention when I should--I was fond of foolish
things and dreaming."
"Bell, you were the best of my bairns; you never gave me an hour's
trouble--till that time--"
"Whisht, mother, let me speak! Then I met with a gentleman--he was like
her there--yon bonnie leddy, that has come to me and comforted me, and
been my stay. By her ye may judge him. He said I should be his wife
before God and man. Never a thought of harm, no a thought was in his
mind. I'm dying and going till him. My man! no his sister there, a lady,
could think less harm. Maybe I would have done what he said, good or
ill; for he was like a god to me--a gentleman--no like common lads--but
never a word of ill said he, mother, never a word. He said he wouldna go
before the Minister, for it would be his ruin; but before decent folk."
Here the sound of a sob broke poor Isabell's interrupted monologue, a
rude outbreak of emotion, sounding like a sudden discord. It came from
the man who stood behind-backs, whose eyes had been gradually getting
redder. The woman by him laid her hand upon him to restrain him; she had
her handkerchief to her eyes; but was watching keenly through it,
keeping her senses about her. Isabell was vaguely disturbed by this
interruption; but after a moment's pause began again; her voice more and
more broken by the struggling breath.
"They were decent folk; they would say the truth if they were
found--John Macgregor and his wife--they wouldna have countenanced any
sin; you may believe that, mother. Folk like them would never have
countenanced what was a shame to think of. I told nobody, because he
said it--no one, not even Agnes. I aye hoped, and he aye hoped. But then
there came the terrible news--the awfu' news; it was in the papers. If
it was not that I'm going--to him--I couldna speak of that day. Dinna
ask me more. I mind nothing more, till I wakened up, and my bairn was
born; and I was a disgrace and a shame!"
"No, no, Bell; no a disgrace!" cried the mother, with tears streaming
from her eyes. "It was a' for the truth that I fought--the truth. I born
minded nothing more."
"And ye believe me now, because I'm dying! there's no other reason. I
was as true then as I am now. Oh, if these decent folk were but here,
that ken a'," she cried with an effort. Another abrupt outbreak of
sudden sobbing came from the other end of the room; Isabell raised
herself up--partly it was the beating of her heart that forced her into
an erect position, partly a curiosity, which was stronger than her
self-restraint. When she saw the strangers, she uttered a sudden cry;
excitement blazed up like flame, over her delicate face, lighting wild
lamps in her eyes, and bringing colour to her cheeks; a gleam as of
stormy sunshine came over her. "They're here!" she cried, with an
infantile laugh of pleasure, the last utterance of weakness. "Oh, make
them speak! is it no true?"
"It's Gospel," cried the man, sobbing. "Oh, Bell, my bonnie woman, to
see you come to this! it's a' Gospel truth. Speak out, Jean, if you're a
woman, and no a stone; speak out, I tell you! It's true, Sir--as sure as
death--as true as the Bible. God! woman, will ye no speak?"
"I'll speak if ye'll leave me time," said Jean. "I'm no to be pushed
that gate, and pushed the other, and never left to mysel'. She was never
an ill lass. I've kent her since she was this height; a bit genty
creature, never just like other folk. Ye ken yourself, Sir, I said we
could never swear against Bell--she's a good lass. There was some
nonsense of the kind went on atween her and young Mr. Heriot--"
Isabell raised herself almost erect in her bed. Her fragile white figure
shook with the heavings of her heart. But for this the flush upon her
face, the overwhelming brightness of her eyes, might have banished even
from the spectator most deeply interested, any idea of mortal sickness.
She looked at the woman with a smile.
"I'm dying!" she said, in a voice that was strangely sweet and strong.
"Answer, before God--and me. Ye'll never see me mair--till the last day.
Ye've my name and my bairn's in your hands. Speak out! I ask you nae
favour; speak the truth--- before God, and me."
"Oh, Bell!" cried the woman, terrified, raising her hand to her face;
"oh, dinna look at me with those blazing e'en! Sir, we meant nae
harm--John and me. We never made our house a tryst, with an ill meaning.
He went on his knees to me to let him see her. We wer'na the folk to
lead gentlemen astray, nor lasses neither; it was not our blame."
"Speak, ye deevil!" cried the man, furious; "or let me speak. It comes
better from a woman. Who thinks of you and me? Sir, Sir! it's a' true."
The tears were running down his rough face. With his stumbling, awkward
step, too big for the place, he pushed forward. "If we didna come forrit
before, it was for the fear o' man," he said. "She thought it was a
story that would lose me my place--like as if we was entrapping lads to
marry. Oh, Bell, forgive me! it was the fear of man."
"Mother, you hear!" said Isabell. She had forgotten all the others. A
glow of gentle contentment stole over her face. The strength of
excitement failed her; she sank back upon the pillows, which Marjory
stealing in, had raised to support her. "Now I can depart in peace; now
I'm clear; now I can go to my man. Oh, God be praised--that sent the
decent folk, just in time."
"Isabell!" cried Agnes, throwing herself on the bed; "you're no so ill
as that? It wasna that I thought you dying; you're no dying. I bad ye
speak because they were here."
"Ay, ay! and I've spoken; and it's a' clear. The night's coming on, I
canna see. Mother, you were saying--what was somebody saying? I hear a
sound in my ears; it's the sea, or the wind--or maybe something more."
"Bell! what is it? oh, my Bell! It's her heart. Raise her up, to get
breath; open the window. She's aye speaking, speaking. Bell, speak to
your mother. My darlin' it's a' clear."
"It's voices," she said, with an effort; "voices--like in the
Bible--like the sound--o' a great multitude; grander than the sea, or
the wind. Do ye no hear?--and one that says 'Isabell!' among all the
angels, and the saved that cry day and night, 'Honour to the Lamb!' Oh,
hearken. One's stopped, and it cries 'Isabell!' Ay, my man! I'm
here--I'm here!"
Then a great silence suddenly fell over the cottage, a stifled sound of
feet moving, faint rustling of dresses, tinkling of the glass in which
they tried to administer something to revive her, and afterwards low
sobs, broken cries, but not another articulate word. The conflict of
wills and voices had ended. Without a word, another brief ineffectual
struggle took place round the bed--the last struggle with death--vain,
passionate, hopeless effort. Isabell did not die all at once; this hard
life, which is so bitter to live, so hard to begin, is hard too to end.
She could not drop it from her so easily. For hours after they moved
about that bed, saying nothing to each other, hiding their faces by
times, stopping their ears not to hear the painful thrill of those last
breathings, which seemed to shake the cottage. The doctor had time to
come all the way from St. Andrews, and look at her, pitiful and
helpless, shaking his head, and whispering that she did not suffer, that
consciousness was gone and pain. But it was the middle of the night
before the last breath died upon poor Isabell's lips. No one of all the
awe-stricken party left the cottage at first. Marjory was with the
mother and sister by the bed. Mr. Charles, pale as a ghost, sat in a
chair in a corner, looking on with a wondering countenance of sorrow.
Had any one suggested it to him, he would have gone away; but he was
absorbed like all the rest, and thought of nothing but of the wonderful
act that was being accomplished before him. John Macgregor was standing
on the threshold outside, his great person heaving with sobs. His wife,
crying, but still with her wits about her, prepared with ghastly matter
of fact composure to make herself of use. This was the scene upon which
Fanshawe arrived, in the early darkening of the summer night. The baby,
whom everybody had forgotten, had just awoke with a cry by the side of
its insensible mother. Somehow this sudden protest of life against the
pre-occupation of all the attendants on the dying, gave a touch almost
of humour to the tragic scene. Marjory lifted the infant, and it was
into Fanshawe's arms that she thrust it, scarcely seeing what she did.
"Take it to the woman," she said, turning away from him. Where was he to
take it? He held the helpless thing in his arms, no one finding it
ludicrous, or even strange, till Jean relieved him of it. And then he
went and stood with John Macgregor, not knowing who he was; or what had
happened, outside the door. But after all, notwithstanding his ignorance
and dismay, it was Fanshawe who brought so much common sense and
understanding to the scene as to send Mr. Charles home, and Macgregor,
both of whom were in the way. He understood, by instinct, a great deal
of what had passed, and though he did not divine who the man was, by
whose side he had been standing, yet it was impossible not to perceive
that some preceding agitation, in which this man had been more or less
involved, had taken place in the humble room, which now the presence of
death filled to over-flowing. Fanshawe sent the other men away, and
remained himself to see what was to be done. Strangely enough this
seemed perfectly natural both to himself and Mr. Charles. He went
outside, and sat down on the rocks which hedged in the bit of velvet
greensward on which the cottage stood. It was a strange vigil. He
watched the last rays of the evening light die out, the revealing of the
stars among the clouds, the gleam of living radiance which woke in them
from the edges of those masses of vapour; and then gradually, slowly,
the pale lightening over the Eastern horizon--the promise of dawn. He
sat with the waves plashing up to his very feet, carried by the high
tide which came in just about the time he took his place there--then
ebbing slowly down among the rocks, further and further off, moving the
gleaming, living line ever lower down. The pale variations of sea and
sky, the gathering midnight darkness that shut out both, all the
mysterious sounds of Night and Nature went on around him; and death was
overshadowing behind him, and a silent awe seemed over everything. To
watch a whole night so, is such an experience as few forget; and to
watch outside as Fanshawe was doing--with all the ghosts of the past and
shadows of the future combining to increase the impression, was more
wonderful still. And yet he felt it but little, his mind and soul being
closed to external impressions by a pre-occupation which is more
absorbing than any other on earth.
The faint grey of morning had begun to dawn when all at once he felt a
soft touch upon his shoulder, and turned round, saw Marjory standing by
him, like a ghost in the dimness.
"All is over;" she said, quietly; and then, "Have you watched with us
all night?"
"All night," he said. "I could do nothing more. Can I do anything now?"
"Take me home," said Marjory. "I am too weary and sad to go alone. It is
all over. She has got away at last. Oh, how hard it is to get rid of
life!"
Her tears fell upon his hands, which held hers. He looked at her
wistfully, eagerly, in the dim light, by which he could scarcely see her
face. How high life was beating in his heart as he listened to these
words. Hard to get rid of life! as if it were not something priceless,
full of happiness, full of possibility, which a man would do anything,
bear anything, rather than be rid of. He put her cloak round her while
she stood passively by him, worn out, with those tears on her
cheeks--and then drew her hand within his arm, and led her away silently
along the dim sea-shore with all its mysterious sounds. The light
increased slowly, dimly, the pale morning broke as they moved along. To
Marjory it was all like a dream. To him, what was it? Every moment he
could see her more plainly, and feel her, leaning on him. Rid of life!
Who would be rid of that which held such prizes still?
CHAPTER XX.
No house possessed by the Hay-Heriots had ever gone through such a night
as that house by the Cathedral in St. Andrews had just passed. First
there had been the blank dinner hour, with no one at home to eat the
food, no one but little Milly who stood at the window and cried, and
imagined misfortunes unutterable which must have befallen "my May." The
crying of the child infected the whole house. One of the maids had
joined her at the window, another climbed to the top of the house to an
attic which commanded the road "east the town," leading to the Spindle,
another had stolen outside to the door in the wall, where she stood
watching all comers and goers, with the wind blowing her ribbons about,
and ruffling her hair. In the very midst of this suspense, Miss Jean's
old coach, like a family hearse, came jolting heavily over the
stones--for all the world, the excited listeners thought, like the
Phantom Coach, which, as is well known, drives along the streets of St.
Andrews at midnight, after a storm, carrying the drowned to the hallowed
soil round the Cathedral ruins. Had it been dark, this resemblance would
have been more than the nerves of the women could have borne, and the
impression was scarcely lessened when Miss Jean herself, tired yet
alert, with her sharp eyes looking out from the shelter of her broad
"borders" and big black bonnet, got out briskly tapping upon the
pavement with her cane. Milly stayed her crying, out of very excitement,
to explain her sister's absence, and was then held silent by fear while
the old lady remarked upon it. "A bonny like way to leave a house with a
wheen maids and one bairn!" she said. "May Hay-Heriot must be out of her
senses. Out of the house at seven o'clock--the hour ye dine--did ye say
it was the hour ye dine? Then it's worse than madness, it must be
wickedness. Do not look at me as if ye would eat me, ye little spirit--"
"Then do not speak of May like that!" said the child passionately,
smothering her sobs. "Oh! what has become of her--what has become of
her? Something has happened; oh, Aunt Jean! let you and me go and seek
her out. She never left us like this before. Oh my May! my May!"
"Hold your tongue you little haverel," said Miss Jean, "she is out to
her dinner or something. Do you think Miss Heriot will leave her friends
or her business because the table-maid is out at the door watching, or
her own woman greeting at the window? Go in to your work this moment.
Where is Mr. Charles? He will come in to his dinner and find nothing
ready, and send ye about your business--or I would if it was me."
Then it was explained to her, by three speaking at once, that Mr.
Charles too had gone out mysteriously towards the Spindle, accompanied
by two strangers; and Milly, whose tears had been stayed, began again
to cry more piteously than before, and the maids to rush to the windows.
Miss Jean gave some decisive taps of her cane upon the floor--"Fools!"
she said, "have you not sense enough to see that they're both together
with some sudden engagement they had no time to tell of? Stop this
nonsense and bring ben the dinner--I'm hungry with my drive, and Milly,
you're hungry with crying--"
"Oh, Aunt Jean, I could not eat a morsel. Oh, what will I do if there is
anything wrong with May?"
"You're hungry with crying," said Miss Jean, "we'll wait for them no
longer; bring ben the dinner. Is all the house to be turned upside down
because they did not leave word where they were going? Help me off with
my bonnet, woman, and dinna stand gaping. Milly, hold your tongue; is
that the way to give me a welcome? You've let the child get low, you
taupies, keeping her waiting. Bring ben the dinner, I tell you, we'll
wait for them no longer. Shut the doors and the windows, and get the
spare room ready. I've come about business, Milly, and I mean to stay
all night."
By these decisive means Miss Jean brought the house into composure and
subordination, and put a stop to the growing romance which the maids had
begun to build up. They said in the kitchen that Miss Heriot could not
be going so much to the Spindle for nothing, that it was fine to talk
about a sick lass, but that more inducement was necessary to take a
young leddy there in all weathers, and that Mr. Chairles had found it
out. This invention Miss Jean so far nipped in the bud, that she gave
them all work to do, which occupied them fully and diverted their
thoughts from this delightful fiction. The old lady had the spare room
prepared for herself, and a fire lighted, a luxury never much out of
place in St. Andrews, though it was but August, and the flush of Summer
still ought to have been over the world. It was a gloomy night, dark
clouds and darker sea, everything that was dismal and discouraging out
of doors, and not much that was cheery within. Miss Jean herself, with
many thoughts in her mind, established herself in the drawing-room after
dinner--having sent Milly, much against her will, to bed--to wait for
some news of her relations who had thus left the house empty to receive
her. She sat in the unfamiliar room, looking out upon the old pinnacles
of the cathedral ruins which were associated with many an early passage
of her youth--and going back into her life, lived in it as old people
do, feeling it present with her, notwithstanding the lively threads of
present interest which crossed each other like a network over that
landscape peculiarly her own which lay behind. Her quick mind darted in
a moment from recollections of an evening fifty years ago, when she had
wandered, not uncompanioned, through these ruins, to many a speculation
as to how her grand-niece, Marjory, her representative, might be
occupying herself, and what manner of interference "auld Charlie" might
be making in some possible complication of affairs.
For her nephew was "auld Charlie" to Miss Jean as well as to the
youngest scoffer who called him by that name. The old maiden was
contemptuous of the old bachelor. His age was an object of greater scorn
to her than it was to the young men who on the whole liked "auld
Charlie." "A poor creature, a poor feeble old creature, with no
character to speak of," she said of him. She scorned him for being what
he was, nobody's husband, nobody's father, and amid the openings of her
old dream, while still she seemed to herself to be straying down the
vast nave traced out by its old pillars, with her hand upon some one's
arm, who was dead and gone years ago--there recurred to her, now and
then, a sarcastic criticism upon the old man who was so much younger
than herself. She herself was two persons in one, difficult to identify
in their separate characters: young Jean Hay-Heriot among the ruins,
fresh and sweet as the youngest rose in the garden: old Miss Jean with
her shrivelled face surrounded by her "borders," her wrinkled hand
leaning on her cane. But as for Mr. Charles he had never been but one,
the same figure throughout, always lean, long, dried up, occupied about
nick-nacks, buried in old books, unbending to nothing but golf. "And now
he's meddling with Marjory," Miss Jean said to herself with a vindictive
gleam of her black eye, "him that knows no more about it than a man of
wood! But I'll see to that, I'll see to that;" and then the sweep of the
great west window caught her eye, and she was young Jean again, looking
up at it to hide her confused sweet girlish face from some one who
would gaze too closely. Which was the real one between these two? which
the most true, the past that lives for ever, or the present that is but
for a moment? The old woman sat absorbed in this bewilderment of mingled
memory and observation, and did not think the dim hours long as they
stole past her. She would not have the lamp brought in till late. She
sat at the window as Marjory had done, her old head framed in by the
delicate crown of the broken arch, perfect on one side, an exquisite
flowing shaft of ancient stone, with canopy work fit for a queen of
heaven--on the other nothing but gloomy sky and sea. The darkness closed
over her but Miss Jean noted it not. The scene before her eyes had
brought all her life back to her; in that very room she had danced a
girl. What need had she of lights, of books, something to divert her? as
the sympathetic maid suggested who found the old lady in the dark and
was sorry for her.
"Go away, and bring me the lamp in an hour. I like the gloaming," said
Miss Jean in a softened tone.
"Gloaming! it was mirk as midnicht, and her an old witch, sitting in the
dark," said the woman, reporting the circumstance below; and this
further aggravation of a weird old woman seated by herself unseen at the
window, seeing nobody could tell how far or how keenly, carried a still
further element of mystery into the vague wonder and suspense of the
house.
The arrival of Mr. Charles, which took place late, about ten o'clock,
when it was quite dark, was the first thing that roused the old lady. He
came in very unsteady on his long legs, with a somewhat dazed and
pre-occupied look--too much absorbed by all the events of the evening to
be much startled by anything that might happen, even by a visitor so
unexpected. He came in and made some sort of greeting, taking her
presence for granted in a way which bewildered her, and then threw
himself upon a chair in the dim room. "She's dying," he said in that
dull tone of spent excitement which expresses so much.
"Who's dying?" cried Miss Jean in alarm, starting from her seat at the
window. "Not our May?"
"May?" Mr. Charles said with a kind of dull wonder. "May? She's yonder,"
pointing his thumb over his shoulder, "as she was at Tom's side, poor
fellow! God be praised, no--it's not her; but that poor thing--"
"The--gamekeeper's daughter;--the--lass--? but that's too good news."
Mr. Charles looked at her with reproof in his eyes. "You know nothing
about it. She is far from a common kind of lass; but that is a thing
women never can understand," he added, taking a certain vigour from his
opposition. "How those that are on the other side, should have any title
to respect--that is a thing you can never understand."
"Maybe not," said Miss Jean with lively and instant assumption of the
quarrel. "We're no so clever as you. You can aye discriminate; ye see
at a glance, and tell the good from the evil. We're weaker vessels;
but, perhaps, if ye were to tell me some of the arguments that convinced
your strong mind--"
Mr. Charles jumped up, galled at this speech and the tone in which it
was uttered; but his weariness overcame him, and he sat down again,
somewhat humbled. "No argument--no argument," he said, "the sight of
her--that is all. I've left Marjory there. She'll not leave the bedside
so long as life remains. I thought she might have come away now, for the
poor thing is no longer conscious; but May feels it her duty to Tom."
"And you left her--a lady--a young woman--to come home alone."
"Ay," said Mr. Charles, and then paused, "I am meaning, not quite alone.
There is that lad Fanshawe," he added in a deprecating tone.
"Fanshawe! him that was at Pitcomlie before--the English lad?"
"Yes, the English lad--I never thought of it till this moment; but he
has a way of turning up when he's wanted that is very
extraordinary--very extraordinary! To see him appear, like a ghost, at
that cottage door--and not one of us surprised within. To be sure," Mr.
Charles added with sudden gravity, "all our thoughts were turned another
way."
"But my thoughts are not turned any other way," said Miss Jean. "I don't
know what folly you're thinking of, her and you; but Marjory is my first
thought. All this about your cottage doors, and your thoughts turned
other ways, is not intelligible to me. I would like to know what you
mean, Charlie. Who is this lad, and what has he to do with Marjory?
You've left him to bring her home--in the middle of the night."
"No--no," said Mr. Charles, deprecating, "not so bad as that--not the
middle of the night. And how could I help it? It was no place for me--a
man that could be of little use. I came away by his advice. It's a long
walk, and I've eaten nothing. And, perhaps," he said, pausing with his
hand on the bell, "I should bid them get a room ready for Fanshawe--he
must stop somewhere. So far as I know, the beds at The Royal may all be
taken. I suppose I must give him a bed in this house."
"You know best who to take in, and who to leave out," said Miss Jean. "I
never interfere with the arrangements of the house. Perhaps you would
like me to go to The Royal? For otherwise, I have my boxes in the spare
room."
"Certainly, certainly," said Mr. Charles, waving his hand; and he gave
his orders with a degree of explanatoriness to which Miss Jean listened
with grim impatience. "There's a gentleman, Mr. Fanshawe, that may be
coming in late--with Miss Heriot; not that he's with Miss Heriot now, or
more than just in the neighbourhood. But she may be kept late, and at my
request he will bring her home--you understand?"
"Oh ay, Sir, I understand!" said the maid cheerfully; "the English
gentleman; he was here the day already, waiting long, and very anxious
about Miss Heriot. He went off after you to the Spindle, when he heard
ye had gone that gait; he was just off a journey; but he would take no
refreshment, no so much as a glass of wine;" but aye, "where was Miss
Heriot? where was Miss Heriot? that was all that was in his head."
"It was me he wanted, in reality," said Mr. Charles, looking anxiously
towards Miss Jean; "on business. We have a great many business
transactions, him and me; and put some cold meat or something in the
dining-room. If Mr. Fanshawe is kept very late--as he may be, waiting at
my request for Miss Heriot (for he is a young man, Aunt Jean, and I am
an old one--he was more able to wait than me); he will have to sleep
here."
"And will Miss Heriot be late, Sir?" said the maid.
"She's waiting upon a poor young woman that's dying," said Mr. Charles,
with solemnity. "You're amused, Aunt Jean? I'm sorry that I cannot join
you, after the scene I've been going through--nor see the cause."
"Oh, you blind auld beetle!" said Miss Jean; "putting it into the lass's
head every word you said, to mix up May's name with this lad's! Who is
the lad?--is he worthy of her? or does he want her? or have you paid any
attention, ye doited auld body, to what I took the trouble to say?"
"I have taken your advice," said Mr. Charles shortly; "much to my own
discomfort; but nothing has ever come of it, that I can see."
"That's no answer to my question," cried the old lady peremptorily. "Is
he worthy of her? and who is the lad?"
"So far as I can make out," said Mr. Charles; "he is very little to brag
of; a good-natured ne'er-do-weel--nobody's enemy but his own."
"And that's just the bitterest foe of everybody that belongs to him,"
said Miss Jean; "and it's a man like that that you leave to bring May
home; to wait for her, and feel for her, and bring her along a lonely
road, and take advantage of all his opportunities--"
"The young man is a gentleman," said Mr. Charles eagerly, with an
indignant flush on his face.
"And you're a fool, Charlie Heriot!" cried the old lady, growing red--as
a woman of seventy-five could scarcely be expected to do. She was angry
and ashamed at his interpretation of her words; she got up hastily to
retire to her room, every fold of her shawl quivering with indignation.
"Judging by what you say, it is little use sitting up for her, I
suppose," she said. "To think of a young woman like Marjory left to come
home with a strange man in the middle of the night! You're a bonnie
guardian, Chairlie Heriot; you give us all great encouragement to trust
the young women of the family to you."
To tell the truth, something of the same feeling crept into Mr. Charles'
own mind, mingled with shame, as he went down to the dining-room to eat
his long postponed dinner, and refresh himself with a little bodily
comfort. He began to feel much discontented, and ashamed. To leave
Fanshawe to take care of her had seemed very natural in the midst of the
excitement at the cottage, as soon as he had recognised that his own
presence there was uncalled for. But in the light of Miss Jean's
comments it had a very different appearance. He had put Marjory into
Fanshawe's hands; he had accepted him as in some sort her natural
protector and companion. This thought entirely drove from his mind the
real event of the night; the occurrence which had absorbed him so short
a time before. Now that he was out of the shadow of the death-chamber,
all that belonged to it flitted away from him. The same feeling was
strong in both of the old people; they pushed death aside almost rudely,
as a thing which once completed, should be thought as little of as
possible--and plunged into the concerns of life again with eagerness.
The scene had been solemn, the moment touching; but these were over, and
life and its necessities were not over. Mr. Charles put himself upon
three chairs in the dining-room, after he had eaten his late refection,
and declared his intention of waiting there till Miss Heriot returned.
He fell asleep very uncomfortably, waking up now and then with a crick
in his neck, with pins and needles in his feet or his fingers, with an
indescribable sense of discomfort penetrating even into his sleep. When
he woke from a painful doze on his three chairs, he decided with himself
that now he might venture to go to bed--that she would not now come till
the morning, when no one could make any remark. Accordingly, when
Marjory, half dead with fatigue and emotion, reached the house, there
was no one up to receive her. She had scarcely uttered a single word the
whole way, and sometimes Fanshawe, holding her fast with her hand pulled
through his arm, had half fancied she must have fainted or fallen into
some stupefying trance, though the mechanical motion continued and she
kept walking on, like one galvanized. When at last a sleepy maid was
roused to admit them, the early morning sunshine was lying warm upon the
silent streets and houses. As she entered, and he after her, on the
strenuous invitation of the maid, who was partly hospitable and partly
afraid lest anyone, "from our house" should be seen making his way to
The Royal "at such an hour"--the stillness of the house came over them
both with a strange half-alarming sensation. At the top of the stairs in
the bright solemn early daylight Miss Jean stood, in her broad-bordered
nightcap, and with curious flannel draperies wrapped about her, looking
down upon them as they mounted the stairs. Marjory was too weary to feel
much surprise.
"Is it you, Aunt Jean?" she asked languidly.
"Is this the way you treat your visitors, coming in at this hour of the
morning?" said Miss Jean, "and with so little regard to what folk may
think? Let the young man bide below till I'm out of the way. I'll see
you to your room, Marjory. You want some woman-person to see after you,
and that taupie of a maid is snoring, disturbing my slumbers for hours
past."
"I am sorry you waited for me," Marjory said in her strange stupor, "but
when you know the cause--"
"Oh, ay, I know the cause," said Miss Jean, throwing a jealous glance
over her shoulder at Fanshawe, who hesitated and lingered on the stairs.
"I know the cause," she repeated, following Marjory into her room and
closing the door with much severity, "but for my part I'm a great deal
more interested, to tell the truth, in what may be the result."
Thus with one consent the elder members of the party--the ones who had
lived longest and were nearest the ending--thrust the death-scene away
from them, and went on with the threads of life as if there had been no
interruption of its ordinary course. This was what they cared for--the
living, not the dead.
And Fanshawe, dazed too with his watching, with his strange long walk
through the unnatural yet fresh and lovely morning, which had seemed to
spy upon them all the way, with wondering looks, like a child, went into
the room prepared for him--having added that picture of Miss Jean in her
dressing-gown to all the others, of which his mind was full. He did not
hear what she said, but he made out her sharp look of disapproval, and
the jealousy of her watch over Marjory, thus peremptorily parted from
him, and taken out of his keeping the moment she crossed the threshold.
She had been so absolutely confided to him before, that the contrast was
all the more remarkable. When he was safe in his room, the
ludicrousness of the old lady's appearance came before him so strongly,
that he laughed in spite of himself--and then was intensely ashamed of
himself, and crept to bed, feeling guilty in the daylight, feeling as if
he had been doing something he ought not to have done. How strange to
glide into the stillness of an orderly sleeping-room after an exciting
night! And he was dizzy with his journey, with fatigue, and long waking.
But still, of all the memories of the night, Miss Jean at the top of the
stairs was the one that lingered most in his memory. He dreamed of her,
and laughed in his sleep, and woke with a half-hysterical mixture of
laughter and emotion, as much moved by that momentary comic glimpse as
by all that had happened. But this levity, fortunately, nobody knew.
CHAPTER XXI.
The party which met in the morning after this vigil regarded each other
strangely, feeling the fever of their excitement still about them.
Marjory did not appear, and it was from Mr. Charles that Fanshawe learnt
that his own mission had failed, and that the missing witness had
already appeared, a fact which he had guessed from all he saw, but had
not been informed of. There was a long discussion over the breakfast
table about this strange change in the family affairs, and all the
revolutions it must bring about.
"An application must be made at once to the Court of Session to appoint
tutors," Mr. Charles said, who was full of suppressed excitement, "and
these young women at Pitcomlie must be informed. It will be hard upon
them, poor things, after all."
"They had nothing to do with the house or the family," said Miss Jean,
briskly. "Strangers, all strangers; neither one nor another has any pity
from me. Eight thousand pounds is not a bad provision for a younger
son's widow, with nothing of her own; but take you my advice, Charlie
Heriot, and be very clear in your mind about this bairn. I'm not fond of
chance bairns coming in when nobody expects them. This lass, that you
all think so much of, may have been everything that's good; but I would
have the court to sit upon it, and make sure. I would trust nothing to
chance, if it was me."
"We'll take every precaution--every precaution," said Mr. Charles; and
then he fell into a reverie, from which he roused up slowly, with a look
of satisfaction in his face, rubbing his hands. "I am glad," he said,
"that I never began to dismantle my old room. I've thought of doing it
more than once. If I could suppose," added Mr. Charles, changing
countenance, "that leaving Pitcomlie would be any heart-break to these
young women; if they had had time to get attached to the place--But as
one house or another is the same to them, and Mrs. Charles is not badly
provided for, on the whole, with her pension and all--I hope it's not
any way hard-hearted on my part."
"But you're old, Charlie Heriot," said Miss Jean, "old to be tutor to a
little bairn. Granting that you may live as long as I have done, for
instance, that's about fifteen years--and nobody can calculate on
more--that would leave the boy just at the worst age. You're spare and
thin, and I would not wonder if ye were one of the long-lived ones of
the family; but granting even that you were spared to be as old as me--"
"You'll live twenty years yet, Aunt Jean," said Mr. Charles, who did not
like the turn the conversation was taking.
"That may be, or may not be," said Miss Jean. "I'm very indifferent; a
year sooner or a year later matters very little. To be sure when you're
well over your threescore and ten, there's no saying--but it's never to
be calculated on. If this bairn is young Tom's lawful son, as you say,
and but three months old, poor bit thing, he must have young guardians.
The like of Mr. Fanshawe here now; or as women are coming into fashion,
Marjory--"
Mr. Charles gave an alarmed look at the audacious proposer of such a
conjunction. He was fairly frightened by it. He looked up with a certain
consternation, to meet the bold response of Miss Jean's black eyes,
twinkling with satisfaction at the thought of having thus bewildered
him.
"Ye need not look at me in that alarmed manner, Charlie Heriot," she
said. "There's nothing but what is strictly reasonable in what I say."
"If I were thought worthy of such a charge," said Fanshawe, startled
too. "I should, of course, do my very best to acquit myself of the
trust; but I have, at present, no connection with Fife--I have no claim
to such a distinction; there must be many others much better
qualified--"
"It's not a thing we can discuss," said Mr. Charles, hurriedly; "it is
not in our hands; there are a great many preliminaries. And in the first
place there is one that's not pleasant. These young women, how are they
to be told? They must be told. What would you say, Aunt Jean, would be
the best thing to do? Perhaps as you are going that way, if you were to
see them and break it in a quiet way? a lady is always the best to do
that; there's more delicacy, and more sympathy, and understanding, and
so forth. Some clergymen have a gift that way; but a lady is always the
best."
"I am much obliged to you, Charlie Heriot," said Miss Jean, "but in my
opinion you're the only bearer of the news that's possible. Nobody can
do it but you."
"Do you really think so?" said Mr. Charles. "Now I cannot help thinking
a stranger would be better--or perhaps a letter--that might be the best
of all--a letter now. Unless Mr. Fanshawe here, that could bring no
painful recollections to their minds, a young man quite unconnected with
everything--and pleasant manners, and all that--would be so obliging as
to drive out, and just prepare them a little. My niece Marjory has so
much confidence in Mr. Fanshawe. It is not a long drive, and the country
is looking its very best. Would it be too much to ask, as a friend of
the family?" Mr. Charles said, with an insinuating look.
Miss Jean's chuckle, and the look she gave him out of her sharp black
eyes, overcame Fanshawe's gravity more than the proposal thus anxiously
made. Even Mr. Charles saw the fun, and relieved himself and his anxiety
with a long low laugh, under protest as it were--for laughing was far
from appropriate at this juncture of the family affairs. But the most
amusing thing of all was that, though they laughed at the idea of
entrusting Fanshawe with this mission, after much talk and many
suggestions, and a great deal of comic remark, it was after all he who
went. He consented--because it was his fate, because it was propitiating
Marjory's friends, because it was a proof to her of his readiness to
serve all connected with her; but chiefly, it must be allowed, because
it was his fate. This was what he was born into the world for; to do
what people asked him, to serve others, to be good for much so far as
other people were concerned, but good for little to himself. Miss Jean
looked on with a certain grim amusement while it was all being settled.
She gave her opinion on the subject with her usual frankness.
"I would not have gone had I been you," she said. "I would have let old
Charlie do his nasty errands for himself."
Fanshawe laughed with some conscious shame, feeling indeed that he had
been somewhat weak; and the old lady resumed--
"Nobody thinks the more of you for being too kind. A willing horse is
aye over-ridden; but that's not all. In this world folk take you at your
own word, Mr. Fanshawe. They think little of a man that holds himself
cheap. It's no advantage--either with man or woman. The best thing ye
can do is to let folk see that a favour from you is a real favour, not
easy to get, not given to everybody--"
"Miss Jean, you speak like Solomon himself," said Fanshawe, with mock
reverence and real confusion, "or rather like the Queen of Sheba,--which
is the next wisest, I suppose."
"Maybe I am like the Queen of Sheba," said Miss Jean; "but it's men far
from Solomon that I've come to see. You like Fife, I suppose, Mr.
Fanshawe, that I find you back here?"
"I suppose so too," he said, with a rueful comic sense that he was by no
means a free agent, "since you find me here, Miss Jean--as you say--"
"You should not repeat another person's words, it's not civil. And yet
Fife has but small attractions for a young man. You're fond of golf, I
suppose, like all the rest?"
"Probably I might be," he said, laughing, "if I had the chance; but I
have never tried yet--"
"Oh, then you're one of those arch-somethings, that make the old stones
speak?" said Miss Jean. "Oh, but the like of me could make them speak
better, if we were to tell all we mind and all we have seen."
"I am not an arch-anything," said Fanshawe.
"Then it's very strange to me--very strange," said the old lady, looking
him in the face, "what pleasure you can find in staying here?"
He laughed--this time an uneasy laugh, and felt himself redden
uncomfortably. Why, indeed, should he stay here? To go on Mr. Charles's
errands, to have all sorts of disagreeable offices thrust upon him, to
be sent off, perhaps, at a moment's notice, to be made use of on all
hands. This was what his past experience had been, and why should it be
different in the future? The old woman's two black eyes, set deep in
their shrivelled sockets, looked knowingly, not unkindly at him, with a
gleam of amusement, but also with a certain sympathy. "There does not
seem much reason, does there, why I should stay?" he said, and got up
and went to the window to look out, avoiding her keen eyes.
"Young man," said Miss Jean, "I don't know much about you, and what I
know is not the best that might be; but you're not an ill young man as
men go. On the whole, I'm inclined to be on your side. And take you my
advice. Don't make too little of yourself; don't be at everybody's call;
stand up for yourself, if you would have other folk stand up for you. So
far as I've seen, your fault is that you're better than most folk. Don't
be that, that's the worst of all mistakes."
"You mean that I am a yielding fool, and cannot say 'No,'" said
Fanshawe; "but that, after all is scarcely the case. There are
circumstances, perhaps, if I could tell them to you, that justify me--"
"No circumstances, but a man's nature account for that kind of conduct,"
said Miss Jean, briskly; "but if it's any comfort to you, I'm inclined
to be on your side."
Whatever comfort there might be in this, Fanshawe had it to console him
on his drive. He set out without seeing Marjory. When he found himself
driving not too quickly over those long country roads, on the business
which was not his, and realised the disagreeable mission he had
undertaken, he felt more weak and foolish than even Miss Jean had
represented him to himself. For what was all this? To commend himself to
Marjory? or because it was his nature and his fate? He was thoroughly
discontented with himself. Was he, who was thus driven hither and
thither by the will of others, who seemed to have no business of his own
in the world, but always and only the business of others--was he the
kind of man to step boldly out of his groove, to begin an independent
life, to ask any woman to share that existence? Nobody but those who are
over-persuadable, ready to be over-borne by the appeals made to them by
their more indolent neighbours, and to take upon their shoulders burdens
which are none of theirs, can understand how ashamed Fanshawe felt of
his own amiability in the business which he had at present in hand--or
how disgusted with the piece of work which Mr. Charles had basely thrust
upon his shoulders. As he approached Pitcomlie, he realized more and
more clearly how disagreeable it was. The sight of the house which had
filled so important a chapter in his life made his heart beat. There it
was that he had been roused out of the equanimity of his placid,
easy-going existence; and what good had that awakening done? None but to
make him a dissatisfied instead of a very contented, happy sort of
fellow; to show him the evil without opening the way to any remedy; to
fill him with longings after the unattainable without conferring upon
him the strength necessary to struggle and attain it. Marjory! the whole
place was full of her; the cliff, with its velvet coverlet of green
sward, round which so often by her side he had taken his "turn;" the
sundial by which he seemed to see her seated; the roofless old house,
against the grey walls of which he had watched her figure so often, and
which formed so fit a background for her; everything was full of
Marjory. The presence of her image there made it somehow more easy for
him to do what he was going to do. He marched into the well-known
drawing-room, almost regardless of the servant who rushed after, pulling
on his coat, to announce him. He saw with a certain sharp sense of
sarcastic pleasure somebody rise hastily from Mrs. Charles's side, and
retire into a distant corner. Somebody--that sentimental personage
called Johnnie, whose presence had once made him furiously jealous. He
was ready to laugh now at the sight of this young man, whom he
recognised at once with that attraction of jealousy and dislike which is
as strong as love. Why was he so pleased to see Johnnie Hepburn start
disconcerted from Mrs. Charles's side? It pleased him to think of
telling it to Marjory; the power of discrediting her old admirer in her
eyes was quite grateful to him; he was spitefully delighted--there is no
other word that can describe his feelings. If Fanshawe had but thought
of it, he might have felt himself quite delivered from the danger of
being too amiable by this vigorous outburst of dislike and feelings
quite un-evangelical. But somehow it did not occur to him to judge his
own sentiments in that uncompromising way.
He had a hostile reception; from the moment of his appearance the ladies
at Pitcomlie made sure that he was coming on no friendly errand. Verna
came in from the cliff through the open window, having caught a glimpse
of him; she was very pale, with a scared look which Fanshawe could not
understand. They both looked at him with a stare of something like
defiance, but took no other notice of his presence. This was very
embarrassing at first. He faltered a little as he drew near, being very
pervious to incivility, and all the smaller pricks by which the mind can
be assailed.
"I have come to execute a commission from Mr. Charles Hay-Heriot," he
said, looking round him almost pitifully for support. Johnnie Hepburn
afforded none. He even turned his back and gazed out of one of the
windows. He did not stand by a brother in distress. He was too much
frightened for the women, if truth must be told.
"Oh, yes; to be sure; and I think we could guess what it was," said
Matilda. "Pray speak out. Don't be afraid. You need not have too much
consideration, or that sort of thing, for me."
"Indeed, I was told to have every consideration," said Fanshawe,
perplexed. "Mr. Charles----"
"Oh, why keep up the farce of Mr. Charles?" cried Matilda. "Say Marjory
at once. We know it is all her hatching, this conspiracy; and oh! you
may be quite sure whatever can be done, by law, against conspiracy--"
"Hold your tongue, Matty," said Verna, in a sharp whisper. "You fool!
don't be always showing your hand."
"As if I cared!" cried Matilda; "as if I did not see Marjory's hand!
Besides, it is well known that she keeps him to run errands for her, and
do whatever she tells him. Oh! say it out! We are prepared for
everything you have to say."
"Then my errand may be all the shorter," said Fanshawe. "It is only to
tell you, from Mr. Hay-Heriot, that a discovery has been made about your
brother-in-law, Tom Heriot. It has been found out that he was married,
and has left a son--"
Here he was interrupted by a defiant peal of laughter, and looking up,
surprised, saw both ladies laughing almost violently, as at the most
excellent joke.
"Oh! this is too good," the one said to the other; "too good; just what
we expected. But Marjory might have invented something better," said
Matilda. "I could have made up a better story myself."
Fanshawe stood, struck dumb, as a man of his breeding and character
could not fail to be by such a rude and foolish reception of his
message. He did not know how to reply. They spoke, as it were, another
language, of which he had no comprehension.
"I had better withdraw, I think," he said. "I don't know what I can add,
or reply; there is nothing, so far as I know, that I can say more."
"Oh, I don't doubt Marjory entrusted you with a great deal more to say!"
cried Mrs. Charles. "She wanted to humble us; but you may tell her she
sha'n't humble us. We are people who can defend ourselves. If she isn't
clever enough even to make up a better story than this--"
"I think," said Fanshawe, "it would be well to leave Miss Heriot out of
the discussion; she has nothing to do with it--and, as it is evident,
that you do not in the least understand her--"
"What do you mean, Sir, by saying Mrs. Charles does not understand?"
said Hepburn, coming from his window. A burning flush covered the young
man's face; his eyes looked hot and bloodshot, and the veins were
knotted upon his forehead; he was suffering such agonies of shame and
pain as few people, perhaps, have gone through; shame for the woman whom
he loved. Yes, though he was ashamed of her, though he perceived her
meanness, her prettiness, her folly, still he loved her. He had stood
aloof as long as he could; now, when the tugging at his heart, as well
as her impatient looks, called him to her side--when very shame impelled
him to come to her defence, to save her from her own folly, to hide from
himself the gnawing pangs of his own shame--that shame took the fiercer
form of passion. If he had worn a sword he would have drawn it; if there
had been any other foolish way of rushing into mortal conflict he would
have adopted it. It was the writhing of his own pain which excited him,
but he tried to make it look like indignation. "If you have anything to
say to Mrs. Charles, Sir," he added fiercely, "or any objections to
make, be so good as to address yourself to me."
"To you! why should I?" cried Fanshawe, more amazed than ever.
"Because she has given me the privilege of standing between her and all
impertinent intruders," cried the unhappy young man, taking her hand in
an agony of self-humiliation. Poor boy! he identified himself with her
publicly at the moment when he saw most distinctly and suffered most
sharply from the revelation of her character, which, to do her justice,
she had never meant to withhold from him. He almost hated her in the
vehemence of his love; hated her for not being what he would have had
her, with a hatred which somehow intensified his passion. The sight was
so strange and painful that it subdued the impulse of anger in
Fanshawe's mind.
"In that case," he said gravely, "since I can neither fight with you,
nor argue with you, I will withdraw, Mr. Hepburn; and Mr. Heriot's
communication can be made officially--if necessary, to you. Good
morning, I have no more to say."
Verna rushed forward as he opened the door. Already her better sense had
perceived the folly of her sister's words.
"Mr. Fanshawe, Matilda is always ridiculous!" she cried, breathless;
"but we will not yield a step till we are forced--not a step!"
"So be it!" said Fanshawe; "though I hope your advisers will counsel you
less foolishly. At all events, I have said what I had to say."
"Forget Matilda's nonsense, at least!" cried the sister. Matilda had
thrown herself back upon her sofa, where the unfortunate Johnnie was
kneeling by her, soothing her. "But I will not give up, I cannot give
up!" she said passionately, under her breath, clasping her hands. She
was not aware she had said it; her face, which was very pale, took a
strange character of force and high purpose,--yes, of high purpose, such
as it was. She did not wish to defraud anyone; but she was struggling
for bare life; she followed Fanshawe out, going with him to the door,
with rising uneasiness--the more generous part of her character waking
with her better judgment. "All that about Miss Heriot," she said,
gasping, "was ridiculous; and Mr. Fanshawe, I am sure she did not mean
to be rude to you; I never meant to be rude to you; it was only temper
and surprise. And oh, when a blow like this is coming, it seems so much
easier when you can feel it is somebody's fault!"
"But you are much too sensible to believe so?" said Fanshawe, "who
could--or would--attempt to deceive you in such a matter? Do you think
an invention of this kind could ever stand the eye of day?"
"It is--it must be an invention!" cried Verna; and then, poor soul, she
had recourse to that expedient which women employ by instinct, and
which, did they but know it, always ruins their cause, though it may
gain them a momentary triumph. She appealed to her companion, as if that
could serve her. "Oh, Mr. Fanshawe," she said, "we should do well if we
were but left alone. The place would soon be got into order. I have
given up all my plans about the house. I should see that Tommy was
brought up as he ought to be. Why cannot they let us alone?"
"Do you think it possible," he said, with some impatience, "that people
like the Heriots are framing a lie in order to harm you?"
She looked at him with dilating eyes, in which the tears gradually rose.
She had no understanding of the question. It came natural to her to
think that somebody must have done it. "I would try to do what they
wished," she faltered, looking at him with a pathetic desire to
understand. "I should be very glad to take their advice--I would do
anything--"
"Miss Bassett," said Fanshawe; "supposing it could affect the question
in any way--which it could not--but supposing, for the sake of argument,
that these good resolutions of yours could affect the question; how long
will you be able to do anything if this piece of news Mr. Hepburn has
told me is true?"
"What piece of news?" She looked so scared that he was almost frightened
by the impression his words had produced. "Oh, you think there is
something between--? But that is unjust to poor Matilda. She could not
think of such a thing so soon. She is only amusing herself. You are very
cruel to my sister," cried Verna, turning her back upon him without
another word. He went out with a smile, and jumped into his dog-cart,
glad to get clear of the whole business. It was nothing to him; but she,
poor soul, fled to her own room--so passionately excited that she could
scarcely keep still as she rushed up those warm, noiseless, carpeted
stairs which had seemed to her like the very path to Elysium, a little
while before. There, at least, howsoever things might turn out, her
power and reign were over. She could have torn her hair or her dress, or
anything that came within her reach, in her passion. It was all over. A
mean and small life of dependence and servility was all that now
remained to her. To be turned out one way or another, what did it
matter? Nay, it would be better to be turned out with Matilda than by
her; better to share her downfall than to be crushed by her triumphant
prosperity. Thus of the three people affected by Fanshawe's message,
there was but one person whom it affected mildly, and that the one most
concerned. Matilda, after her fit of abuse of Marjory and the old
family, shed a few angry tears, and then was comfortable again, and
ready for such dalliance with her lover, interspersed by quarrels, as
was her only fashion of mental amusement. But it would be hard to
describe the mingled passions in Hepburn's mind, as he knelt by the
sofa, scorning, hating, adoring, the pretty, miserable, beautiful
creature who had bewitched him. It was not her fault; all women were so;
did not every sage bear testimony to it, from Solomon downwards? And the
poor young fellow, in the revulsion of his feelings, took to admiring
her more and more, dwelling upon her beauty, her movements, her glances,
all the outward part of her. These were what women possessed to make men
mad and happy--nothing more.
And Verna up-stairs sobbed in an hysterical passion. She had lost her
very life.
CHAPTER XXII.
It is needless to trace all the steps by which the real heir of the
Heriots was placed in such possession of his rights as a poor little
orphan baby of three months' old could attain. Before his young mother
was carried to the family grave, where she was laid, under silent
protest from her humble family, who stood aloof with a pride familiar to
the Scotch peasant, giving up the child with a certain grim and
indignant reluctance--the infant was taken to St. Andrews, and placed
under Marjory's care. This was done by Agnes, who all along had regarded
Tom Heriot's sister as her rival and enemy. She carried the child
herself, scorning all aid, to Mr. Charles Heriot's house. If possible,
her peasant appearance--the air of a respectable maidservant, which was
natural to her--was more manifest than ever. She would not allow it to
be supposed that she wished to approach herself, by ever so little, to
the "gentles," with whom her sister had been connected.
"I've brought you the bairn," she said, confronting Marjory, with that
defiant look which had never quite left her face; and she unfolded the
sleeping baby from the shawl in which he was muffled, and laid him down
upon the sofa, sternly repressing all sign of emotion. "He was to be
mine," she said, briefly, "I promised to be a mother to him, but it's
reasonable now that he should be in your hands. My sister, up to her
last day," and here a spasm crossed the resolute features, "never knew
that he was the heir--nor my mother. They thought the bairn would be
provided for, that was a'. I knew well enough--but why should I have
troubled her innocent mind, that heeded no such vanities? And I allow
that a bairn like this, born the heir, should be in the hands of the
family. You and me will, maybe, never meet again--"
"Agnes," said Marjory, "you cannot think that I would wish to separate
you like this from Isabell's child?"
Again Agnes's comely face was swept as by a wind of emotion, and again
she banished all trace of feeling. "I know you are kind," she said. "It
is your nature; but I'm of the nature that I canna bide kindness. I'll
take it from my equals--but no from you--and nothing else can be between
us--- though I respect ye--I respect ye," she added, hurriedly. "I've no
a word to say. If I had been to choose, I would have chosen different. I
would rather he had been a poor lad's son, with little siller. I would
have bred him up, and watched him night and day, and put my hope and my
heart on him; but oh, being otherwise, it's a blessing of Providence
that it's come to light now, and no later. Time makes no marks upon a
helpless infant, as it would do upon a grown lad. It's best to part with
him now."
Here two tears, big and bitter, fell upon the child's white frock,
making two large spots, which Agnes, taking out her handkerchief, did
her best to wipe away.
"He shall know all that you did for his mother--all that you would have
done for him," said Marjory. "He will grow up to reward you, at least,
with his love."
"Reward me!" said Agnes, with a hot flush on her cheeks.
"I said, with his love," said Marjory, gently, "which is what no one
would scorn, not the Queen."
"No, no the Queen. She's a good leddy," said Agnes; "but ye can take
many a thing from them below you that you canna take from them above
you. Love's no love unless you're a kind of equals. I would rather he
kent nothing about us. We're no of his condition, and never can be. Eh,
my poor Bell! my poor Bell! that was so pleased he should be a
gentleman's son, without thinking that it parted him from all belonging
to her," cried Agnes, the tears rushing down her face in a sudden
tempest. Then she dried her eyes hurriedly. "Miss Heriot, I ken he's in
good hands. We'll never trouble you, and you'll no breed him up to
despise us. I must away now; there's aye plenty to do, God be praised."
"But, Agnes, I shall see you again? You will not go away without coming
to see the child and me?"
"It would serve no purpose," she said. "I'll see you where I once saw
you before, in the churchyard." "Oh, little did I think how I was to go
there next! I grudge her to you, I grudge her to you! though I do not
deny it's an honour, a' the honour that can be shown now--"
"All that we have ever had it in our power to show," said Marjory.
"I'm saying nothing against that," said Agnes, with her unquenchable
look of rivalry, of unsuccessful rivalry, compelled to yield to superior
power. She bent over the child, who slept peacefully on the sofa, for a
moment, and then she turned and left the room with scant ceremony. Her
heart was too sore for politeness, and politeness is not the cardinal
virtue of her kind. Thus she passed away out of Marjory's life. The
strange interlude of her connection with the Heriots must have looked
like a dream to her in after-days. She never interfered, never claimed
to see the child, never asserted any right to him. Partly with that
stoicism which belongs to her class and nation, and partly for very
love's sake, she gave him up, making the sacrifice absolute and perfect,
as only a powerful nature can do. How could she? many a feeble critic
said afterwards. The peasant-girl could, because of love, and because
she was tenderer and stronger than most; the effort rent her heart, but
she did it, feeling the fitness of the sacrifice.
And the baby who had been born amid the peat-smoke in a Highland
cottage, who had been frantically concealed at first, a shame to
everybody belonging to him, entered upon another kind of existence
without knowing it, in equal ignorance of his cloudy entry into life,
and of this sudden revolution. He lay on the soft sofa, softly
sleeping, placid as if he had not been laid in a hard bed, and pillowed
on dying arms. He never knew any existence but that which he thus began,
as it were, for the second time under Marjory's shadow. He had no
surroundings but those that belonged to the natural level on which he
was to spend his life.
Fanshawe remained in St. Andrews while all these steps were being taken.
His conduct was quite in accordance with his character. He intended to
go away daily, but every day found some pretext to detain him. He
lingered, and was ready to aid in everything required, and bade himself
begone at night, only to feel that to go was impossible every morning.
People made a hundred comments on him. He was gibed at, gravely
questioned, made the object of many a conjecture, but nothing moved him.
He stayed through the Autumn, with now and then a divergence into the
Highlands for a day's shooting; he saw the Autumn steal into Winter, and
never budged. Mr. Charles became so used to him that he received the
suggestion of his departure with indignation at last.
"Go away! why should he go away? Where could he be better?" Mr. Charles
said; and did his best to teach him golf, and initiate him into all the
delights of the place. It was Fanshawe who stood by Marjory in the
disagreeable assault she sustained from Mrs. Charles, who drove into St.
Andrews in the Pitcomlie carriage, and stormed so loudly against her
husband's family, that the wanderers in the ruined Cathedral heard the
sound through the open windows, and came gaping and wondering to
listen. Matilda denounced every kind of vengeance upon the heads of
those who had got up this conspiracy against her, and were about to hunt
her and her orphan boy from their home.
"But do not think you will get rid of me," she said. "I am not the
outcast you think. Providence has given me another home, where I shall
be able to watch and find you out when you are not thinking. Oh, don't
imagine you are rid of me!"
Poor Johnnie Hepburn stood by during this objurgation, shrinking from
Marjory's eye, looking on, now red with shame, now pale with distress,
while his future wife made this exhibition of herself. He stood between
the ideal he had worshipped all his life, and the real upon which he had
fallen, poor fellow, breaking not his bones, but his heart, by the fall.
He was too much cowed to say a word. And neither of the others said
much; they allowed the young widow to drive off triumphant with the
sense that she had humbled them all, and vindicated her superiority.
"That must have done her a deal of good," Fanshawe said when it was
over, "and it has not done you much harm."
"It has done me a great deal of harm," said Marjory, paling out of her
flush of excitement, and looking ready to cry; and then after a while,
she said softly, "Poor Johnnie!" These were not the words of a woman who
had entertained any very elevated feeling for the man whom she thus
pitied; but they were enough to make Fanshawe quite unhappy.
"Idiot!" he said to himself without any pity; and spent that evening
mournfully by himself to the wonder of the Heriot household, and the
consternation of Marjory, who felt that he had been her best support;
and who had not an idea what he could mean by absenting himself on that
particular evening when she was so grateful to him.
They were brought together also by another duty, not of an agreeable
kind. Mrs. Charles gave her sister a summary dismissal when she herself
left Pitcomlie. It was Spring when this occurred, and Matilda was to go
to Edinburgh, her year of mourning being nearly out, to prepare for her
second marriage. But Verna, whose courage and temper had both given way
under the failure of all her hopes, protested so warmly and so
injudiciously against this precipitate marriage, that there was a
violent quarrel, and the weaker sister was turned out to find her way
back to India, or where she pleased. She went to St. Andrews, not
knowing why, and threw herself upon Marjory's compassion. She had
nowhere to go to but India, where her father did not want her. Nobody in
the world wanted poor Verna. While they were trying to arrange for her
return voyage, she fell ill of a brain-fever, and lay between life and
death for weeks. When she got better, somehow she had acquired a niche
in the household of which she had intended to be the most active enemy.
She stayed in her loneliness as Milly's governess, or in any other
capacity that could be invented for her; and finally married Dr.
Murray's successor, and made an admirable parish Minister's wife,
interfering too much with the poor people, but gradually learning their
character. She and Mrs. John Hepburn were sometimes friends--when the
latter was in want of help; and sometimes enemies, when Matilda felt
well enough to be insolent; but Verna's vicinity made poor Johnnie's
life less miserable, and his home less hopeless, than in her absence
they could have been.
This, however, is an incursion into the future which we are scarcely
warranted in making, seeing that the fate of the two principal persons
of this history still remains unsettled. Fanshawe lingered at St.
Andrews through all the Winter and Spring. He made himself of use to
everybody, and was deeply ashamed of his own absolute uselessness. Never
had he been so conscious of the good-for-nothing existence which he did
not seem able to shake himself clear of. It closed his mouth in
Marjory's presence. What could he say for himself? how could he
recommend himself to her? He would go and sit by her, or walk by her
side when permitted, silent, embarrassed; doing nothing to win her
attention, wondering if she despised him, or if she pitied him, or if
she thought him worth thinking of at all? His feelings grew exaggerated
and unreal in the profound consciousness he had of his own helpless
unimportance, and in his constant surmises as to what she thought of
him, and the questions concerning him which must arise in her mind. One
half of these questions, however, never arose in Marjory's mind at all,
and the other half appeared to her in a different light, and affected
her differently; but the man was in love and humble, and never divined
this. He lingered on, hoping for he knew not what; that something might
break the ice between them, that she might offer herself to him, or
something else equally improbable. Marjory's sentiments were of a very
different character. She did not feel herself to stand on that vast
pinnacle of superiority which was so visible to him; her eyes were not
so clear as he supposed them. To be sure, he was not at all her ideal of
what a man ought to be; but I am not sure that she liked him less on
that account. Probably Marjory, like many other young women, supposed
herself to prefer that glorious being of romance whom romantic girls
dream of, whom they can look up to, upon whom they can hang in sweet but
abject inferiority, and who is to them, as Mr. Trollope says, a god. I
say probably she supposed that she would have liked this; but I doubt
much whether she would have liked it; for men like gods seldom appear to
the visual organs of any but very susceptible feminine adorers, after
five-and-twenty, and Marjory had reached that ripe age. But I fear she
liked Fanshawe all the better for not being a god. She liked him for the
very qualities which he felt she must despise him for. To her the vague
and unsettled character of his life appeared but dimly, while his
generosities shone out very bright. All her good sense and
discrimination failed her in this point, as such qualities invariably do
just at the moment when they might be of practical use. In matters so
closely concerning personal happiness they never are of the slightest
use; as soon as the heart is touched, such poor bulwarks of the mind
yield as if they were made of broken reeds. She saw nothing ignoble,
nothing unworthy in the life full of so many kindly uses, of which
Fanshawe thought with so much shame, yet felt himself incapable of
changing.
"Most people come here for golf," she would say, when his long lingering
was remarked. "Why should he not stay--for his own pleasure--if he likes
it? Is golf such an elevating occupation?"
This was said, not because she despised golf, but because of him whom
she felt herself bound to defend, and who had not even golf--who had
only herself, for his excuse.
The way in which all this ended was as follows: Marjory had gone out to
the Spindle on a bright Winter day to pay a farewell visit to that spot
which had occupied so important a place in her past life. Who does not
know the keen and radiant brightness of a sunny day in Winter, when
there is no wind to chill the still air, no clouds upon the deepened
blue, none of the languid softening of Summer, but every outline sharp,
and every tint brought out by the radiant sun and clear atmosphere? The
rocks unfolded all their glittering veins, all their ruddy stains of
colour under the sunshine. There were no trees to keep the fact of decay
before the spectator by means of fallen leaves and bare anatomy of
branches. The sea was like a great blue mirror, except where the crisped
surface, still, though ruffled, betrayed some breath of wandering air.
The sails of the fishing boats rose brown out of this dazzling surface,
and in the distance some far white ships glided like great sea-birds
along the bright broad line of the horizon to which both sky and sea
went out widening and paling. The sun was warm, and Marjory seated
herself, for a few moments, on a dry rock from which the sea had long
ebbed. This stillness was more intense than it ever is on a Summer
day--the brightness almost more intense too. She sat and thought of all
that had passed there--of Isabell and her death-bed--of the strange way
in which this corner of rocky beach had been thrust into her own story.
She was disturbed and annoyed when she heard a step approaching,
scattering the pebbles, and sounding through the Winter's stillness. She
was still more disturbed, but perhaps not annoyed, when she saw that the
intruder was Fanshawe. He was the only intruder whose presence she could
have endured; and when she saw him, she rose and went to meet him,
taking the path towards home, which somehow made the encounter less
embarrassing. He turned and accompanied her. It is a long walk, winding
up and down by many a fold of the bold coast, now at the foot of the
cliffs, now above--an endless walk to people who are embarrassed by
finding themselves together; and yet not disagreeable--one of those
opportunities of pleasant pain which few have the courage to avoid; and
which may become, who knows, all pleasure, and no pain, by the chance of
a sudden word.
"Do you know," said Fanshawe suddenly, after some vague conversation
about nothing, "that I know what a poor wretch I am, Miss Heriot? If I
was good for anything--if I was of the least consequence in the world,
or knew how to make myself so, I should go away."
"Should you?" said Marjory; "I do not see the necessity. Do you know
that I think you talk a great deal of nonsense on this point. You cannot
expect me to agree with you, seeing what a friend you have been to us;
how much you have done for us ever since we knew you. You have been good
for everything--"
"And yet," he said, "it is odd if you will think of it--that I have been
of no real service whatsoever. I don't mean to say I had not the best
intentions--but there is nothing so feeble as good intentions. About
these Macgregors, for instance; they were found before I got back from
my wild-goose chase. I meant well, but I did nothing."
"That is not the question," said Marjory loftily; "their coming was a
mere accident. You did everything--the accident came in and balked you.
I was half disappointed myself."
"Were you?" he said, looking at her with those melting, glowing eyes
which betray secrets. And then he added quite abruptly: "The road is
rough, will you take my arm?"
Marjory laughed. "I do not see how that follows," she said, amused.
"No, it does not follow; nothing follows in life--except that the road
is rough, you know, and facts count for something. They do count for
something--not for much, perhaps you will say--"
"Indeed, I am not such an infidel; they count for a great deal," she
said, and though she needed no support, she accepted it to give him
pleasure. But such was the fantastical nature of the man that, after the
first gleam of delight that came across him at the touch of her hand,
his brow clouded over.
"How good you are, Miss Heriot! too good. You drive me to despair when
you are kind to me. Often, do you know, I have wanted to ask you
whether, by any chance--people take odd fancies sometimes--you would
have me, to try what you could make of me? and then you have been kind,
and driven me to despair. It is no use, is it, telling you that I have
been a greater fool than usual to-day? Do you know," he went on, holding
her hand tightly in his arm, "if you would have had me, I think
something might have come of me, perhaps--"
He looked at her so that she could not bear his eyes. It was a curious
kind of love-tale; but not, I suppose, less embarrassing than another.
She withdrew her hand from his arm with difficulty, and with a little
impatience. "Mr. Fanshawe, you vex me when you say such things--of
yourself."
Each word as she said it was lower than the preceding one; and the last
two were quite inaudible to poor Fanshawe. He gave a huge sigh that came
from the bottom of his heart. "Well!" he said, "I knew how it would be;
I felt sure that was about what you would say. And it is quite right--I
am not good enough to look at you, much less to hope. But, Miss Heriot,
I am done for now, and I don't care what becomes of me. Don't be kind to
me any more."
Marjory looked up, and saw, to her wonder, the darkness that had come
over his face. There was no time to be lost in trifling. She put her
hand within his arm again--she looked at him smiling. "But I will," she
said.
"You will--what?"
The question was foolish--the answer unnecessary. So are many questions,
and many answers at that crisis of life. They got home somehow, and
told the others what had happened. "But I have nothing," Fanshawe said
ruefully when he recounted the matter to Mr. Charles.
"We must make some arrangement--some arrangement," said that troubled
sage, with many puckers in his forehead. Anyhow, it was a way of solving
the question of Marjory's marriage, and that was worth a sacrifice.
The Fanshawes are now settled at Pitcomlie, the guardians of the baby
heir. The useless man has become the most useful of men in that work
which so many useless men could shine in, the management of an estate.
He has found what he can do, and does it. And Mr. Charles sits in his
room in the old Tower, and has come to the second volume of the family
history. It will be a long time before he comes to the entry of "Thomas
Heriot, married June 16, 18--, to Isabell Jeffrey," nobody's daughter,
which it goes to his very heart to think of. Perhaps he will not live
long enough to be obliged to record that there was once an irregular
marriage and a nameless wife among the Heriots; but in the meantime the
others keep the name of poor Isabell always sacred; and her boy, after
his long minority, will be the richest Heriot that has reigned for many
a generation in the East Neuk of Fife.
THE END.
PRINTING OFFICE OF THE PUBLISHER.
*       *       *       *       *
September 1874.
Tauchnitz Edition.
Latest Volumes:
The Parisians by Edward Bulwer, Lord Lytton, 4 vols.
Two little Wooden Shoes by Ouida, 1 vol.
Lady Hester by the Author of "the Heir of Redclyffe," 1 vol.
The Life of Charles Dickens by John Forster, 6 vols.
History of two Queens by W. H. Dixon, 6 vols.
Johnny Ludlow, 2 vols.
Taken at the Flood by M. E. Braddon, 3 vols.
A Pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina by Richard F. Burton, 3 v.
Fables in Song by Robert Lord Lytton, 2 vols.
My Mother and I, by the Author of "John Halifax," 1 vol.
South Sea Bubbles by the Earl and the Doctor, 1 vol.
Reginald Hetherege by Henry Kingsley, 2 vols.
Old Fort Duquesne by Charles McKnight, 2 vols.
Uncle John by Whyte Melville, 2 vols.
Only a Butterfly by Georgiana M. Craik, 1 vol.
Martin's Vineyard by Agnes Harrison, 1 vol.
Kilmeny by William Black, 1 vol.
Station Amusements in New Zealand by Lady Barker, 1 vol.
Israel Mort, Overman, by John Saunders, 2 vols.
A Rose in June by Mrs. Oliphant, 1 vol.
A complete Catalogue of the Tauchnitz Edition is attached to this work.
Bernhard Tauchnitz, Leipzig;
And sold by all booksellers.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAY; VOL. II ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:
* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."
* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.
* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.
* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.