Project Gutenberg's The Pastor's Fire-side Vol. 1 (of 4), by Jane PorterThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: The Pastor's Fire-side Vol. 1 (of 4)Author: Jane PorterRelease Date: August 12, 2014 [EBook #46570]Language: English*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PASTOR'S FIRE-SIDE ***Produced by Beth Baran and the Online DistributedProofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file wasproduced from images generously made available by TheInternet Archive)THEPASTOR'S FIRE-SIDE,ANOVEL,IN FOUR VOLUMES.BYMISS JANE PORTER,AUTHOR OF THADDEUS OF WARSAW, SIDNEY'S APHORISMS,AND THE SCOTTISH CHIEFS.I will confess the ambitious projects which I once had,are dead within me. After having seen the parts which foolsplay upon the great stage; a few books, and a few friends,are what I shall seek to finish my days with.TWEDDELL.VOL. I.LONDON:PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN,PATERNOSTER-ROW.1817.THEPASTOR'S FIRE-SIDE.CHAP. I.It was late one fine evening in September, when a boat, borne along bya single sail, passed over the narrow sea which divides Lindisfarnefrom the mainland, and moored itself within the small bay of theisland. The moon was beginning to rise; and by her silvering outline,already distinguished the venerable relics of Saint Cuthbert'smonastery from the shadows of twilight.Two persons wrapped in large cloaks, and followed by one who seemeda servant, rose from the boat; and giving a piece of gold to theirsolitary navigator, stepped on shore. The elder of the two made thesign of the cross upon his breast, and with his eyes bent to theground, walked slowly forward. The younger performed the same act ofdevotion, though in a less fixed manner, and shivering as he lookedup to the flying clouds, followed his companion. Having proceededover sand and shingle without discerning any thing like an inhabiteddwelling, he began to doubt the boatman's information respecting thesituation of their purposed lodgings; and, looking around for someother intelligence, perceived a group of fishermen on a shelve of therock.--By the assistance of his servant, he scrambled up the acclivity,and enquired the way to the Reverend Richard Athelstone's.--One ofthe men, raising himself from the heap of gathered nets they had beendrying on the rocks, pointed along the top of the cliff, and told himto keep on, west of the abbey, when he would soon see the church, andthe Pastor's house beside it.The travellers proceeded a little way in the direction given: butfinding that the dubious light bewildered them amongst rocks, ruins,and trees, the younger returned to the fisherman, and begged hewould conduct them to Mr. Athelstone's. This request was obeyed withthe same direct compliance as his question had been answered; andthe man, throwing his net over his shoulder, trudged on before thetravellers.--The elder pursued his way in devout abstraction. His eyeswere fixed on the distant tower of the monastery; which, to his musingfancy, seemed to stand alone in the bright horizon, like the stillhovering shade of the glorified saint of the island.The way to the Pastor's dwelling lay by the ruins of the wall whichhad once surrounded the monastery. As the travellers approached it,the roofless aisles and broken arches stood white in the moon-beam;and the windows, partially obscured by the withered stone-crop whichsprung from their mouldering columns, threw a checquered light on thehalf-sunk monuments below.--The youth, fatigued in limbs, and depressedin spirits, drew near his companion. The elder traveller pressed thenerveless arm that now rested upon his, and said in a low voice,"What desolation is here!--Ah, my son, how can we expect peace in thecounsels, or virtue in the conduct of a people who thus dishonour thetombs of the saints.""Alas, my lord," replied the young man, "if we must estimate the pietyof nations by the unanimity of their councils, we have not much reasonto congratulate ourselves on the holiness of Spain!--Why," added hewith asperity, "did her vacillating policy drag us from peacefulItaly?--But for that, we might never have visited these rugged shores.""Ferdinand," rejoined his father, "the disease of your heart, makesyou misjudge your country.--Spain has her errors.--But no comparisoncan be justly drawn between a people that respect the Faith, evento hallowing the ashes of its apostles; and a race of men, whotrample alike on the rights of their kings, and the ordinances of thechurch:--No good can come to such a people!"The young man shuddered. "At least," exclaimed he, "no good can cometo us, in so excommunicated a land:--though I shall not be sorry toshelter myself from so cutting a blast, even within the condemned cellof the heretic Cura of the island."The travellers continued to follow their guide over rough groundcovered with loose stones, and rendered intricate by the stunted treeswhich grew in scattered loneliness amongst the detached masses of thedecayed monastery. Through the shadowy arches of what had once been apassage to the west cloisters, they espied a distant light."For your sake, my son," said the elder stranger, "I hope that portendswe are near houses!""I hope so too," rejoined Ferdinand, "but I also fear, it may be onlythe lantern of some vessel, more lucky than we were, passing thisdesolate rock."Having made their way through the varied gloom of the ruins, they cameout on a smooth sheep-path.--The abbey now lay behind them.--Beforethem, rose the spire of the parish church; and near it, in holyfellowship, stood the parsonage; from whose ivy-latticed window stillstreamed the friendly ray which had guided them to its gate."This be our pastor's,--and God's blessing abide with him and his!"said the fisherman, pointing with a bow to the house.--Ferdinand putmoney into the man's hand; and then followed his father and theirservant through a wicket into a little green court. They crossed itssoft grass, and stooping beneath a low stone porch, knocked at thehouse-door. It was opened by a hoary-headed servant, of a hale andcheerful aspect. The elder stranger asked for the Reverend RichardAthelstone. The old man immediately opened a door at his right hand;and without other reply than a respectful bow, ushered the travellersinto the presence of his master.The venerable pastor of Lindisfarne advanced to meet his visitors; who,though unannounced, he saw by their air were foreigners and gentlemen.The elder apologized for their appearance at so late an hour; saying,they had arrived from Holland at Berwick that morning in the midst ofa storm. "But," said he, "when so fine an evening succeeded, I becametoo impatient to tread the sacred shore of Lindisfarne; and to delivera packet entrusted to me by the Grand-Pensionary Hensius, to delay mycoming until another day."As the stranger spoke, he presented the packet. Mr. Athelstonereceived it with a hospitable smile: and turning to a lady, who satwith two younger ones at a work-table near the fire; "Mrs. Coningsby,my dear niece," said he, "welcome these gentlemen; they come from afriend of your father's."The lady rose; and gracefully obeyed, by expressing her reverence forthe Grand-Pensionary; and the pleasure she felt in seeing Lindisfarnehonoured by his remembrance in the persons of his friends. She thenintroduced the young ladies as her daughters. The eldest she calledCornelia, and the youngest Alice. They cast down their eyes, and bowedtheir fair necks to the strangers, as their mother named them:--andwhen, on observing the pale countenance of Ferdinand, she invited thetwo gentlemen to draw nearer the fire; the sisters moved their chairsback, and pursued their needle-work with redoubled industry.Mr. Athelstone took a hasty survey of the Grand-Pensionary's letter;and folding it up, repeated his former polite greeting with thecordial addition of taking the strangers each by the hand."Pleased as I was to receive any friend of the Baron Hensius," saidhe, "how must my pleasure be increased, when I see in that friend theMarquis Santa Cruz!""The Marquis Santa Cruz!" repeated Mrs. Coningsby, in a tone ofdelightful surprize.The Pastor smiled.--"Your name, my lord, has long been with us. Famehad given it to the world at large; but it was brought to our remoteshores by your noble antagonist Prince Eugene of Savoy."With a bow to the implied compliment, the Marquis inquired how recentlythe Prince had been in England."Not very lately," replied Mr. Athelstone, "my acquaintance with HisHighness must be dated one and twenty years back; in the spring of1704, when he came to England on a secret mission from the Emperorof Germany.--Having gained our queen's concurrence to support theImperialists against Bavaria, Prince Eugene and the Duke of Marlboroughembarked for Holland. Stress of weather drove their vessel on thiscoast. I then inhabited Bamborough-Castle, during the absence of mybrother Sir Hedworth Athelstone; and going to the beach to offer theusual assistance to distressed mariners, I discovered my friend theDuke, and his noble compeer, in two nameless passengers. They took uptheir residence with me till the tempest subsided, and it lasted manydays; but remaining unknown to the country, they gave the whole oftheir society to myself and my niece. It was then, my lord, that indiscoursing on the great and good of all countries, Prince Eugene namedwith friendship the Marquis Santa Cruz; who, he said, had baffled hisbest military skill the preceding year in Italy."An answering glow of generous admiration suffused the face ofthe Marquis. "Eugene of Savoy," returned he, "can afford suchacknowledgements. And, that I did discover, and baffle his designsbefore the dyke of Zero, I have ever considered the proudest fortunewhich has hitherto been granted to my military career. Since thatperiod, I have often met the Prince, both in the field and in thecabinet: and in every character, whether as soldier or as statesman,he has manifested that nobleness of soul which commands alike theconfidence of friends and of enemies."A blush overspread the fine, though matron features of Mrs. Coningsby."Ah, my dear uncle," cried she, "why does not Louis hear this, from theMarquis Santa Cruz?" Then rising, she said she would enquire about hisreturn, and left the room."Does Mrs. Coningsby speak of her son?" asked the Marquis."No," said the Pastor, "the young man she alludes to is the son of herelder sister, now in a better world. His father, you doubtless know;the Baron de Ripperda.""I have not been in Spain these ten years," replied the Marquis; "but Iknow the Baron is now there; and introducing plans of internal policy,worthy the emulation of his own times, and the gratitude of futureages.--Before happy circumstances restored him to Spain, it was nevermy good fortune to meet him in any of my accidental visits to theNetherlands."Mr. Athelstone and his noble guest continued their discourse on thepublic history of the Baron de Ripperda. Remarking, with some loyalanimadversions, on his father Don Juan de Montemar Duke de Ripperda,who, in resentment for some slight from his sovereign, left Spain forthe Netherlands; and, joining himself to the United States, exchangedhis Spanish rank for that of a northern baron.--While the Marquisregretted that his son, the present illustrious Ripperda, had everbelonged to any other country than that of his ancestors, he expatiatedwith the pride of a Spaniard on the talents which were now reclaimedby their parent land. Mr. Athelstone, who had all the old-fashionednotions respecting amor patri, rejoined that the satisfactoryaccomplishment of Baron de Ripperda's mission as ambassador from theNetherlands to Madrid, had empowered him to resign with honour hisbonds to their country; and to resume his hereditary rights in Spain inthe manner best calculated to re-establish his house, and to transmitthe ancient glories of his family.While the Pastor and his guest were engaged in this conversation,Ferdinand leaned exhausted in his chair; and had leisure to surveythe domestic scene around him; so different from the solitude hehad anticipated in the condemned cell of the heretic Cura of theisland!--From the window of the room in which he now sat, still issuedthe light he had seen from afar; and which had beaconed his weary stepsto his present comfortable station by its source; a cheerful fire, anda cluster of blazing candles on its chimney-piece.Ferdinand could not have been so long in Italy without forming ataste in architecture; and he contemplated with admiring curiositythis specimen of Gothic workmanship. It was of a cinque-foil shape,supported by short columns on brackets, and adorned with a projectingfrieze, on which stood the lighted branches, with alabaster vases fullof autumnal flowers. It appeared to have been translated from somebuilding of older date; and, indeed, little more than a century before,this very arch had mantled the Abbot's hearth in the good monastery ofLindisfarne.Ferdinand next looked at the oak-pannelled walls of the room, enlivenedby a range of fine portraits in carved ebony frames. These, with acabinet of curious china, a harpsichord, a well-stored bookcase, andthe usual complement of sofas and chairs, completed the furniture.He did not take so cursory a view of its inhabitants. The venerablemaster of the house sat on one side of the fire-place, talking with theMarquis. His silvered hair and benign countenance, blanched and worn byseventy winters, seemed to announce how nearly the divine spirit withinhad shaken off its earthly tabernacle. The Marquis had never beforeregarded an avowed minister of the Reformation, without a distancein his manner that proclaimed I am near pollution! but now he satlistening to the Pastor with so cordial an air, that Ferdinand murmuredto himself; "Ah! my father, it is too late for your unhappy son, shouldyour present feelings towards that good man, indeed, draw away theonly prejudice from your noble heart!" He sighed heavily, and turnedhis attention to the other side of the room.The sisters had withdrawn their chairs far from the fire-side circle,and were plying their needles with indefatigable diligence. Cornelia'sraven hair was braided back from her polished brow, and confinedin a knot with a gold bodkin. The majestic contour of her featuressuited well with her Roman name; and the simplicity of the plain whitegarment in which she was arrayed, harmonized with the modest dignityof a figure, which proclaimed in every movement that the nobilityof the soul needs no foreign ornament! As her fair hand traversedthe embroidery frame, Ferdinand turned from these lofty beauties, tothe gentle Alice; whose charms, if of a feebler, were of a subtlerforce. Her head, which moved about rather oftener than her sister's,in search of silk, scissors, and needles, gave free scope to thecontemplation of the young Spaniard. She appeared several years youngerthan Cornelia. Her form was fairy in its proportions; slight, airy,and apparently impalpable to aught but the touch of a sylph. Her azureeyes, glancing around for what she sought, shone so lucidly bright fromunder her flaxen locks, that Ferdinand thought he had never seen eyesso beautiful; "Never," said he to himself, "so divinely innocent; neverso irresistibly exhilarating."He continued to gaze, till some bitter recollections caused him tocover his eyes with his hand; but soon withdrawing it, he lookedagain upon Alice; and longed to hear her speak, while a suddenself-gratulation on how fluently he could himself discourse in English,animated his before languid features. He observed her turn her headtowards the yet uncurtained window. The moon was now holding herbright course in the heavens, without meeting the passing shadow of asingle cloud. He seized the opportunity to address the sisters, andremarked the beauty of the night."It is calmer than usual, after so tempestuous a day," observedCornelia."I am glad the winds are quiet," said Alice; "for we may now look forLouis, without fear of the breakers."Ferdinand enquired whether her cousin were to cross the sea that night."We hope so," replied she; "he went yesterday to Bamborough Castle;and I am sure nothing but the storm prevented his returning to us thismorning.""Whatever may be the attractions of Bamborough Castle," rejoinedFerdinand, "I cannot be surprised your cousin should prefer his home toall other places." He accompanied this remark with that sort of smileand bow to Alice, which a woman of the world would have understood asa compliment to herself; but Alice was too ignorant of the gallantriesof fashionable society, to see anything in this, but the obviousmeaning of the words. Cornelia received the speech as her sister haddone; and exclaimed with a sigh, "I wish Louis did prefer his home toall other places!""Why say that, Cornelia?" said Alice; "you know how he loves us all;how he despises the people he meets at the Castle; and you cannotseriously doubt our dear Louis's preference of home to all otherplaces!"Ferdinand did not perceive the grounds of conclusion which the fairAlice drew from her argument, but he admired her brightening eyesas she uttered this hasty defence; which he readily apprehended wasintended, rather as a palliation to him of her cousin's absence, thanany refutation to her sister. Cornelia appeared to understand the same;for she did not reply, but pensively resumed her embroidery. Alice nowbecame confused; regarding the silence of her sister as a reproof forher having said so much before a stranger, she turned away her head,and with trembling hands re-commenced her work.--Ferdinand did notwithdraw his eyes from the little table. He wished to see the fortunatecousin, upon whom these lovely sisters lavished so much solicitude; andhe was curious to know who the inhabitants of the castle were, whoseattractions could excite jealousy in young women so full of charms.While he was thus ruminating, Mrs. Coningsby entered, to lead heruncle's guests to the supper room. Before they obeyed her hospitablesummons, the Marquis requested that he and his son might retire todisencumber themselves of their travelling accoutrements; and when theyhad withdrawn, the Pastor took that interval to inform his niece anddaughters, that the noble Spaniards were to be his guests for somedays.--He read apart to Mrs. Coningsby, the passage of Baron Hensius'sletter, which mentioned that Don Ferdinand d'Osorio, the Marquis'sonly son, was the primary cause of this visit to England.--On theMarquis's recall from his diplomatic situation in Italy, he stopped afew months at Vienna, where his wife's family reside. In that city, DonFerdinand was seized with a fever on his spirits, which menaced hislife.--Medical skill was exhausted; and as a lost hope, the physiciansordered him to travel. His father knew this darling son had a fatalbond in the Austrian capital; he therefore saw no alternative but toapply secretly to Spain for the royal mandate, to send both fatherand son on a seemingly official tour to Holland and Great Britain. Itarrived, and the travellers set forward. In Holland, Don Ferdinand'sdisorder re-doubled.--The Amsterdam physicians recommended a seavoyage, and the bracing air of the north; and as the desponding invalidnow appeared indifferent to his fate, the Marquis determined onentering Great Britain by Scotland. He knew that Lindisfarne, the HolyIsland of unnumbered saints, lay in the way; and full of parentalanxiety, he formed a wish, which he communicated to Baron Hensius, ofpropitiating a peculiar blessing on this part of his tour, by payinghis vows at the shrine of Saint Cuthbert."My friend warns me," continued the Pastor, addressing his youngernieces as well as their mother; "that the Marquis Santa Cruz is a RomanCatholic in the severest sense of the term.--That his mind, enlightenedon every other subject, is here under an impenetrable cloud. Indeed,his errand hither is a sufficient proof of his mental darkness. Hebrings his son to this island, to touch the dead man's bones, and behealed; and he neglects the living presence of his Saviour, who hasonly to will it, and it is done!--Oh, my children, here is a lessonto humble the pride of intellect, and to fill you with awe before theCreator of your reason, and the revealer of his word!--Reason, whenhearkening to revelation, must be as a little child; not as an idiot,that receives all, and does all, without understanding the nature ofthe command;--but as a little child, humble and intelligent, eager toapprehend the truth, and ready to obey it. Such a little child as thatwhich appeared with the Doctors in the Temple, hearing and asking themquestions, Mark you!--He did not then speak as one having authority,but he came to hear, and to inquire!--In all things, He is ourexample; and that example bids us search the Scriptures for truth; andto apply to God alone, through one Mediator for salvation here andhere-after."Mrs. Coningsby did not answer her uncle, but pressed the hands of herlistening daughters; who cast down their eyes in reverence of theirbeloved teacher and his divine subject.--Mr. Athelstone paused a fewminutes, and resumed."The Grand-Pensionary, being aware how happy I should be to see theMarquis Santa Cruz, and to render every service in my power to hisinvalid son, gave him this letter, which has introduced to us two suchinteresting persons.--So now, my dear niece, you must do your part, inthe shape of aired rooms and nourishing diet; and I will try to performmine so, as to induce the father and son to become our guests for asmany weeks, as they have purposed days:--They would be visitors afterLouis's own heart.""I thought the young Spanish nobleman looked very ill," observed Alicein a tone of pity; "he leaned so languidly in his chair; and his largedark eyes moved so heavily, it seemed a labour for him to turn themeven from me to my sister; though we sat close together.--Poor youngman!--And how kindly he asked about Louis!--Did not you, Cornelia,think he looked ill?""Indeed," said her sister, "I scarcely noticed his looks at all; whichI am sorry for.--He must have thought us most unfeelingly inattentive,to allow an invalid to sit so long in a hot room with that heavy cloakon.""I rather think the fault was mine," rejoined their mother, "butthe remembrances of past days had totally obscured present objects.And, as another proof of it, my dear Sir;" said she, turning to thePastor; "I had forgotten to tell you that the boatman has returnedfrom Bamborough without Louis; and bearing no other message than SirAnthony Athelstone's respects, and Mr. de Montemar will remain at thecastle the remainder of the week."Further remarks were prevented by the re-entrance of the travellers.They were conducted by their hospitable host to the supper-room;and after partaking of its northern fare with good appetites, Mrs.Coningsby led the Marquis and his son to the doors of their apartments,where she bade them adieu for the night.CHAP. II.Ferdinand arose next morning at a late hour, refreshed and lighterin spirits than he had been of a long time. The day was bright andbalmy; and when he descended to the breakfast-room, the Marquisglanced at his renovated appearance, and addressing Mr. Athelstone,exclaimed--"Already my son's cheerful countenance bears witness to theefficacy of this blessed spot!"The family of the Pastor were assembled round the table; Mrs. Coningsbypresided over the dispersion of her fragrant tea; and her daughters,blooming with the freshness of the dewy flowers, did the honours of thecoffee and kneaded cakes. Social converse, augmenting in interest withits prolongation, succeeded the hospitable meal, till Mr. Athelstoneobserved Ferdinand turn his eyes wistfully towards the open window.The light foliage of the spruce, which bent towards it, floated intothe room on the gentle impulse of a soft south wind; and the aromaticbreath that followed, seemed to be regarded by the young Spaniardas an invitation to taste its fragrance nearer. The Pastor, whoanticipated the wishes of invalids with the same solicitude he wouldadminister a salutary medicine, turned to his young nieces, and desiredthey would put on their hats, and introduce Don Ferdinand to theirMichaelmas-daisies. The ladies withdrew; and Ferdinand, not requiring asecond permission, was soon in the little porch, ready to accompany hisfair conductors.The youthful party had scarcely withdrawn, before a note was broughtfrom Bamborough Castle. It was in answer to one the Pastor haddispatched that morning to Sir Anthony Athelstone, to explain thenecessity of Louis's immediate return to the Island. Mr. Athelstonetook the letter, and read as follows:"To the Reverend Richard Athelstone."Sir Anthony Athelstone is very sensible of the respect due to hisreverend Uncle, and to his noble guests; but Louis de Montemar beingengaged with a hunting-party, it is impossible he can have the honourof waiting upon them.""Bamborough Castle,Saturday Morn.""From what I can gather from the man who brought the letter, Sir;" saidthe old servant who had delivered it, "the Duke of Wharton is at theCastle."At this intimation, an unusual colour spread over the face of Mr.Athelstone. "Peter, that cannot be!--With all Sir Anthony's errors, hewill not forfeit the honour of a gentleman!"Peter bowed his grey head, and respectfully answered; "The lad, Sir,who brought that note, told me a fine Duke from foreign parts, with acompany of ladies and gentlemen, came yesterday through all the stormto the Castle; and they were so merry and frolicsome, they sat up allnight dancing, and singing outlandish songs, which the butler, whounderstands tongues, told him were arrant Jacobite."Mr. Athelstone rose hastily from his seat.--"Peter, I am afraid you areright."--Peter bowed again, and withdrew.--Mr. Athelstone re-seatedhimself, and for a moment covered his discomposed features with hishand."I remember the Duke of Wharton eight years ago in Paris," said theMarquis; "I think it was in the summer of 1716; when he came to payhis homage to the illustrious widow of King James of England.--Whartonwas then a very young man, hardly of age; certainly not arrived atthe years of discretion; for with a genius that equalled him insome respects to the maturest minds in France, he was perpetuallyreminding us of his real juvenility, by the boyish extravagance of hispassions:--And I have since heard that time has not tamed them.""It seldom does," exclaimed the Pastor, "when the reins have once beengiven to their impulse.--Oh, my dear Lord, where-ever human passionis, the law of reason and lawless appetite contend there, like Satanand the archangel.--Duke Wharton has yielded the mastery to the illspirit:--and he is the less pardonable, his intellectual endowmentsbeing equal to any resistance. If the man who only hides his onetalent, meet condemnation; what will be the eternal fate of him, whodebases a countless portion, to decorate the loathsomeness of sin?"Mr. Athelstone paused a few moments, and then added:--"I have so greata horror of the contagion of such characters, that I made it a pointwith Sir Anthony, he would never, willingly, bring his nephew intothe company of this dangerous nobleman; and how it has happened now,I cannot guess. Some unexpected circumstance must have brought him tothe Castle. For you know, Mrs. Coningsby, your brother has always beenscrupulous of a promise.""Hitherto;" replied she "but if we have rightly explained Peter'saccount, we cannot consider Sir Anthony's present detention of Louis,as any thing less than a breach of promise to you."The Pastor looked more disturbed.--"When the tide serves in theafternoon," cried he, "I will cross to Bamborough myself; and if I findthat my confidence has been abused, I shall then know my course.""Not that my uncle doubts our nephew's steadiness in despising thefollies of Duke Wharton;" said Mrs. Coningsby, addressing their guest;"but no engagements ought to be broken with impunity.""Pardon me, madam," returned the Marquis, "if I say that we shouldcruelly betray our young people, if we did not so far doubt theirsteadiness, as always to do our utmost to withdraw them from everyseparate temptation to vice or folly?--I hold it as great a sin torush unnecessarily into occasions of moral contest, as to fall by thetemptation when it comes unsought. Man should neither tempt himself,nor suffer others to be tempted, when he can put in a prevention. I am,therefore, thoroughly of Mr. Athelstone's opinion, not to allow Mr. deMontemar to remain an hour that he can prevent, within the influence ofthe Duke of Wharton."The Pastor was roused from anxious meditation, by the last remark ofSanta Cruz. And as Mrs. Coningsby soon after left the room, he put hishand upon the arm of the Marquis, and conducting him by a side doorinto his library; "My good Lord," said he, "your observations are sojust; that, as I may appear to have acted inconsistently with what Iconscientiously approve, by having permitted my nephew to go at allwhere he is liable to meet the Duke; you must allow me to explain thepeculiar circumstances which compelled my assent.""I shall be glad, reverend Sir," returned the Marquis, taking a seat,"to hear what can be urged in defence of subjecting the waxen nature ofyouth to the impressions of perverting society. By painful experience,I know the trial to be perilous."--The last sentence was followed bya sudden coldness in his air towards the Pastor, which passed unfelt,because it was unobserved.Unconscious of what really actuated the remarks of his auditor, with abenign smile Mr. Athelstone resumed.--"Your Lordship must indulge me with listening to a little familyhistory, as a preliminary to my apology?--else, I know not how to makeyou perfectly understand my situation with regard to my nephew SirAnthony Athelstone."The Marquis bowed, and Mr. Athelstone proceeded.--"My only brother, the late Sir Hedworth Athelstone, was the father ofthe present Sir Anthony, and of two daughters. The eldest, Louisa,was the mother of Louis de Montemar; and the youngest, Catherine, youhave seen in Mrs. Coningsby. My brother's wife died the same yearin which her husband received the commands of his sovereign to goembassador-extraordinary to the Netherlands. Louisa's health havingbeen impaired by attendance on her mother, Sir Hedworth made her thecompanion of his embassy. At the Hague they met the Baron de Ripperda.He was struck with my niece at first sight. And indeed she was the mostbeautiful creature these eyes ever beheld!--My Lord, you will seea manly copy of this angelic being, in her not unworthy son. Beforeshe went abroad, she had refused the hands of some of the first menin England; for her accomplishments and her virtues were equal to herbeauty. My brother had always left her to her own choice. He admiredthe Baron de Ripperda; and when she granted him permission to addressher, Sir Hedworth sanctioned her acquiescence with pride and joy. Ithink I can recollect the very words he wrote to me on the day of hernuptials. I have often repeated them, though not lately;--yet I willrecall them."The venerable man leaned back in his chair, and shutting his eyes insilent recollection, in a few minutes repeated these words of theletter."Congratulate me, my brother!" said he, "This morning I havebestowed the hand of our darling Louisa upon William de Montemar Baronde Ripperda. I need not enlarge in his praise: I have named the Baronde Ripperda; and in that name all human excellence is comprised. Myfull heart, overflowing with happiness, has but one wish ungratified.Richard, am I ungrateful to the Giver of all good? But my tears arenow falling, that I enjoy it without the participation of her belovedmother. Oh, that she had lived to see this blissful day!"The pious narrator paused a moment, drew his hand over his eyes; andthen resumed his story in his usual manner.--"Thus did my brother write, in the exultation of his heart. And everysucceeding letter contained similar intelligence of Louisa's happiness;of the high-minded patriotism of her husband; of the honour in which hewas held by the States; and of the anxious joy which agitated them all,in the prospect of an heir to this treasure of felicity. Think then, mydear Marquis, what were the feelings with which I read a long-expectedletter from the Hague! I had impatiently awaited what seemed sostrangely withheld. It was to tell me of the birth of the anticipatedblessing. The letter came, sealed with black.--An heir had been born,according to hope, but the mother was no more.--Louisa's delicate framehad perished in the trial of that dreadful period. She lingered threeweeks after the morning of her child's birth, and then died in the armsof her husband and of her father. Next day the afflicted parent wroteto me. How differently did this letter conclude from the one in whichhe announced her marriage!"Again the Pastor leaned back in his chair, and closed his eyes; buthe also pressed them down with his hand, as he proceeded to quote hisbrother's words.--"I come to you, Richard, with all that remains to me of my tooprecious Louisa.--So young, so beautiful, so beloved!--Ripperda hasresigned her infant to my care. When he consented to my earnestsupplication, he pressed the poor unconscious babe to his weeping face,and then putting him into my arms:--Take him, Sir Hedworth! (cried he)What compensation is too dear to the father of my lost Louisa? He thenrushed from the room, and I have not seen him since. I thank my God,her mother is spared this last blow, which has laid my grey hairs inthe dust."As Mr. Athelstone closed these remembrances, with a silent address tothe Being in whose peace now rested the parent with his child; theMarquis wiped the starting tears from his eyes,--a pause of a fewminutes ensued; and then the good man, turning with a serene aspect tohis auditor, resumed.--"My brother returned to Bamborough-Castle. He found me there, withhis sole-remaining daughter. Early in the succeeding year, Catherinegave her hand to Mr. Coningsby. Not to leave my brother quitealone, I henceforth continued to divide my time between the exerciseof my parochial duties, and assisting him in the delightful task ofunfolding the mental faculties of my infant nephew. But the droopingspirits of Sir Hedworth were daily depressed by cares more heavy tobe borne than anxiety for the sick, or sorrow for the dead. Almostevery post brought him accounts of his son's follies at college, or intown; and few were the weeks which past without calling on his pursefor some disbursement to redeem the pledged honour of this unthinkingyoung man. Mr. Coningsby died the sixth year after his marriage; andnot leaving a son, his entailed property went to the male heir; buthis daughters have, nevertheless, very noble fortunes. Sir Hedworthand myself were constituted their guardians; and as the best meansof rendering them protection, my brother invited their mother fromthe dismal associations of a jointure-house, to her former home. PoorCatherine gladly obeyed the paternal voice:--and time went smoothlyover our heads, till the day on which Louis de Montemar attained histenth year. It was always a sacred anniversary with my brother; and onthat evening, while kneeling in his closet, he was called to a blessedre-union with her he had so long mourned."My nephew Anthony hurried from London to take possession of hisinheritance. He expressed satisfaction at finding his uncle and hisyoung nephew in the Castle; and requested his sister to honour histable by keeping her place at its head. Notwithstanding the happypromise of this conduct, (for Sir Anthony is kind and liberal toobjects in his sight;) we soon found that Bamborough, under its newmaster, was not a fit residence for Mrs. Coningsby and her children. Inshort, he was too much a man of pleasure to allow of even the commonrestraints usual in a family on the recent loss of its head. Whilstthe hatchment was yet over the door, the Castle continued to overflowwith visitors of the gayest order; and amongst the most conspicuouswere the dissipated Earl of Warwick, and the no less worthless Duke ofWharton. Hunting all the morning; feasting all the day; and revellingall the night with wine, cards, music, and dance; formed the unvaryingdiary of the so lately revered Bamborough. In vain I remonstrated withmy nephew on these pursuits; on the evils of his example to the county;and the prejudice he was doing to his fortune and his reputation. Tobe rid of my arguments, he frequently admitted their reasonableness;but they produced no amendment in his conduct. In short, the castle ofmy fathers had now become a Babylon, from which I saw the necessityof bearing away my innocent charges, while they were yet too youngto be contaminated. In right of my mother Lady Cornelia Percy,Morewick-hall, on the Coquet, belongs to me. But as my pastoral carewas constantly required at Bamborough, or in this island, I had neverresided on my inheritance. I now wished to make it the home of myniece, and her children, till they became of age. She gladly embracedmy proposal. And the young Louis, though the indulged-plaything of thewhole party, so far from expressing regret at leaving the castle, heardour arrangement with joy. This may appear more than natural in a boyhardly eleven years of age; but a little affair which took place atthat time, will make his acquiescence very credible."It was during the Christmas of the very year in which you met DukeWharton at Paris, that he made his brilliant but baneful appearanceat Bamborough. He took an immediate fancy to Louis; who was a finespirited boy, full of enterprize and invincible good-humour. The Dukedelighted in betting on his youthful talents, against the maturestacquirements in the castle. He exulted in the leaps he made him takeon horseback; on the precision of his eye, in firing at a mark; andthe dexterity with which he disarmed almost every man, but himself, inthe practice of the foils. Even in this there was much to blame. Butone evening, when Sir Anthony and the Duke were wearied of the restof the company, and withdrawn to another room were sitting over theirwine, a sudden whim seized their own half-tipsey fancies, to sendLouis in masquerade to surprise the boisterous group below. Louis wassummoned; and, innocent of their intention, hastened to his uncle. Inthe ardour of their frolic, they told him they meant to dress him invine branches, and priming him with wine, introduce him as the festivegod to the worship of the revellers in the dining-room. The naturalgood-sense of the boy started at the proposal; and he modestly refusedto comply.--They persuaded, they flattered, they threatened; but invain. Both resolutely, and with tears, he declared he would not, forhis life, do any thing so wicked. Sir Anthony's passionate nature wasin a blaze at this opposition. Mad with intoxication, he threw thehelpless child on the floor, and holding him there, called on hisprofligate companion to give him the Burgundy. Wharton obeyed; andthe inhuman uncle poured so great a quantity down the throat of hisstruggling victim, that the poor child was taken up insensible. He wascarried to bed; and passed the remainder of the night in delirium andfever."I was then on one of my occasional visits to Lindisfarne. But on myreturn next day, the whole was told me by Mrs. Coningsby. Full ofhorror at the relation, I gave instant orders for our departure; andwas passing along the gallery before the servants, who were supportingthe suffering child to the carriage, when I encountered my gracelessnephew. "Anthony!" cried I, in the burst of my indignation; "you havecommitted an outrage against the morals and life of this innocentchild, that will cry against you at the gates of Eternal Justice!"Sir Anthony stood confounded; but Duke Wharton, who was just athis back, with affected solemnity, exclaimed--"It is a prophet whospeaks!--Let us take care that in to-morrow's hunt, the foxes do notape the bears of old, and turn upon and rend us!"--The sarcasm of theyoung libertine, and his irreverent allusion to Scripture, recalledme to a sense of my own unrestrained violence; and turning again tomy nephew with a more collected manner, "Sir Anthony, (said I) I donot reply to your companion; having no hope that human reasoning canmake any good impression on a mind which studies revelation only touse it to blasphemy. But for you, the son of a virtuous father, and apious mother!--Recall to your remembrance their happy lives, theirhonourable reputations, and their blessed deaths! And, notwithstandingall your wit, your merriment, and your splendour, your heart willwhisper, that in comparison with them, you are wretched, despised, andnow stand on the brink of everlasting perdition!" Sir Anthony remainedsilent and confused; but the hardened Duke, making me a gay bow, puthis arm through the Baronet's, and with a jerk turned him into thebilliard-room."Eight years elapsed before I saw my ill-directed nephew again.--Havingestablished a truly Christian minister at Bamborough, I henceforthpassed the winter months at Morewick-hall with Mrs. Coningsby. Andhow different from the society of the castle was that which visitedour residence, and assisted to develope the opening minds of ouryoung charges! Sir Richard Steele, Mr. Craggs, and Mr. Addison, wereseverally our guests. In short, my dear sir, I drew around me a kindof college for my pupils; and besides the persons named, many othersof humbler note, but equal merit, were our constant visitors. One halfof the year I devoted to the inspection of my curate's ministry; andfor that purpose fixed my summer residence in this island. Louis alwaysaccompanied me to Lindisfarne; as I considered it my duty, as wellas my delight, to share with his various tutors, the anxious task ofturning to good account the rich soil of his mind. His nature is soenquiring and ambitious, we had rather to restrain than to stimulatehis abilities; and they have ever pointed to a military career. Itried to incline him to the calmer paths of life; but it was stemminga torrent. His spirit is determined to excess. And having fixed hisheart on the reputation of a Nassau or a Marlborough, he directshis studies with an undeviating aim to that point. If he begin anylanguage, science, or art, he pursues it steadily till he gains eithera perfect knowledge of its principles; or at least acquires as much ashis teacher can give him. He will not hear of a slight knowledge of anything; therefore, what he does not wish to master, he never attempts atall. In short, his talents take the form of passions; and are not to beexhausted by the continuance or impetuosity of their course."From strong interest, the Marquis had hitherto forborne to interruptMr. Athelstone; but he could not now help exclaiming--"Oh, Sir,what a perilous character have you described!--How great is theresponsibility of the man who is to guide and impel this youth! Virtueand vice contend alike for the direction of such spirits:--and you areanswerable to his father and to heaven, that these powerful impulsesshould not be turned to evil!""I know it," replied the Pastor, devoutly bowing his head to theAlmighty Being to whom he especially owed this responsibility; "andat present, I trust, those impulses are blameless. His heart overflowswith good-will to every created thing; and, (as he often says with agay smile,) he seems born with no other concern but to be happy, and todo his best to make others as happy as himself. Dear child!" exclaimedthe old man, with glistening eyes;--"if that be his commission, heknows he fulfils it here!--For the sound of his voice, or the tread ofhis foot in the passage, is sufficient at any time to raise my headfrom my severest studies; and to make his aunt and cousins start fromtheir chairs, to welcome their gladdening Louis!""And yet you trust this gay, this buoyant!--this young man, constitutedby nature, to be only too sensible to the world's allurements; youtrust him to the temptations of his uncle's roof?""Because," replied the Pastor, "they are no temptations to him. Settingaside the principles with which religion fortifies his heart, histaste is too pure not to be disgusted with the coarse jollity of SirAnthony's usual boon companions. These sots see nothing in theirwassal-bowl, but the wine and its spices. It is the possible visits ofDuke Wharton, and a few of his anacreontic associates, that excite myapprehension. He drugs the cup with the wreath of genius. The wit, thegrace, the sorceries of that man, indeed fill me with alarm: and fromhis society, as I would snatch a swimmer from the verge of a whirlpool,I shall hasten to bear away my yet uncorrupted nephew."The Marquis enquired how, with these sentiments, and after the rupturewith Sir Anthony, Mr. Athelstone had ever suffered Louis de Montemarto touch such a vortex again.--Mr. Athelstone apologized for havingdigressed so long from this most necessary part of his narrative; andproceeded to relate the accident which re-introduced the uncle andnephew to each other. What he succinctly related, is more particularlygiven thus:In the autumn of the preceding year, Louis obtained his guardian'spermission to accompany a neighbouring gentleman to the Red-deer huntat Blair Athol in Scotland. On the first day, several fine harts wereroused and slain. But just as the two Northumbrians were seatingthemselves on a high wooded cliff to take some refreshment after a hotpursuit, the forester who attended them approached, crouching on handsand knees, and silently made a sign, pointing to the glen beneath.--Onlooking where he levelled, they saw two fine stags upon a rock below,which projected over the river Tilt. Louis immediately took aim, andshot one of them on the edge of the precipice; the animal fell headlonginto the stream; and the victor, with his followers, hastened down theglen to secure his prize. About the same instant, a huntsman, who hadbeen with the foremost all day, from an opposite direction had espiedthe companion of the slain stag galloping forward in affright. He lostnot a moment, but fired, and wounded the creature in the haunches. Thedisabled deer slackened his pace, and the huntsman let a hound looseafter him, who held him at bay on a high bank; but the stag recoveredcourage, and broke away again.--Another dog was then unleashed, whichbrought him to a stand in a deep dell, filled by the current of amountain-stream. This second hound ran in upon his antagonist, andseized him between the horns. The stag gored him from shoulder toshoulder, and alarmed for the life of his dog, the huntsman made aspring into the water, to shoot the deer without danger to the hound.But in his haste, the man fell, and with his gun under him. At thismoment the Northumbrians came up. Louis's companion rashly unloosedtheir dogs, to assist the struggling hounds of the fallen huntsman.The deer, the dogs, all were at once upon the prostrate man. He calledfor help.--The stag's foot was on his breast:--the hounds crushed himas they sprung forward, and hung on the furious animal. The deer'seye-balls flashed fire; he dashed his tremendous antlers from sideto side, and seemed aiming their next plunge against the life of hisfallen enemy."He is a dead man!" cried the forester. But Louis drew a dirk, whichwas always his companion in these excursions 5 and throwing himselfat once amidst the terrific group, struck it into the throat of theanimal.--The wounded stag instantly recoiled, carrying away the weaponburied in his flesh. The released huntsman sprung on his legs, andextricating himself from the dogs, which hung more fiercely on theirdying prey, staggered towards the adjacent bank. With the assistanceof his companions, Louis immediately conveyed the fainting strangerto a neighbouring lodge, where he soon recovered his recollection andwonted spirits.--Perhaps it need hardly be said, that this stranger wasSir Anthony Athelstone!--Louis, being unacquainted with the alterationin his uncle's person, which eight years of intemperance had renderedbloated and coarse, had thus exerted himself from humanity alone.But when Sir Anthony enquired the name of his preserver, and learntthat he owed his life to the intrepidity of Louis de Montemar, thejoy of the uncle knew no bounds. He embraced his nephew a thousandtimes; vowed never to marry, that he might adopt him as his son; nay,he declared, that from this day forward, Louis de Montemar should bethe lord both of Bamborough and its master. Louis was affected by hisuncle's gratitude, and self-accusations for the cause of their firstseparation; but respectfully declined resuming a stationary residenceat the castle, though he gratefully promised to make his visits veryfrequent."Providence having thus reconciled the uncle and nephew," continued thePastor, "how could I presume to refuse my sanction to the renewal ofkindred affection?"The Marquis assented to the force of this argument; and Mr. Athelstonehastened to conclude his narrative, of which the following is a briefsummary.After this general amnesty, Louis continued to visit Sir Anthony everyweek. And as the watchful guardian heard of no proceedings in thebaronet likely to injure the morals of his nephew, he consented to hisaccompanying his uncle early in the ensuing spring, to re-visit thescene of their happy reconciliation. They accordingly went to Scotland.And when they left the Duke of Athol's, Sir Anthony proposed returninghome by Loch Rannock, and paying his respects to old Robertson ofStruan. Louis was eager to see the veteran and the poet; though, fromhis advanced age, he expected to find little of the lyre, and less ofthe trumpet, at his hospitable board.The visit was paid; and Louis returned to Lindisfarne in raptures withthe country he had seen; delighted with the chief of Struan; but aboveall, enchanted with one of the old man's guests. He seemed intoxicatedwith some before untasted pleasure, as he discoursed, full of a vaguekind of admiration, about this extraordinary personage. Mr. Athelstoneasked his name; Louis replied, it was the Duke of Wharton, whom heremembered when a boy; and who, he recollected, had joined his unclein the folly about the wine. The Duke came to Loch Rannock the dayafter Sir Anthony's arrival. There was a large party in the house, butWharton selected Louis as his companion; often deserting the rest, toride alone with him; and to explore with fearless step, sometimes onhorseback, but oftener on foot, the caverned recesses of the Loch;its fir-clad islands, and mountains of desolate sublimity. Duringtheir wide and stormy rambles, they visited the house of the laird,and the hovel of the shepherd; pleased alike with the generous cheerof the one, and the frugal hospitality of the other. Wharton couldspeak Gaelic, a language of which his companion was totally ignorant;but Louis did not the less enjoy the hilarity with which his noblefriend pledged their entertainers in claret or whiskey: and while arapid discourse passed in this, to him, unknown tongue, he did not theless sympathise in the pleasure with which gentle and semple seemedto regard their animated guest. Men, women, of all ages and degrees,thronged around their illustrious visitor. Sometimes he was serious,sometimes he was gay; but still he spoke in Gaelic; and all changesrenewed their acclamations of delight.When Louis narrated these particulars at the tea-table in Lindisfarne,Mr. Athelstone sighed, and thought that in this fortnight's sojournat Rannock, his nephew had seen too much, or too little of thisextraordinary man. However, he would not risk knowing all that passed,by any immediate observation to damp the ardour of Louis's frankcommunicativeness. His cousins were eager listeners; and he wentrapturously on, describing the Duke as the most fascinating being onearth. So profound in his reflections; so careless in his manner ofuttering them; so conscious of his fine person, and yet so gracefullynegligent of its effect; so dignified in his carriage, and yet soboyishly fond of mirth; that the mischief he played ever found a readyexcuse, in the ingenuity of its contrivance, or the frank apology ofthe laughing perpetrator."I would say," exclaimed Louis, "that he is the merriest devil I eversaw, if I could give so poor a name to so rich a wit!""Call him Belial," said the Pastor, with a meaning smile; "and you willname him rightly."Louis laughed; and replied,--"If you will have him a fallen angel, hemust be Satan himself:For such high-reaching thought, and port superb,Could ne'er be native with the grov'ling crewThat sunk in raging Phlegethon!"The Pastor shook his head with another smile; and Louis ran on,talking of the Duke's lofty demeanor at one season; of its playfulcondescension at another: and in the guileless exhilaration of his ownheart, described the air with which Wharton drank his Burgundy; howhe graced each draught with a brilliant song, adapted by himself towords of Horace or Anacreon, in their original language. Then he spokeof the Duke's eloquent criticisms on the classics; of his wit in aptreferences to them, and to the best writers of France and Italy; andof the sportive manner with which he trifled, with the foibles of thecompany around him;--"seeming," continued Louis, "to stoop from hisnative height, merely' to skim the grosser element, in condescendingfellowship with those heavy sons of earth. And the Duke tells me thechange is pleasant; for it is only burrowing a little amongst thegnomes, to enjoy with keener relish the etherial joys of the upperregions!""Here, my Lord," continued the Pastor, in his narrative to the Marquis,"was the snare I had dreaded. When we were alone, I declared myapprehensions to my nephew; but he combated my suspicions with allthe pleadings of ingenuous enthusiasm. Louis had never felt more thangeneral kindliness for any of the young men of his acquaintance. For, Iam sorry to say that education is not a principle of these times: andmy boy found few to understand any part of his intellectual pursuits,till he met this highly-gifted nobleman. Wharton is also master ofevery avenue to an unsuspecting heart. This, too, was the first timethat any thing like his own ideas of friendship had come before mynephew; and when they were proffered by so specious a character, itwas hardly surprising that even the short intimacy of a fortnightshould bewilder his imagination and captivate his heart. When I becameaware of the depth of the impression, I took up the subject in theserious light it demanded. I narrated several instances of the Duke'sill-conduct in various relations of life; and shewed at once to Louisthe deleterious cup he was so tenaciously holding, since it had alreadyinduced him to confound right and wrong, by denominating the ruffianviolence he had received in his helpless childhood, mere folly andfrolic! His countenance betrayed there was a powerful contention inhis mind. I conjured him to reflect on what I had said; to hearken tomy warning voice, as he would to that of his distant father, or to thelast admonitions of his departed mother. Tears burst from his eyes;and kissing my hands, he solemnly pledged himself never again to be awilling resident in the same house with the Duke of Wharton. His Gracehad separated from the travelling party, and was gone to Ireland. Butthat did not prevent me calling on Sir Anthony; and though he did notsee the reasonableness of my alarm, he was prevailed on to make me apromise that he would not again be instrumental in bringing his nephewinto the society of the Duke."From that period until now, this dangerous man has been too muchengaged in cajoling and thwarting the British ministry, to think ofobscurer triumphs in Northumberland. But now that he is come, and hismischievous spirit has not only persuaded Sir Anthony to break hishonour with me, but that Louis has been wrought upon to forfeit theverity of his word; I must assume the authority of a guardian; and atonce wrest the infatuated boy from the favour of his uncle, and theperverting powers of his friend.""Venerable Mr. Athelstone!" cried the Marquis, with an emotion ofreverence; "this resolution is worthy of a minister of Christ!" Butthe words were no sooner uttered, than, dropping the hand he hademphatically seized, he quitted the room in disorder.CHAP. III.Unconscious of the anxieties which had been aroused respecting him athis tranquil home, Louis found himself engaged in scenes he littleexpected in the dull routine of his uncle's castle.The first day of his present visit to Bamborough, passed according tothe usual journal of the whole year; a plenteous dinner, with abundanceof wine, and three or four country squires around the table. Afterthe feast, Louis played at backgammon with his uncle; while three ofthe other guests, with the assistance of Dumby, dozed through half adozen rubbers of whist. The senses of the fourth had not sufficientlysurvived the dinner's last potation, to be even a silent spectator.He took his station in an easy chair, near some snoring dogs on thehearth-rug, and soon shewed audible fellowship with their slumbers. Atten o'clock the butler announced supper. The whole party started fromtheir chairs; and rubbing their eyes and hands in the joy of renewedimpulse, crowded into the eating-room. Louis, who could say no with asmuch good humour as most people say yes, declined accompanying them,and went to his own apartments; where he passed the moon-light hours inmaking a drawing of their effect on the opposite tower of Lindisfarne,and the misty ruins of its abbey.The next morning being ushered in by a fierce equinoctial tempest, theguests of the castle gazed despairingly at the floods of rain whichswept before the furious wind; and when they found it impossible toanimate the drowsy hours by lingering out a breakfast they had alreadyprolonged to loathing, they dashed through the pouring torrents,to kill time amongst horses and grooms, dogs and whippers-in. Butthese employments too found satiety; and at the first blast of theletter-carrier's horn, the whole party rushed into the house, to seewhat his bag contained, and to snatch the welcome newspapers. Thesleeper of the night before, who was also high-sheriff of the county,in right of his dignity, mumbled The Postman to himself; while SirAnthony, with many bursts of applause, read The True Briton aloud tothe rest of the company.As soon as Louis found the badness of the weather likely to preventhis uncle's guests from taking their usual excursions, he retreatedfrom their noisy pastimes to the large solitary library. There he knewhe should be as safe from invasion, as if he had hid himself in thevaults of the chapel. A few minutes absorbed his whole attention inthe black-letter annalists of Great Britain; comparing their detailswith the chronicles of France; and losing himself in admiration ofthe Conds and Montmorencies of the one country, and the Talbots andPercies of the other. He dwelt with particular delight on the chivalriccharacters of Froissart, feeling as if he conversed with them asfriends; while the heroes of Cressy and Poictiers divided his heartbetween the triumph of conquest, and the god-like moderation of theirvictories. While thus engaged, he was at times wrested from his fanciedpresence in the scenes he read, by the smacking of whips, and thehalloos of his uncle's guests as they passed through the hall in theirvisits to the stables."What descendants of the Mowbrays, the Percies, and the Nevilles!"cried Louis to himself. The uproar rose and fell in gusts, like thetempest; and at last dying away behind the friendly interposition oflong passages and distant rooms, he forgot the existence of the noisyrout; and again found himself in the pavilions of heroes.Towards four o'clock the clouds had exhausted themselves; and a brightsun, tempering the chilly freshness of the air, he looked from thelibrary window over the woods and glades of his uncle's park; and feltinclined to steal out unobserved, and take an exhilarating race towardsits boundary. The deer were coming from their covert, to enjoy thebeam; and the rooks, speeding home in glad multitudes, were cooing andwheeling, and flapping their wings, as they hovered over or settled onthe tall elms of the ancient avenue. These sounds of grateful nature,rather soothed than disturbed the tranquillity of the scene; and Louislingered at the window, reciprocating the happiness of these creatures,free, careless, innocent, and full of blameless enjoyment.In the midst of these musings, a new, and an uncommon noise in hisuncle's house, startled his ear; opening and banging doors along theadjoining gallery, the rumbling of trunks, the calling of servants,and a variety of female voices in constant command. Louis stood amazed.He had not heard that his uncle expected any unusual company, and leastof all women; for owing to the convivial character of Sir Anthony'smeetings, none of the country ladies had honoured the Castle with avisit, since the departure of Mrs. Coningsby.In a few minutes Louis heard his name loudly vociferated by Sir Anthonyhimself.--"Louis--Louis de Montemar!--Where the devil have you hidyourself?"--and with the boisterous interrogation the baronet burstinto the library.--His eyes sparkled with jovial intelligence, ashe advanced to his nephew: "Come Louis, my boy! Here is metal moreattractive to your taste than chess and backgammon!--Leave this mustyplace, and I will introduce you to lillies and roses!"Louis guessed, from these extraordinary transports, that some accidenthad brought ladies to the Castle; and while he allowed Sir Anthony tohurry him down a back-stair to the drawing-room, he tried to learnsomething of the matter. But the Baronet was in too great an ecstacy tospeak common sense:--he broke into extravagant thanks to the storm, andeulogies on fine eyes and blooming complexions; and did not give Louistime to ask another question before he ushered him into the presenceof several elegantly dressed women. With manifest pride in the fineperson of his nephew, Sir Anthony introduced him to the fair group; andthey received him with compliments to the uncle, which, being new tothe young man from female lips, deepened to crimson the colour on hisglowing complexion.A little observation convinced him that these were neither hiscounty ladies, nor the ladies of any other county in England. Theywere handsome, their habits costly; and their deportment somethinglike high fashion, though it wanted that ineffable grace of delicatereserve, which is the indispensable mark of a true English gentlewoman.As he looked on their careless movements and familiar ease, he couldnot but think how like the last harmonizing hue which a skilful paintercasts over his picture, is the veil of modesty to a lovely woman. Inshort, he soon gathered from the rapid discourse of these unexpectedvisitors, that they were natives of different countries, and belongingto the stage; which profession, he thought, might necessarily freetheir manners from the usual restraints of their sex, without inreality impairing their virtue.[A] Two of the party were of the opera,the one, an Italian primadona, with a singularly beautiful figure;the other, a French dancer, young, pretty and full of life: the rest,English actresses of various degrees of personal charms.It was the voices of these ladies' respective maids, which hadsurprized Louis from the gallery; and he now stood contemplating thepersons and manners of their mistresses, with the amused curiosity ofyouth.--The pretty French dancer had just enquired whether he spokeher language; and was expressing her delight at being answered in theaffirmative, when Sir Anthony (who had quitted the room soon after theintroduction of his nephew,) re-entered with the Duke of Wharton andthe remainder of his guests.Louis started at sight of the Duke, instantly remembering his promiseto his guardian. Wharton wore the same careless, animated air, as whenhe first fascinated the imagination of his young admirer; and springingdirectly from the dull mass which surrounded him, seemed to Louis likea sun-beam shot from a heavy cloud. The next moment he found himself inthe Duke's arms."My dear de Montemar! This is unexpected pleasure! I thought only ofrefreshing my horses, little dreaming your uncle had provided thisfeast for their master!"Louis trembled and was silent. He wished his guardian had not exactedthe promise, which, even at this moment, whispered he must not hearkento the captivating Wharton, but tear himself away. Louis did not reply;for he felt unable to say (what he was determined to do:) that he mustinstantly return to Lindisfarne.The Duke took his arm, and drew him to a distant part of the room."De Montemar, I could sacrifice a hecatomb of my best Cumberlandsteers, for this blessed meeting! I have not seen any thing so aftermy own heart, since we parted; and yet I have been lamp in hand, dayand night, in search of one of your stamp. I know you have a bravesoul; and that it spurns a sleepy life, though your dreams should beof paradise!--When all are gone to bed, meet me to-night in the oldlibrary.--I have that to say to you, I would not have even a listeningspider whisper to some of this herd.""Not even myself must listen to it!" replied Louis, making a strongeffort to declare at once his intention; "Your Grace must pardon me,but I am this instant leaving the Castle.""Impossible!" cried the Duke, "you would not go for the wealth ofMexico, if you knew the matter I have to communicate.""No temptation must detain me!" replied Louis, with a smile that spokeof sacrifice; "I am under an engagement that cannot be broken.""That countenance," returned Wharton, laughing; "tells a differentstory!--You know the old proverb! where there is a will, &c.; and Icannot doubt yours, since we pledged ourselves heart to heart on thebonnie braes of Glen Rannock!--Besides, I am here accidentally, andonly for a short time. Under these circumstances, what engagement canbe so serious, as ought to separate us at such a moment?"The Duke paused, and Louis blushed. It was almost for hisvenerable uncle; for he thought him severe against this resistlesspleader.--Wharton resumed. "Come, de Montemar; let me write man uponthat candid brow. Not as your uncle Anthony would stamp it, in lees;nor as another uncle, perhaps, would mark it, with Saint Cuthbert'stonsure! My signet is of other impression.""Your signet is too true a one," returned Louis, "to obliterate a wordof honour! and I have given mine to my uncle of Lindisfarne to----,"he hesitated.--Could he tell the noble Wharton, that he had solemnlypromised never to remain willingly under the same roof with him?Wharton observed the painful confusion of his too well-inclined friend."To what," said he, "have you pledged yourself to Mr. Athelstone?--Toreturn to him to-night?--But the promise was given under ordinarycircumstances. I know your uncle does not like the usual orgies of SirAnthony. And as neither you, nor the good old gentleman, could guessthat my happy stars would bring me to Bamborough to-day, you mustallow me, as a good knight, and grand-master in the courts ofhonour, to give both of you acquittal on this head; and to pronounce,that change of circumstances releases you from your engagement, and himfrom the necessity of demanding its fulfilment!"Louis's heightening colour overspread his face, as the Duke concluded;but collecting all his powers of self-denial, "My Lord," said he, "Youare very good; but I must go!--The tide now serves, and delay----"Wharton released his arm with an air of pique.--The resolution of Louisto depart, and without assigning his guardian's reason for insisting onhis return, was enough for the ready apprehension of the Duke. He atonce comprehended that Mr. Athelstone foresaw a change in his nephew'smoral and political principles, should he be permitted to cultivate anintimacy, which, it was evident, was the secret wish of that nephew'sheart.--The Duke saw the struggle between inclination and duty. He saw,that persuasions to stay, by causing Louis to summon more of his moralstrength to oppose his own desire to stay, only ensured his departure;and therefore the moment Wharton perceived the real position of theenemy, he made a russe de guerre, and drew off."I shall not withstand your own inclination, Mr. de Montemar," saidhe, as he turned away with assumed coldness. The words smote on theheart of Louis. Sir Anthony, who had caught their unusual tone, lookedtowards the Duke and his nephew. He saw the former walk with a gravedemeanor towards a window, and the latter gaze after him with anagitated countenance. The baronet approached Louis, and in a whisperasked what had happened."I must obey my uncle's command to return to Lindisfarne."This reply re-called to Sir Anthony his own promise to the sameeffect. He reddened angrily: "and you have told the Duke, Mr.Athelstone's monkish antipathy to his gaiety and good humour?""No, dear Sir, but I have told him, I must go; that I am pledged to go.And though he injures me by supposing that I am such an Insensible asto obey without reluctance; yet I respect my word too much, and hold myuncle's command too sacred, to hesitate about what I ought to do."With a hurrying step, he was moving towards the door; when the baronetmade one angry stride, and stretching forth his athletic arm, graspedhis nephew's; and with an enraged countenance drew him into ananti-room, waving his other hand to the Duke to follow. Wharton was toogood a general to comply immediately; and Sir Anthony, as soon as hecould speak without the observation of strangers, burst into a loudand violent invective on his uncle's unjustifiable prejudices againstthe Duke."What can he charge him with?" cried the baronet,--"That he is young?The fitter to be your companion!--That he is gay? And if a man benot gay in his youth, when is he to be gay?--That he is married,and does not live with his wife? What man of spirit would keep anyterms with a woman, who wheedled him into wedlock, before he was outof his teens!--That he is fond of wine? His thirst does not makeyou drink!--That he is liked by women; and not ungrateful to theirkindness? Why Louis, your old uncle had best shut you up at once withthe dead bones in the abbey vaults! And then he calls him a rebel tohis King! What of that? If the King himself does not fear him, butlets him go at large amongst his subjects; why should the Pastor ofLindisfarne take more care for His Majesty, than His Majesty thinksproper to take for himself! I tell you, Louis, the cloven-foot isunder the surplice. It is resentment of an old affront, that excitesall this animosity in the mind of Mr. Athelstone."There was much in this speech, and more in the manner of it, thatoffended the best feelings of Louis. "Sir," said he, "I thank you forhaving recalled to me my uncle's arguments on this subject. He may bemistaken as to the extent of the facts; but till he is so far convincedof his error, as to release me from the promise I gave him, to avoidthe Duke; I must consider myself bound to abide by it."The baronet's face now became purple. "Louis! am not I your uncle, aswell as this domineering priest? I am your mother's brother; and fromher, I have rights, he cannot claim. You respect his commands! By whatauthority will you disobey mine? I therefore order you, on your peril,not to stir from this house, till it is my pleasure to let you go."He turned, with a look of defiance, to leave the room; but the voiceof Louis arrested him. "Sir Anthony," cried he, "when you command meas becomes my mother's brother, I have ever been eager to shew youobedience; but there is no authority on earth shall compel me to staywhere I am to hear words of disrespect coupled with the name of my mostrevered guardian.""We will look to that!" said the baronet fiercely; and opening anopposite door, he disappeared, banging it furiously after him. The Dukeentered at the same instant, by the one from the drawing-room. He stoodfor a moment, observing the countenance of Louis; then approaching himwith his usual frank air: "De Montemar," said he, "unintentionally, Ihave overheard something of what has passed between you and your uncle;and I have learnt enough, to be ashamed of the fool's part I haveplayed just now, when I turned from you like a jealous girl!"Wharton laid his hand on the arm of Louis, and with a gay smile, whichwas rendered enchanting by the affectionate seriousness of his eyes, hegently added, "but friendship being the sister of love, we must forgiveher sharing a little of her brother's infirmities."Louis could not guess how much of the recent offensive discussion hadbeen overheard by its subject; but he was glad to be cleared in themind of the Duke from the implied charge of quitting him capriciously."Chance," said he, "has communicated to your Grace, what I could neverhave brought myself to utter.""And therefore," returned the Duke, "I suppose you leave me to guessthe good Pastor's reason for excluding me from his fold? I see it inthe sin of my youth. You have forgotten it; but in my beardless days, Ioffended Mr. Athelstone in a way that deserved a cat-o-nine-tails. Hadhe laid his horse-whip over my shoulders at that time, it would havebeen wholesome chastisement: but this interdict--""It is not for that!" exclaimed Louis, "but could my guardian knowthe generous character he so misjudges; I feel he would court thatfriendship for me, he now so fearfully deprecates."The Duke shook his head: "thanks, dear Montemar, for that profession ofyour faith! But when prejudice gets possession of an old head, neitherargument nor auto de f can dislodge the evil spirit.""Indeed," cried Louis, "my excellent uncle is not fuller of years thanof candour! It is not one prejudice, but reports--slanders--""Aye," interrupted the Duke, "Dan Bacon warns us that Envy, like thesun, beats hottest on the highest grounds! But I could have sparedthis proof of my merit.--de Montemar," added he, in a graver and moreearnest tone; "shall I tell you, that you;--with that guileless heart,that ingenuous soul, that maiden reputation; will one day be reported!slandered! made a pest, as I am, to be avoided!"Clouds collected over the Duke's brow as he proceeded. He walked a fewpaces towards the opposite side of the room, and then turned round withhis usual bright countenance.--"De Montemar, my life has been a comet'strack; and therefore may astonish and alarm. It is not given to everyman to know whither my eccentric course tends:--but I tell you, its aimis to the sun!"Louis's heart glowed, as the Duke thus animatedly delivered himself."Oh, my Lord," cried he, "why are you thus misapprehended? Or rather,why will that noble spirit give any licence to slander, by stooping tosuch associates as----" he paused."We will not name them!" replied Wharton laughing; "But such thingsare my toys, or my tools. Did men of our sort keep only with our likes,we should prove but useless animals. The world is a multitude, whereevery creature must partake the fellowship of poor dependent humannature; or at once claim kindred with the gods by doffing his clay, andascending post-haste to the regions above!"The castle bell rang for dinner; and with its last peal, Sir Anthonypresented himself at the drawing-room door.--He came haughtilyforward. "My Lord Duke, the ladies await your hand to lead them downstairs.--Louis, you are come to your senses, I see, and will follow hisGrace."The manner with which the baronet said this, shewed he rather expectedto intimidate his nephew into compliance; than really thought he hadmade up his mind to obey. Louis answered with firmness, "I cannot,Sir, transgress what I know to be my duty."Sir Anthony's eyes flashed fire: "That is to say," cried he, "you knowit is your duty to obey me!--and you will obey me!--or abide by theconsequence." "Nay, Athelstone," interrupted the Duke, "this is shotand bounce with a vengeance! What man, with the spirit of a weazel,but would grub through your very towers, to shew you he despised suchthreatenings? Open your gates to the uncontrouled egress and regress ofyour nephew; or my free pinions will spurn them in a moment!" "I am nojailor, Duke Wharton," replied the angry baronet, "But that boy shouldknow his uncle is not to be insulted with impunity. He presumes on myavowed affection for him, to affront my company before my face; andthen mocks me with an apology still more galling, by declaring that hemust prefer the caprices of a selfish old priest, to all the gratitudehe owes an uncle who indulges his every wish; and has already made himheir to this castle and its estates.""Athelstone! Athelstone!" exclaimed the Duke, "am I to tell you thatboy is one exception to Walpole's theory of mankind? You cannot bribeLouis de Montemar to act against his conscience. Open your gates, andlet him go."Sir Anthony looked from the playful remonstrance of the Duke, to theperturbed countenance of his nephew.--"Louis," said he, in a moretemperate tone, "You know how this has been wrung from me. Is thereno terms to be kept with my affection for you? No middle way betweenoutraging all respect to me, and breaking your extorted promise to thislord of penance?""How can I listen, Sir, to such epithets attached to the idea of themost venerable of men?""He may indulge the boy's-play!" cried the Duke, "Ill names stick onlyto such sorry fellows as I.""Oh, Sir," rejoined Louis, "I have only to represent to my guardian thecandour with which the Duke of Wharton has just treated his unhappyprejudice; and I am sure he will instantly permit me to return to thecastle.""Then you persist in going to-night?""Now, Sir," replied Louis, "the tide serves: and if I delay, I mustremain till midnight."Sir Anthony walked the room in great agitation. Wharton looked at hisyoung friend with a persuasion in his eyes, to which he did not givewords; and their beset object, unable to give a favourable answer tosuch pleading, bent his to the ground.At last the baronet stopped opposite to him. "Louis, you are not agenerous adversary. You deal hardly with the heart you so well knowis all your own. And there you stand, so silent, so stern, to compelyour uncle--the man whose life you saved,--to beg your pardon for hisviolence; and to entreat you, even with prayers, not to leave hisroof in anger!" Sir Anthony caught his nephew's hand, and sobbed outthe last words. Louis threw himself on his uncle's neck; and quiteovercome, hardly articulated, "I will stay to-night, but to-morrowmorning--Oh, my dear Sir, do not urge me to forfeit my own esteem!"Wharton took the arm of the baronet, who covered his face with hishandkerchief, while he obeyed the impulse which drew him away throughthe gallery-door. The Duke bent back, and whispered to Louis, "You willfollow us to the dining-room?" He bowed his head in troubled silence;and the baronet and his friend turned down the gallery."A few hours yielded to my uncle's feelings," said Louis to himself,"will, I trust, make no essential difference in the performance of myword to Mr. Athelstone. And indeed I am true to its spirit, for I staynot willingly. And yet, were it not for my pledged word, what delightshould I have in the society of this amiable, this ingenuous, thisgenerous Wharton!"When Louis joined the party at dinner, the flush of his hardly-subsidedagitation was still on his cheek; but his manner was composed, and hislooks cheerful. The company were all seated; and the place left for himwas between the lively Frenchwoman and the Earl of Warwick. The ruddyface of the baronet was burnished with smiles from his recent victory,which he hoped was a final one over the future influence of the Pastorwith his nephew: and the pride of triumph did not a little inspirit thevivacity with which he did the honours of his table; challenging Louisto pledge the ladies in sparkling Champagne, while he drank to theirruby lips in glowing Burgundy.For a little time the Duke appeared thoughtful; and frequently turnedhis eyes upon Louis, rather as if he were the object of his thoughts,than of his sight: but the actress who sat next him, rallying him onceor twice on his portentous abstraction, he suddenly shook off a moodso little according with the company; and replying with answeringbadinage, warned her dramatic majesty to beware of forcing Eneas fromhis cloud. The lady dared his threats; and a dialogue of wit, andplayful gallantry, passed between the two, that delighted the sportivefancy of Louis, and set the grosser spirits of the party in a roar.In the first pause of this noisy mirth, the black-eyed Italianchallenged the Duke to bear his part with her in a new duetto ofApostola Zero. It was from the opera of Sappho and Phaon, anddescribed the lover's last interview in the Lesbian shades. Louisloved music; and always listened with pleasure to his cousins chantingtheir border-legends, or giving utterance to the sweeter ballads ofScotland: but he had never heard Italian singing until now; and he wasin so wrapt an ecstacy, that, lost to the objects around him, he satduring the performance with his hands clasped, and his eyes rivettedalternately on the Duke and on the Signora, as they severally tookup the thrilling melody; but when their voices mingled at the closewith all the harmonious interchange of height, and depth, faultlessexecution, and exquisite pathos, the heart of Louis seemed dissolvingwithin him; and as the last notes trembled, and died on his ear, heleaned back in his chair and covered his face with his hand.The momentary pause that followed, and which his throbbing heart wouldfain have prolonged, was rudely broken by an universal clapping ofhands, and cries of bravo! By a side glance, Wharton had observedLouis's attention to the singing; and now seeing the disgust withwhich he pushed his chair back from the discordant uproar, he bentbehind the Frenchwoman, and tapping his young friend on the shoulder,whispered--"This universal shout, and shrill applause,Seem to the outraged ear of listening Silence,Strange as the hiss of hell, whose sound perverseWent forth to hail its sovereign's victory!"As the Duke spoke, the cadence with which he repeated the linesrecalled the strains which yet vibrated on the entranced sense of hisauditor; and Louis, turning his eyes on him who had charmed him out ofhimself, expressed, in broken but energetic language, the delight hehad felt, the wonder that such powers could belong to the human voice:"I have heard fine singing, before;" said he, "but this is more thansinging!--It is the voice of the soul--or, shall I say, it is the veryineffable language which love breathed into the heart of Psych?""Say what you please, my own De Montemar!" cried the Duke, his faceradiant with animation; "you have the soul I want!--meet me to-night inthe old library."His friend the actress heard the last words; and gaily protestingagainst any appointment which tended to break up the present festivity;the rest of the ladies rapturously seconded her motion to close thenight with a dance. Sir Anthony rubbed his hands with glee at theproposal: and when the ladies soon after ascended to their tea-table,he ordered the band, which usually travelled in the retinue of themagnificent Duke, to take its station in the great drawing-room.The healths of the fair dames being drank on their departure,the native topics of the chace, races, justice-meetings, andcounty-politics, gradually gave way before the ascendancy of highspirits in men of wit and genius. Louis had insensibly drank more wineat dinner, than was his custom. Its fumes, and the entrancing power ofthe music, united with the charms of the Duke's ever-varying discourse,had thrown his faculties into a kind of enchanted mist, where all thatis pleasurable played on the surface; all that was alarming, remainedbehind the cloud.At a late hour they joined the ladies, who were seated at ombre andpiquet; but the moment the men appeared, the tables were pushed aside;and the leading actress, rising from her chair, invited the Duke to aminuet. He presented her his hand, while the violins obeyed the nod ofhis head; and then moved through the elegant evolvements of the dance,with a grace the more charming from the air of gay indifference withwhich he approached, and retreated from her gliding steps.The pretty Frenchwoman shewed the agile varieties of her art, in a passeul, which filled the northern squires with a wonder and satisfactionmore level to their apprehensions, than had been the science of thefair Italian. Louis stood, leaning over the back of a chair, smiling,and nodding his approbation to the exhilarating time of the music.As soon as Mam'selle Violante had made her concluding whirl in theair, she tripped lightly forward, and gaily demanded his hand for thecountry-dance. He bowed delightedly; and obeyed her volant motion, asshe bounded with him down the room to join Wharton and his fair partnerat the head of the set. The ball became general; and the jouissanceso intoxicating; that the whole scene swam in delicious, deliriouspleasure, with the newly-initiated sons of rough Northumberland.When the party broke up as the sun rose, and Louis retired to hischamber, he hardly knew himself to be the same man who had left it themorning before. In that very chamber, four centuries ago, the gay andprofligate Piers Gaveston had been a prisoner! and Louis had issuedfrom it, only the preceding day, censuring in his mind the vices of itsancient possessor; and marvelling how any temptation addressed to themere senses of rational man, could betray his virtue.With a whirling brain he now threw himself upon his pillow.--The musicstill sounded in his ears; he yet wound with airy step through themazes of the dance; the familiar pressure of the laughing Violante wasstill warm on his hand; and he yet thrilled under the soft glancesof the fair Italian. Till that day, he had never seen the manners ofwomen so unzoned. He had never thought it possible, that any behaviour,freer than what he saw in the behaviour of his aunt and cousins, couldexcite other emotions in him, than those of dislike and disgust. Hehad admired the magic painting of Homer, Tasso, and Spenser, in theirCirc, Armida, and Adessa; and he had trembled for the constancy oftheir respective heroes, before the allurements of such sorcery:--buthe never expected to find similar trials in real life. He believed thefair tempters in romance, were indebted for the beautiful mask withwhich they concealed their mental deformity, entirely to the spells ofthe poet's genius. Vice, in living woman, he expected to find as odiousin outward shape, as it is loathsome within.In short, in meditation, nothing is beautiful without goodness.The unbiassed heart, speculating upon these subjects, never unitesadmiration with any thing foreign to that character; and mistakingtaste for principle, when it comes to the proof, too often substitutesthe approbation of virtue for virtue itself. The discourses of Mrs.Coningsby fostered in the mind of her nephew this natural idea of theindivisibility of goodness and beauty. She described the empire ofvice to be absolute, when it takes possession of a woman; and thatits immediate effects were to obliterate every feminine grace, andtransmute her at once into a monster of sin and disgust. Believingthis, Louis was not prepared for the scene he had just witnessed. Thepit, he expected to behold yawning like the mouth of hell, and sowarning him from its approach, he saw overlaid with a verdure, brighterthan all around: and no wonder his unwary feet trod the tempting spot,and found it treacherous.Footnote A: The reader is requested to call to mind, that this is thedescription of the Theatrical Profession, at that period of its historyin this country, when the plays of Farquhar, and others of the sametaste, occupied the stage; and were performed by persons who too nearlyresembled in reality the characters they represented.--With Garrickand revived Shakspeare, morals and propriety were restored:--and atthe head of our present British actresses who possess the "grace ofdelicate reserve, which is the indispensable work of a true Englishgentlewoman;" no one can fail to respect Mrs. Siddons.CHAP. IV.He slept, and the scene was renewed with a thousand strange varieties.Imagination recalled, in fantastic vision, all that he had read ofenchanted pleasures, or of descending goddesses mingling their immortalnature with favoured man. He now lost his own identity in the personof Rogero, slumbering away life in the arms of Alcina; and then becamethe indignant Rinaldo, cutting his way through the entangling thicketsof Armida's wood.--He awoke heated, and unrefreshed. His heart pantedwith his imaginary contest; and his fevered temples beat to agony as hesprung from his disordered bed, and throwing open the window towardsthe breezes of the sea, inhaled their cooling freshness. His tremulousframe gradually recovered a braced tone; and wrapping his dressing-gownaround him, he stood gazing on the opposite rocks of Lindisfarne, withfeelings as new to him as had been the spectacle of the night before.He blushed as he thought of rejoining the dear inhabitants of thatsacred spot.--A strange faintness seized on his heart--a sense of shame!"For what?" cried he, "what have I done, to cause thisself-accusation?--I have not broken my word with my uncle; I did notconsent willingly, to stay till this morning: I made the sacrifice toSir Anthony's feelings."Thus far, his conscience acquitted him; and he breathed freer: butstill he could not say, my heart is lightened of its load."I feel myself polluted!" cried he; "I know not what was said and donelast night, to change me thus; but the wine I drank, and those women'slooks and words; and my very dreams, seem to have contaminated my souland body!--Oh, holy Lindisfarne!--My uncle, my sweet cousins, why did Iever leave your innocent presence!"With this agonized invocation, he hastened to dress himself; that hemight fly from the castle, and all its present mischiefs.Violante had informed him the preceding night, how so strange a partycame together; and why they had intruded themselves on the hospitalityof his uncle. She described, with satirical pleasantry, a week'svisit, which she and her Thespian sisters had been making to a nobleamateur in Teviotdale.--Lord Warwick was there; and soon after, DukeWharton came in his way from the Highlands. At the time of his arrival,the whole company were on the eve of departure; but as he was comingsouthward, and they were to travel in the same direction, he compliedwith Warwick's entreaties to join the party.--The storm caught themon the moors; and as it was attended with thunder, the women became sofrightened, it was necessary to take them to some place of shelter.--Aminute's thought brought to Wharton's recollection that Bamborough wasin the neighbourhood; and without hesitation he ordered the horsesheads of half a dozen carriages to be turned towards the mansion of theconvivial baronet.As Louis ran over these circumstances in his mind, and recalled thelively indifference with which the Duke seemed to dally with all thisyouth and beauty, and female witchery; turning from one to the otherwith the gay caprice of the frolic butterfly, which flies from flowerto flower, hovering and touching, and straight to flight again:--"HappyWharton!" exclaimed he, "yours is indeed the spirit which skims theearth, and does not soil its wings! while mine, has only to approachits surface, and be made but too sensible, that dust I am, and would todust return!"In this mood he descended to the court yard; and gave orders for a boatto be ready at the castle-cove, to row him across to Lindisfarne assoon as the tide should serve. But in returning along the terrace, heencountered the object of his meditation and his envy; the object whichstill made his heart linger about the spot he was so determined toleave."Ha, de Montemar!" cried the Duke, "Well met; before the constellationsof last night arise to put yon saucy, upbraiding sun out ofcountenance!--But how long have you been making morn hideous with thoserueful looks?--Why, you are a different man, from the etherial sonof joy, who moved amongst us last night like Ganymede dispensing thedraughts of Olympus!"Louis saw in this gay hyperbole, only the spectre of a folly he wasashamed of. His disturbed countenance spoke what was passing in hismind; but trying to smile, "Indeed, my Lord," said he, "you are rightto laugh at my inebriated senses.--I assure you, I despise myself.""For what, de Montemar? That you have eyes, and ears, and are a man?"Louis coloured; "Perhaps, that I own too much of his worst part!""How?"He did not answer, but quickened his steps. The Duke looked archlyin his face, and laughed:--"I will answer myself. That fond littledevil Violante has driven Saint Cuthbert out of your head, and you arehastening to exorcise the strange possession at the shrine of the holywoman-hater!"Louis started at this insinuation: it offended him, though so lightlyuttered. Perplexed, and every way displeased with himself and hiscompanions, he however tried to answer composedly.--"Your Grace ismistaken. I carry away with me no image from last night's revelry, butthat of my own weakness. I despise the facility with which I fell inwith the fashion of the hour, to drink wine till I unsettled my reason;and I detest myself for feeling that I existed from that time untilI awoke this morning, without other consciousness than that which mybesotted senses afforded." He stopped, then raising his before benthead, smiled scornfully, and added, "The garden of the Hourii is not myparadise!"Wharton gazed on him a moment in fixed astonishment.--Louis did notperceive the amazement he had created, but walked on with a steadierpace and a calmer countenance."Well," thought the Duke, as he put his arm through that of Louis;"Anteas rose the stronger, after he had touched his mother earth! ButHercules will try another throw!""De Montemar," said he, "let us leave these unlucky Hourii to theirslumbers, and resume the subject which they charmed to silence lastnight?--An eve's dropper might be dangerous; so, let us turn towardsthe wood, where we may converse undisturbed."Louis looked at his watch, and seeing that the tide would not be atfull for yet half an hour, he allowed Wharton to turn his steps throughthe inner-court into the park."Louis de Montemar, I am going to unlock my heart to you.--I am goingto put my life into your hands.""My Lord?""I am.--But I have weighed the trust.--You do not know yourself.--Ido; and,--laugh at me for a coxcomb, if you please! But I affirm, yourcharacter and mine are composed of the same materials. I recognize mybrother's soul in your breast; and the same will be your pursuits, thesame your destiny.""Oh, my Lord," cried Louis, "if emulation could transform its subject,you might not prophesy in vain!--But I will not think you mock me!Your own luminous nature surrounds you; and seeing through that, youfancy objects bright, which only reflect your beams.""Prettily said, my ingenious friend," answered the Duke, "butmy position shall be proved by the fact.--Let us comparecircumstances.--You are not yet of age?""Just twenty.""Young enough to be catechised!--Will you answer me fairly?"Louis smiled: "as my godfathers did promise and vow?""Have you ambition?""As much as ever budded the brow of young Ammon.""Have you enterprize?""Else my ambition had never been avowed.""Can you dare the world's obloquy?""In a noble cause, I would risk its hisses." The Duke caught himin his arms.--"By all the host of heaven," exclaimed he, "Yours isa spirit, with which mine shall have no disguises!--You know I amreported, slandered! But, on your own principle, I exult in thehooting of the mob; and I would direct your flight to the point whereonI stand, and laugh triumphant on the fools below! Mark my progress,de Montemar.--You see in Warwick, what nine-tenths of nobilityare; distinguished from the crowd by nothing but their titles andextravagance. I would sooner hang like Absalom on a tree, than so passaway amongst the herd of my cotemporaries!"My father did not understand my character; and when he died,bequeathed me doctors of law and doctors of divinity, to teach me theway I should go. They tried to break the spirit they could not bend;and often hard words, and harder usage, shook their heads as well astheir canes, and pronounced me an unmanagable colt. In the very heatand tempest of my rebellion, I told them I was a Bucephalus they couldnot tame! And so, breaking from their bridle, wonder not I scoured thefield in the very wantonness of liberty!"Louis joined in the gay laugh of his friend, and Wharton proceeded."I was then hardly nineteen, but I spurned the tedious tutelage ofschools and colleges, and threw myself at once into the university ofnature; the wide and populous world. I went to the continent.--But notto visit the garden of the Hourii! At Geneva, I became the friend ofphilosophers; at Paris, the companion of wits; in Italy, the counsellorof princes.--Do you mark me?""I do, with wonder and admiration.""What I then dared to advise, I am now come to execute." He paused amoment, then resumed, "De Montemar, there are objects at Avignon, ofmore interest than Vaucluse!"--again he paused, and looked at Louis,expecting a reply."I do not understand you, my Lord.""Expound my riddle, and you shall have a better fate than Oedipus.""I should deserve a worse, were I to waste the time in guesses; when Imay profit by its exposition from yourself."The Duke did not like this dullness, but he proceeded.--"De Montemar,what is your opinion of the Marquis of Montrose? He who Cromwell sentto the scaffold for attachment to the house of Stuart.""I consider his gallant patriotism," replied Louis, "as hardly secondto that of his immortal country-man William Wallace; and could almostenvy him his feelings, when the executioner bound to his neck thecatalogue of his battles against the regicides. What a consciousness oftrue greatness must have been in the smile with which he welcomed thisintended badge of disgrace, as a brighter testimony to his honour,than the star of Saint George which they tore from his breast!""Well answered, my promising catechumen!" cried the Duke, "now foranother question, and I have done.--In what respect do you hold honestGeorge Monk, who deserted the blockhead chief of the Roundheads,and recalled the son of his murdered sovereign to the throne of hisancestors?""Monk does not fire my heart, like Montrose," replied Louis, "I lovethe direct path; and honest George was most inclined to crookedones.--However, he walked straight at last, and for that I honour him.""Then you love the Stuarts?""Their line is of mingled yarn!--I revere, love, blame, pity them.""De Montemar, you must know the Chevalier de Saint George!""How?--where?" "At Avignon.--Now, do you read me?"Louis met the powerful glance of Wharton's eye, and it shot into hissoul. At the same instant the words of his guardian seemed to ring inhis ear:--The wily Duke will teach you to be a traitor!--Hot and colddamps burst from every pore of his body."You do not answer me, de Montemar?--I see you are discomposed,--youare agitated;--and it is a cause to stir up every vital spring inthe breast of free-born man! My blood is ready to follow the courseof Derwentwater and Kenmuir; or to purchase, in some happy field ofvictory, the re-establishment of my lawful king!"Louis had been taken unawares, and was still incapable of reply. Heverified the remark, that no history is so little understood by youngpersons as that of their country near their own times. The falselights of party have not sufficiently subsided, to allow the regularhistorian a clear view of events; and the prejudiced memoirs of theday are too numerous and contradictory to be put into the hands ofyouth, without making a waste of that time which ought to be devotedto building up a future judgement on the well-founded basis of thehistory of past ages. The subject proposed by the Duke, was thereforenew to the reflections of Louis. He had never questioned, nor confirmedhis loyalty to the House of Hanover, by considering the change ofsuccession with any reference to his own peculiar opinions. He hadnever seen any thing at the parsonage but peaceful submission toauthority, not for wrath, but conscience sake. At the castle, anothersentiment was often agitated; but the speakers were usually violent,unreflecting characters, whose praise or blame were equally worthless.However, he could not deny to himself that he had shrunk in horror fromrecitals of what passed ten years ago, with regard to the rebel lords;and he also could not forget that his uncle of Lindisfarne had oftenlamented the severe policy of their execution, and wished the State hadthought it possible to unite mercy with judgement. "Had His Majestypardoned them," said Mr. Athelstone, "rebellion would have perished intheir stead; for the honour of a British heart is stronger than death."All this rushed confusedly to the recollection of Louis. Hispartialities, romantic associations, and generous enthusiam, were allon the side of the suffering party; but his habits of submission hadbeen directed by his best friends to the reigning family. He felt hisown indecision he saw the Duke's advantage; and repeating to himselfhis uncle's warning, again determined not to linger another hour nearthe dangerous contagion.Wharton's observing eye perceived fluctuation in the mind of hisfriend; and as there was fluctuation on so portentous a subject,he boded a favourable issue to his side of the argument, could hedetain him a little longer from the island. Should Louis return thitherbefore his faith were actually pledged to the Stuart cause, it couldnot be doubted he would impart his scruples to the Pastor; and thattrue minister of the reformation, would keep him firm to the Houseof Hanover. Full of this apprehension, and aware that his proselytemust soon be summoned to the boat, unless he could prevent it by someunsuspected manoeuvre, Wharton was not sorry when he saw Sir Anthonyand several of the party advancing fast upon them from the house.--Thetongues of the ladies proclaimed their vicinity."Gird your loins, my friend!" cried the Duke, resuming his usualmerriment; and laughing at the stern air with which Louis turned totheir voices:--"Dalilah and the Philistines are upon you!" "And ifevery hair on my head were a rope by which they held me," repliedLouis, "I would escape them!" As he spoke, he suddenly turned on hisheel, and darted down a vista of firs towards the sea-beach. Whartondid no more than wave his hand to the light-footed Violante. She shotby a cross path through the shrubbery, and at a curve in the avenuemet the flying object of her pursuit with such force, that she wasstruck to the ground. The rest of the party soon hastened forward,by the cries of Louis for help; for on raising her, and finding herinsensible, he thought she was killed by the violence of the shock.When they came up he was on one knee, with her head leaning on theother, and gazing with horror on her pale face. The pallid hue of hisown, told all that he feared, to the Duke and Sir Anthony. But theladies found the case not so desperate; and by the help of essencessoon restored the fair sufferer to animation.Sir Anthony proposed her being taken into the house. But on attemptingto rise, she sunk back, almost fainting a second time from theexcessive pain of a sprained ancle. Wharton called for a sofa, whichbeing brought, the invalid was carefully placed in it on cushions; andthe gentlemen present, insisted on being its bearers into the castle.As the sofa was raised from the ground, Violante turned to Louis witha languid smile; "you will not leave me, Mr. de Montemar?" said she,and stretched out her hand to him, with a look more persuasive than herwords.To disappoint the wish and expectation these words and action implied,he found impossible.--He had no suspicion that she was running tointercept him, when the accident happened; and now, turning with arespectful bow to her summons, he silently followed the sofa into thebreakfast-room. Her gallant bearers placed it by the fire, at a smalldistance from the table. The Duke offered his services to the recliningbeauty; but she would accept of no hand to bring her coffee and toast,but that of Louis: saying, that he who wounded, was in duty bound toadminister the restoratives. Recovered from his dismay at what mighthave been the fatal effect of the accident he had so unintentionallyoccasioned, he gladly took the opportunity to make the amendehonourable, and express his concern at what had happened.Time rolled away, and he heard no tidings of the boat. It was anunusual inattention in his uncle's servants, who always vied witheach other who should be most prompt in obeying every wish of theirbeloved Mr. de Montemar. But Wharton had contrived to have the littlevessel countermanded, without appearing in the orders. Ignorant ofthis, Louis seized the first moment the invalid addressed herselfto another person; and in a low voice asked the butler whether theboat were in waiting. The man, not aware of the commands which hadbeen given one way or the other, simply answered the tide had beenat ebb two hours. Stung with vexation, Louis started from his chair.Violante observed his disorder, and softly enquired the cause.--It wasno sooner explained, than casting on him a reproachful look, she burstinto tears and turned her head silently away. Louis felt himself ina very embarrassing situation; and almost unconsciously resuming hisseat beside her, he drew a vexatious sigh as he said to himself,--"I amcaught, and coiled in spite of myself!"Violante mistook its meaning; and withdrawing her hand from her eyes,gave him a glance that mantled his face with crimson. Though apparentlyengaged in gay badinage with the other ladies, Wharton did not lose anexpression of his friend's countenance, as the alluring Frenchwomancontinued to converse with him in a tone of mingled tenderness andraillery. "If he stand this," thought the Duke, "he has even more ice,of a certain kind, in his composition, than he forced me this morningto believe!"Sir Anthony entered from the hall, calling aloud, "Who rides thismorning? I have ordered horses round to the court.""De Montemar, what are you for?" said the Duke, "I see victory is inthe hands where I would always have it; but as the ladies may not wishto have their captive in their way all day;--are you inclined for asteeple-hunt this morning?"Louis eagerly embraced the proposal.--Violante coloured, touched hisarm; and pressing it with strong emotion, whispered something in hisear. Wharton laughed, and turned on his heel. Louis believed himselfturned idiot. Abandoned of his usual presence of mind, he knew notwhat to say, or how to look; though he felt perfectly resolved notto sleep another night in the castle, while it contained its presentextraordinary inmates. The seductive scenes of the preceding night,seemed disenchanted before him; men and women, all were divested oftheir magic garments, excepting Wharton, and he still wore the vestureof light."Why will he mingle his noble nature with creatures base as these?"again he said to himself; "are they his toys? his tools?--To whatpurpose?"He was gazing on the Duke, as these thoughts occurred to him, anddeepened his reflections. Wharton caught the look; its expressionwent through him: but waving his hand, as if that would glance itaside, he shook his head sportively and exclaimed; "You want meto pledge my guarantee to Violante, that there shall be no moredesertions!--Believe me, pretty one! For the bright Pleiades are notmore inseparable above, than are your swain and humble servant below.""----We rise and set together."He spoke the last sentence without any reference to the subject whichhad first suggested the idea; and having in the utterance as muchforgotten Violante, as though she had never existed, he put his armthrough Louis's, and turned with him out of the room."De Montemar," said he, as they crossed the hall; "the conversationwhich was interrupted this morning, must be finished. I have put apacket open into your hand, which must be sealed this evening; elsethe vagrant leaves may follow the sybil's trick; and I know nothing ofthe gatherer, till that doughty Lictor, Jack Ketch, makes me his bowon Tower-Hill." "Surely, my Lord, you cannot doubt my honour, if youcould my heart?""I will doubt every thing, till that heart is laid open to me.--I vowedto have no disguises with you.--Repay me in kind.--Heart for heart, DeMontemar, is the only true exchange!"Louis did not immediately answer; for he felt what he would not fairlyacknowledge to himself, that a mist did sometime appear to rise overthis professed frankness of the Duke, which often made it uncertainwhether he had really shewn his heart at all.--In the midst of asentiment that seemed direct from the soul, a sudden quirk of fancywould present itself, that turned all athwart into whim and laughter.And the freest disclosure would as frequently start aside, to appearnothing more than a fantastic figure of speech, or break off intoirreconcilable fragments, without apparent aim or connexion. Butfor all this, an apology came to the breast of his friend. "He hasembraced the desperate fortunes of a dethroned prince.--And perhapsit depends upon the caution of this, that prince's ablest confident,whether they are to be redeemed, or finally consigned to despair!"The horses were at the hall door; and Sir Anthony, and his other maleguests, mounted. On sight of the friends, he called to them, and thegrooms bringing forward more horses, the Duke vaulted into his seat,and Louis, with a sensation of a double release, gladly followed hisexample.--As they turned merrily down the rocky path-way which led bythe ancient fosse to the open country, every man had something to sayaccording to his own humour, of the pleasures of the preceding night;but all concurred in so overcharging their anticipations of the comingevening, that it was easily to be foreseen the revelry of the past,would be encreased to an excess in the future, which would destroyall, by drowning pleasure and consciousness in the same stream.Sir Anthony appeared to take it for granted, his nephew had completelysurrendered himself to the impulse which governed them all; but withredoubling disgust, Louis tried to make his uncle comprehend, that sofar from intending to partake the projected festivity, he would not goback to the castle, but return to Lindisfarne immediately after theirride. Astonishment, remonstrance, raillery, entreaties, reproaches; allwere successively and successlessly brought forward: Louis found hisspirit rise with the clamour of opposition. He was now steadily doing,what he always knew was his only proper conduct; the padlock which hadseemed to chain down his faculties under a sense of committing wrong,now burst asunder, and he was all himself again.--Sir Anthony affectednot to believe him serious; talked of Violante, then declared, it washis belief, he only wanted to be forced to do the thing he liked; andwhispering the noisy sheriff and others, a loud laugh peeled throughthe party, and they instantly drew around Louis."What do you mean, gentlemen?" cried he, glad to be manually opposed byothers beside his uncle."To bear you, as the Loves bore Adonis"--cried Wharton gaily, andplanting his steed also, before that of his friend."Et tu Brute?" cried Louis; and striking his spurs into the sides ofhis horse, the high mettled animal sprang through the foremost rank,dispersed the rest; and speeding forward with the wings of the wind,was plunged by his determined rider into the receding waters of thetide.CHAP. V.While these events were agitating the dissipated circle at the castle,the simple family on the opposite shore were engaged in far differentscenes.--Its Pastor opened his pious views to the noble-minded SantaCruz; and the young people obeyed the venerable man's commands, toenjoy the vernal hour of day, with all the zest of their as vernalyears.Cornelia conducted Don Ferdinand under the ivy-crowned wall whichsheltered her uncle's flower-garden. He admired the disposition of itsparterres, and wondered how such beautiful chinasters, balsams, andholly-hocks, could bloom in so northern a climate. Alice led him tothe aromatic spot where she had stationed her bees, and shewed himthe beds of thyme, lavender, and other sweet herbs she had plantedfor their food. A little onward, raised on a low mound, stood an oldsun-dial. Its bank was covered with mignonette; and many of Alice'sindustrious favorites were loading their wings with its extractedhoney. She gathered a cluster of the flowers, and gave it to Ferdinand.Cornelia stooped to pluck a piece of sweetbriar, but the pricklesprevented her: "I want my cousin's dextrous fingers here," said shewith a smile."Rather his bold ones," cried Alice as she saw Ferdinand break off thebough, and present it to her sister, leaving the thorns in his hand."If he be as happy as I am, in being wounded in so sweet a cause,"rejoined Ferdinand, "Mr. de Montemar is more to be envied than any manon earth.""How so?" enquired Alice, with an incredulous laugh, "I see no pleasurein being pricked and scratched for the prettiest flower in the world!""But I do, sweet Alice!" said he with a gallant smile, as he presentedanother branch of the shrub to her. With a faint blush, she glancedat her sister, but Cornelia, thinking at the moment of the truantLouis, had not heard what was said; and Alice, seeing no surprise inher sister at the familiarity of the term, supposed it was a foreigncustom; and unlatching a wicket which led to the pasture-land, boundedwith the lightness of a fawn to the top of an adjacent hillock. Shestood in the midst of its heathy grass, calling on her sister to followher, for that was the spot whence they might shew Don Ferdinand theobjects of the island to best advantage. Cornelia and her companionwere soon by her side; and as the young Spaniard's excursive eyeshot at once across the island's self, to the surrounding ocean, heperceived a cluster of rocks to the north, which shone in the noondaysun like gems on the belt of the horizon."I have heard," said he, smiling, "that in days of yore, a band ofwandering sages, sailing in these seas, discovered certain islandsencompassed with floods of light, and inhabited by blissful souls.These fortunate adventurers called them the Islands of Blessedness.Since that time no traveller has been able to find them. But, as I am acountryman of the great Columbus, I venture to hope the happy discoverywas reserved for me; and that there they are!"Both sisters remarked the direction of his eyes; and laughing heartilyat the compliment his fancy had paid to the most barren of their rocks,told him, they were the Ferne Islands. "And so far from being blessedplaces," said Alice, "my uncle would never allow Cornelia or me to gonear them, the landing is so dangerous." "But Louis often visits themwith the kelp-gatherers," rejoined Cornelia, "and while their firesreduce the weed to ashes, he generally throws himself on a juttingrock over the sea, to command the view, and sketch the group. Were youto walk these shores on a fine evening at that season of the year,you would admire the picturesque vapour from the kelp-fires, as itswreathing volumes sail away, and mingle with the clouds.""But you would not mistake the kelp-gatherers for blessed spirits!"returned the gay Alice, "nor run the risque of your life to draw theirportraits! But Louis loves roaming about amongst odd places, as much asyou may love a quiet walk, and a bunch of sweet flowers;" added she,observing the delight with which Ferdinand continued to smell at themignonette, "and so, we must forgive him."Ferdinand was gratified at her playful reference to her fragrant gift,and answered, "I do not believe that he can love rock or quicksandbetter than I could love and cherish some of the sweet flowers of thisisland, which he seems content to cast away!--and, pardon me, if I alittle doubt the taste of your adventurous cousin?"The sisters did not quite understand this speech, which seemed to beginin sport, but certainly ended with a serious tone."You mistake my cousin," said Cornelia, "if you suppose he chusesperilous excursions, from a vanity to shew his courage.--Courage isso natural to him, that he never thinks about it.--The activity ofhis mind makes exercise necessary to him; and the fearlessness of histemper renders that easy to him, which might be difficult, if notimpossible to timid characters.--But indeed, his affection for us hasbeen the most frequent cause of risquing his safety; for he deems noattempt too hazardous, by which he can gratify a wish of my mother, ora desire of my sister or myself.""My uncle will tell you, such have been his ways from a child," criedAlice, "and from the first of my recollection, I remember thesefrightful tokens of his love! Coming in with curious aquatic plantshe had torn from some hardly accessible rock, for my uncle's herbal;or making his appearance with shells for me, which he had swam for,and sought in the sand bank at the point-head. I am sure I have oftenadmired their beauties through my tears; but he never would believe wecould be frightened.""Indeed," rejoined Cornelia, "after old fisher-John's two sons weredrowned, I have known Louis absent for hours on the open sea inthe poor man's boat, helping him to draw his nets. For nothing istroublesome, or dangerous to him, that is connected with affection orbenevolence.""Ah, those daring expeditions suit your taste, Cornelia!" said Alice,with a shudder; "You, like Louis, love to ride in the whirlwind anddirect the storm! I can never forget his absence one whole nightduring a frightful tempest, when we did not know but that each horridblast we listened to, was that which was sinking him to a watery grave.My terrors cost me a fit of illness,--and then my uncle made him seethe cruelty, and even wickedness, of being rashly brave; for eversince, he has been careful not to put himself in any needless danger."Ferdinand sighed heavily, as both sisters separately spoke. He felta sense of feebleness in his own character, which made him envy theenterprising spirit of Louis. "Here," murmured he to himself, "isindeed the fire of youth, the animating principle of future greatness;while that which burns in my veins, withers my very vitals, andconsumes every nobler element within me. Wretch that I am,--reprobate,and accursed!" His lips moved almost audibly, as his accusing spirituttered the last words; and unconsciously turning from the sisters, hewalked hastily down the hill towards the cliff.Cornelia and Alice gazed, on each other, astonished; "That is veryodd!" cried the latter, "Did you observe his countenance?""Yes, he suddenly knit his brows; and I thought looked quite strange!""Let us follow him," rejoined Alice, "if he go on at that rate, and notbeing aware, he may slip down some of the fissures into the sea."Alice hastened forward as she spoke; and not merely walking, butrunning, joined him as he had gained the top of the cliff. Corneliacame up soon after; and seeking to divert Ferdinand from whateverpainful thoughts possessed him, she uttered the first idea thatpresented itself, and exclaimed as she approached, "You two standthere, your garments waving in the breeze, like Adam and the angeloverlooking the earth and its waters.""To me," answered Ferdinand, "it might well be called the hill ofparadise; if you and your sweet Alice, would indeed be to me what thesister-angels were to the erring father of mankind!"Alice looked from him to her sister, with a tender pity that did notescape its object. Again he found a balmy warmth encircle his heart.The freezing hand of despair, which a moment before had obliteratedall other impressions, was again withdrawn. "Have I," said he tohimself, "indeed interested this innocent creature? I, so unworthy,so self-despised!" He drew towards her, as she followed Cornelia, whoturned through some broken craggs, and crossing a ravine, brought themforth on a ridge that faced the west. At their feet lay the straitwhich divides the two shores. The tide was retreating, and rapidlydiscovering the sands and sunken rocks which form the foundation ofthe stupendous cliff on which stand the towers of Bamborough."What princely fortress is that?" demanded Ferdinand, surprised intoexclamation by the commanding line of coast; and the magnitude of thewarlike structure which crowned its summit."It is the castle of my mother's ancestors," replied Cornelia; "underthat parental roof, when my dear grandfather lived, she passed many ahappy day; and there my sister Alice was born."Ferdinand could not forbear looking from its regal grandeur, to the twolovely beings by his side: the offspring of the barons bold, who informer ages had poured the storm of sovereignty from those embattledwalls! and they were content to pass their lives in an obscureparsonage, on an almost deserted island!--Their garments were simpleas their lot; but the air of the one still demanded the coronet of herancestors; while the other, fair, tender, and unaspiring, seemed readyto shrink from the threatening front of what had once been thestronghold of her fathers. "Bright Cornelia!" said he to himself, ashe looked on the castle, and listened to her observations; "your lovermay be he who courts the wonderful, the wild, on the dizzy steep orthe wide ocean!--But my heart--had it not engendered the vulture whichpreys upon its vitals!--would cleave to seclusion and peace, in thebosom of your timid Alice."Cornelia described the extent of ground which the fortress occupied;enumerated its towers, and assigned to each the era of its erection.She pointed with particular complacency to the white walls of theformidable dungeon; and quoted Archives in Durham Abbey, to prove thatits foundation was the work of a Roman Emperor. She named the SaxonKings, from Ida to Egbert, who had raised their standard on its roof;and made Ferdinand distinguish a high-grated window, which yet went bythe name of Queen Bebba's chamber."But what is that in the sea yonder?" asked her auditor; who hadaccidentally looked down to the dashing surges at the foot of the rock,while she was directing his attention along its summit. The eyes of thesisters followed his."It seems to be somebody swimming," said Cornelia."To me," cried Alice, "it appears to be a man on horseback.""Hardly possible!" exclaimed Ferdinand, "what human being would be somad? Or rather, how can any man and horse live on such a sea as that!""It is, indeed, rashness, in the present state of the tide;" returnedCornelia, "the sands are so shifting, and the sea so rough. But whenit is quite at ebb, or before it be amply full, persons, acquaintedwith the track, may find safe opportunities of passing on foot oron horseback from the mainland. We have it on record, that in thepersecuting reign of William the Conqueror, a little army of monksbrought the relics of Saint Cuthbert from Durham to the opposite shore,and crossed with them, dry-shod, to Holy Island.""Our cockle gatherers do the same continually," cried Alice, "butcertainly never with the tide in the state it is now; and so, mostlikely, that is some poor smuggler flying from the revenue officers."While Cornelia gently rebuked her, for bestowing an epithet of pityon such desperate violators of the law, the sisters descended tothe beach, to gratify the curiosity of Ferdinand, who wished to seethe hardy cavalier come to land. As they hastened along the cliffs,they saw the roaring waves, bright in the sun beams, break over thehorse and the rider; and as the noble animal rose from the abyss, andresolutely breasted the surge, the lashing waters whitened his sideswith their foam. In one of these fearful moments, a huge wave, rollingtowards the island, raised the man and horse upon its immense bosom, toa height almost level with the rock; and then plunged with them into adepth that seemed to cover them for ever."Merciful Heaven, it is Louis!" cried Alice--in that fatal instant shehad recognised him, and with frantic shrieks ran forward, as if to meethim in the ocean.Finding that the extraordinary swell of the last wave, had not merelytorn the footing of his stout hunter from the ground, but had exhaustedhis strength, Louis slid from his back while he was yet overwhelmed bythe weight of the surge; and grasping the bridle, swam with him throughthe deep water. Coming to the breakers, he waded the rest; and havingdrawn his faithful horse on the shelving rocks, was patting his heavingsides, when he perceived the terrified party rushing down the nearestpath to his assistance. Ferdinand had beheld the whole with wonder.And now that he stood apart, and saw him, with dripping garments,and uncovered head, reining and soothing the alarmed animal, that hemight not injure the sisters; the astonished Spaniard could not helpexclaiming to himself:"Mounting with springing step the broad ascent,A buoyant form of matchless shape I spied,Attired like one whose ardent soul is bentTo win in fleetest race, by glory's side.Flinging its changeless splendor far and wideFrom his bright forehead flamed the polar star;Through his clear cheek the ruby-tinctured tideShone with a healthful glow; while on the airBack from his radiant eyes, was blown the clustering hair!""Louis! Louis!" exclaimed both sisters at once. Alice clasped her handsand sobbed aloud."Why, my dearest cousin, encounter all this danger?" cried Cornelia."I had no other way of getting to you." "Hear him!" cried Alice,running back to Ferdinand, and grasping his arm; "I knew it was not hisown will that detained him from us. Dear, dear, Louis!" and weepingagain with the excess of her joy, she unconsciously allowed Ferdinandto support her with his arm.Louis called to a fisherman he descried among the rocks; and giving himhis horse to lead to the Parsonage stables, proceeded with Cornelia tojoin the trembling Alice and the young Spaniard, who, his cousin hadtold him, was their uncle's guest."My sweetest Alice!" said Louis, as he approached her. The moment sheheard his footstep and the salutation, she took her hands from herstreaming eyes, and threw herself upon his breast.Cornelia put her hand upon Ferdinand's arm, and impelling him gentlyforward; "pardon me, Don Ferdinand," said she, "but Alice is so weakin her nerves! Or rather, her tender nature is so alive to any dangerthreatening those she loves, that at such times she is hardly herself.She will recover soonest when left alone with our dear, but still rashcousin.""What could impel Mr. de Montemar to so extraordinary an act?""His word, given to my uncle, not to be a willing inmate with DukeWharton. His Grace is at the castle; and he and Sir Anthony, findingLouis determined to return to Lindisfarne, would have made him theirprisoner, had he not effected his escape by this terrible expedient.""But why did Mr. Athelstone require such a promise from your cousin?"asked Ferdinand; "has the gay Duke offended your uncle?""As he has offended all virtuous men," replied Cornelia with severity.Ferdinand regretted his inconsiderate question. Fearing the impressionit might leave on the sister of Alice, he sighed deeply, andexclaimed; "happy De Montemar! to be in this blessed seclusion sostrange to vice, that its first aspect causes you to fly with horror!In the wide, worthless world, Miss Coningsby, vice meets us at everyturning; and, to our shame, familiarity with the object soon makes usindifferent to its deformity."The young Spaniard again lost his self-possession; and with an almostconvulsed countenance and waiving his hand for her not to follow him,he darted through a chasm into the craggs; and by their interveningprojections instantly disappeared. Cornelia joined Alice and hercousin; then turned with them into the direct path to the Parsonage,that Louis might be released from his wet garments; and her unclerelieved from any alarm the arrival of the horse might have occasioned.As they walked homeward, she gave her cousin a brief account of thevisit of the Marquis and his son; and he much surprised her, when hedeclared this to be the first intimation he had received of theirarrival. Alice was not sparing of her invectives against Sir Anthonyfor his dishonourable concealment of her uncle's messenger; and thenenquired how Louis had at last broken away from his detainers."That you shall hear by and by," said he, "but I don't know whatCornelia will say; for, indeed, I had a run for it!" Cornelia smiled;and he added in a graver tone; "but if Mr. Athelstone knew the Duke ofWharton was at Bamborough, what must he have thought of my apparentneglect of his summons? Of my shameless contempt of my promise.""No circumstance could have made him believe that any neglect camefrom you," cried Alice, "but we never heard of that frightful Dukebeing there; and so my uncle thought nothing about your stay, onlyas he regretted your losing so much of the society of these nobleSpaniards." On the first intimation of their being Spaniards, Louishad eagerly enquired whether they came from his father; and Corneliahaving answered no; that their errand was the young man's health; helistened with benevolent interest to Alice's questions, of what wasbecome of Don Ferdinand. Cornelia shook her head; and describing how hehad left her, had just finished her account of his strange behaviour,when they arrived at the garden wicket. Louis entered the house by aside-door, that he might rid himself of his disordered cloaths beforehe saw the family; and Cornelia went to communicate his arrival to hermother and uncle.Being satisfied of the safety of her cousin, Alice felt her anxietyre-awaken for another object. She lingered in the garden behind hersister; she returned to the wicket, and stood gazing through it; thenstepping up the sun dial mound, looked from side to side over theboundaries of the garden. Ferdinand was no where to be descried. Thetreacherous footing among the rocks, the perpendicular cliffs, hisabstracted eye, and hurrying step, again presented themselves to herthoughts; and alarmed and agitated, she turned wistfully towards thehill beyond the little gate. "From that spot, I might certainly seehim.--But if he were to see me, how strange he would think it! AndCornelia too, that I should absent myself from dear Louis, after suchdanger!"Just as with blush succeeding blush, she made these comments, theobject of her anxiety appeared from the opposite side on the top of thehill, leaning on his father's arm. Joy, confusion, a sense of shameshe had never felt before, overwhelmed her; and springing from themound, she ran hastily across the garden. She darted into the house,as if fearful of pursuit; and stopped, panting, before the door ofher uncle's library. Supposing it vacant, and glad to recover breathunobserved, she opened the door, and found herself in the presence ofher uncle. He was bending before a table, and leaning his head upon hisclasped hands. On hearing a step, he looked up. Alice stood confounded."My child," cried he, "come hither, and with me thank the giver ofall good for the virtuous firmness of your cousin! He has not onlypreserved that bloom Of truth unimpaired, which, if once lost never isregained; but he has risqued his life this morning, to avoid a man who,I know, he loves, but whose society he relinquishes because he believeshim to be as full of vices as of charms. Come Alice, and bow with mebefore his Almighty guardian!"Alice sunk on her knees by the side of her uncle. She bent her faceupon his fervent hands, and pressed them with her lips as her heartbreathed with devotion the thanksgiving his eloquent piety pronounced.Cornelia, having been the glad messenger to Mr. Athelstone, andafterwards to her mother, of the safe return of Louis, accompaniedMrs. Coningsby to the general sitting room. It was that in which theyhad welcomed the travellers the preceding night, and where they foundthem now. Ferdinand had cast himself into a chair, fatigued and gloomy.His father stood by the window, gazing on him in anxious silence. Mrs.Coningsby had not time to address either, before the Pastor entered. Headvanced immediately to Santa Cruz; and his aged eyes not discerningthe peculiar sadness of his guest, "My Lord Marquis," cried he, "Louisde Montemar is returned. And I take shame to myself for having doubtedthe integrity of his word.""My son has told me sufficient of the manner in which Mr. de Montemarhas kept it, to fill me with respect for his principles, and toinspire me with something more than admiration for the determinationwith which he has asserted them."Before the Marquis had ceased speaking, a quick step was heard in thepassage."Here is my dear nephew," cried Mrs. Coningsby, and the next moment heopened the door; but perceiving the strangers, he checked the buoyantgladness with which he was coming forward, and with a graceful bowadvanced into the room. Alice glided in after him, and took a seatbehind her mother's chair. Mr. Athelstone immediately named to him theMarquis Santa Cruz, and Don Ferdinand d'Osorio. The Marquis scannedfor a moment the son of Ripperda, and the comparison he could not butdraw was wormwood to the heart of a father. Nature had given Louis apassport to almost every bosom; a countenance and a figure which neededno addition to complete the perfect form of youthful nobleness."Mr. de Montemar," said Santa Cruz, addressing him with a sigh he couldnot smother, "you have this day proved how worthy you are of the nameyou bear. I shall be proud of your friendship for my son."Louis found himself pressed to the breast of Don Ferdinand, whoindistinctly repeated his father's assurance of esteem. Praise andflattery of dubious import were fresh in the mind of Louis; but therewas something in the encomium uttered by the Marquis, an air of noblesincerity rather than of courtly politeness, that filled him with apleasure very apparent in the luminous countenance with which he bowedin modest silence to what was said. The Marquis pursued the subjectwith a vehemence not usual to him; and still addressing Louis, spokeof the indispensible duty of maintaining mutual confidence betweenrelations; and then expatiated on the honourable contest which manis commissioned to hold at all periods of his life with the ignobleimpulses of sense, till the appetites are subdued, and the passionsthemselves become the agents of virtue."Few young men," added he, "would have made so bold an amendment as youyou have done, on the story of Telemachus. He waited till Mentor thrusthim from the rock, you cast yourself into the sea!"Louis lost the pleasure of being approved, in the embarrassingpersonality of the language. He thought the Marquis went much fartherthan delicacy could warrant, or real respect for the object of hispraise would have dictated. What had he then heard of the scene atthe castle? How much was left for himself to tell his revered uncle?And whether did he indeed deserve praise or blame for his tardy yetdesperate determination to escape? While this passed in his thoughts,he looked down disordered. But some were present, who read in theanxious face of Santa Cruz a dearer aim than paying a compliment to astranger.Mrs. Coningsby observed that Ferdinand was discomposed by his father'sremarks; and the Marquis himself soon perceived the mischief he haddone. He sought to excite a generous emulation in his despondent son;but he saw that his extraordinary eulogy of Louis had been received byFerdinand as an insidious reproach to himself: and resentful of thecovert infliction, he stood distant, frowning and pale. A witheringchill struck to the heart of the father, who became abruptly silent.Striving to shake off his embarrassment, Louis looked up, and met thehaughty glance of Don Ferdinand. When their eyes encountered, theSpaniard's ashy cheek flashed scarlet, and he turned with a scornfulair towards the window. This, by offending Louis, tended to restorehis self-possession. Whatever the father might intend by his excessivepraise, the son evidently shewed that he despised its object. Louisthought he could not mistake the looks of the young Spaniard, and asense of self-respect immediately dispelled his confusion.Pleased with the truth of the Marquis's remarks, the Pastor hadremained a gratified listener. But Alice, observing the gloom ofFerdinand; and half suspecting there was some reproving referenceto him in what had been said, took advantage of the general pause;and hoping to change the conversation, or at least take it out ofthe Marquis's hands; she whispered her mother to ask of Louis theparticulars of his detention at the castle. Mrs. Coningsby did so,adding, "It will interest our guests:--and I am anxious to know howyou could be driven to so dangerous an alternative." Louis feltnew embarrassment at this request; and in a low voice he replied tohis aunt, "I am sure, madam, you will excuse me, if I do not relatecircumstances in the presence of these gentlemen, which might seemto cast some blame on a relation to whom I owe gratitude, if notunquestionable respect?"The Marquis rose from his seat, on over-hearing this answer, and takingLouis's hand; "young man," said he, "I honour you." Louis could notdoubt that look, that voice, that pressure; and blaming himself forhaving been inclined to take a prejudice against the father, from therepelling manners of the son; he gazed long and silently on the closeddoor, after the Marquis and Ferdinand had left the room.CHAP. VI.Understanding the delicacy of Santa Cruz, in thus having withdrawn;and to leave the room free for his return, the Pastor retired withhis family into the library, where they listened without interruptionto a brief account of what had passed at the castle.--Louis onlyexcepted Wharton's mysterious discourse; and a little softened hisrepresentation of the scenes with the female visitors. He did not meanto deceive in either case; but honour forbade his betraying the Duke;and the decency of a manly mind, almost unconsciously threw a shadeover descriptions which confessed their nature, by shrinking fromdisclosure.Mr. Athelstone scarcely spoke during the recital. He listened withan attention that considered every circumstance, and weighed everyword.--The ladies were affected differently. Mrs. Coningsby inveighedagainst Sir Anthony, and extolled Duke Wharton for his unexpectedinterference in favour of her nephew's return. Cornelia expressed herwonder that women of any respectability could bring themselves to sharethe boisterous society of the baronet and his companions.--And Aliceasked, as actresses must copy from the best models, whether it couldreally be the fashion in London and abroad, for women to be so veryeasy with men?--"If it is," said she, looking at her sister; "how verystupid Don Ferdinand must think you and me!"Louis smiled, and thought; "Did you know all the ease of those ladies,how little would you have sullied those pure lips with even the mentionof their names." But he only answered, "My dear Alice, licence in yoursex is more complimented than respected by ours.--Modesty in womanmust be the fashion with men of principle in every country."When he closed his relation, Mrs. Coningsby rose from her chair invehement indignation at her brother; who had thus sought to gratifya whim, at the expence of his own honour, and the risque of hisnephew's life.--The sisters trembled at what might have been thefatal consequence of Louis's desperate escape. And to calm the three,by diverting their attention to what he felt they were all mostinhospitably neglecting, Mr. Athelstone proposed their seeking theMarquis and his son; while he remained a few minutes with Louis, tomake some necessary observations on what they had just heard.Louis foresaw that his uncle meant to enquire more particularlyrespecting the Duke, than he had thought fit to do before hisnieces.--When they had left the room, the good old man drew his chairclose to his nephew, and with earnest tenderness asked him if he haddisclosed all?--The cheeks of Louis kindled and his eyes fell."My child," cried the Pastor, "these answer for you.--You have not!--Iguessed it, from your manner when you spoke of those women, and thatdissembling Wharton.--Fear not to confess to me.--What is it that youhave withheld from me?""Nothing, I trust, my dearest Sir, to justify this extraordinaryagitation in yourself.""Thank God! Thank God.--That open brow is still unmarked withconsciousness of guilt.--Oh, my child, may it be ever thus withthee!--Preserve that innocence, so bright, so peace-bestowing! andnever hesitate doing as you did this morning, risking your life in itspreservation.""I never will, my uncle:--So help me, heaven!" A solemn pauseensued.--When Mr. Athelstone again spoke, the restored serenity ofhis mind was seen in the benign composure with which he proceeded todiscuss the very subject which, a few moments before, had occasionedhim so much emotion. He at once expressed his belief that his nephew'scontest at Bamborough had been of a more serious nature than he hadyet allowed; and he hoped he was not uncharitable in suspecting thatDuke Wharton made those theatrical ladies his tools to detain Louis,while he played the disinterested part of promoting his release. Louiswould not admit this inference; but he acknowledged that his uncle hadguessed right with regard to the share the ladies had in protractinghis stay. He ingenuously told the whole relating to them; and did noteven disguise his own delusion of senses during the midnight revels.The venerable Pastor lifted up his clasped hands:--"Anthony! vileAnthony!" were his ejaculations during the recital.--"Oh, Louis," criedhe, "the bane of your life was in that hour!--and in the blindnessof your cheated imagination, had you put forth your hand to take thepoisoned cup----alas, dear child of my sainted niece, how near werethese grey hairs being brought with shame and sorrow to the grave!"--Hepaused; then resumed; for Louis was too much affected to interrupt him."I cannot excuse the Duke.--I know him to be profligate; though toyou he affects to despise the companions of his debasing pleasures.These women were in his train; and I firmly believe he excited theirpractices on your inexperienced heart.""How?--Why?""That he might have you in his power.""For what? my uncle." He had no sooner asked the question, thanrecollection of the park discourse, answered him."I know not for what," replied Mr. Athelstone, "Probably he doesnot exactly know himself.--But there is a principle in wickednessthat delights in laying human virtue waste, merely for the sake ofdestruction! The prince of evil was a murderer from the beginning!and so are all his followers.""But my dear Sir, taking it for granted that Duke Wharton had an objectto gain with me, how would my subjection to the seductions of thesewomen, put me in his power?""He would have been your master in the new science you began tolearn.--He would have governed your passions by the wiles of thesewantons;--and, self-abased, and dependant on him for the wretched wagesof your sin; how abject would have been your slavery! How omnipotenthis controul!"Louis felt the cold damps of suspicion drop upon his heart.--Heturned pale; he gasped for breath. A thousand circumstances whichmight corroborate his uncle's suggestion rushed upon his recollection.Though Wharton ridiculed the advances of these women, he did not repelthem! Though he scorned the sensualist's pursuit, he boasted of seemingto share it, that he might turn him to his purpose. And when Louisretreated in his sight from the temptations he feared, did not the Dukerather laugh him into daring their strength, than encourage his flyingfrom their influence?--Louis had never before doubted human being; muchless suspected perfidy in the man who solicited his confidence, andwhose irresistible persuasions had charmed him of more than half hisheart. The Pastor grasped the cold hand of his nephew."Louis, can you be thus disturbed, by nothing more than myrepresentation of what might have been?" "My most revered, my bestfriend!" cried he, straining the old man's hand to his breast; "Thereare some views of human nature that strike an honest heart with horror.But I cannot suspect Duke Wharton of such murderous treachery, whenhe had that very heart in his hand. Oh, my uncle, wrest from me thethought! It seems to cover the character of man with one universalblot."Mr. Athelstone allowed the violence of his nephew's feelings to exhaustitself, before he made a reply. He saw something had passed betweenLouis and the Duke, which the former still kept secret; and confidentin his integrity, he determined not to press a disclosure he appearedso averse to offering voluntarily."I perceive, Louis," said he, "that you do think it is possible youmight have been placed in the predicament I have supposed. I alsoperceive this subtle nobleman has got you so far into his power as tohave obtained your confidence, and a pledge from you of secrecy. I donot require you to betray it; but I warn you again! You have put yourheart into the hand of a man who is practised in deceiving; and whohas no value for your deposit, but as it suits his purpose to make youhis toy or his tool. These are his words, as you repeated them to me;and let them be his judge."Louis was shocked to find this accusation lodge, and not reboundfrom his heart. He acknowledged that the Duke did engage him in aconversation he would rather have avoided; but no pledge of secrecy hadbeen demanded; yet it was implied, and he trusted his uncle would thinkthe word of honour he then gave ought to be respected."Your uncle, my child, will never induce you to violate that fidelityof word, which he has ever taught you to regard as one of the mostsacred bonds of society. But, without committing yourself by any answerto what I may say, you must allow me to speak to the subject on whichI believe your honour has been given?""Speak freely, Sir, and I shall be grateful, but on your own terms, Imake no answer."He prepared to listen, looking down, that Mr. Athelstone might not readby the consciousness of his eyes, how true or false was his guess.The good Pastor had no difficulty in fixing his suspicions onsome confidential communication respecting the expatriated royalfamily. Duke Wharton was the near relation of the unfortunate LordDerwentwater, who died on the scaffold, in the cause of JamesStuart; and from that hour his young kinsman had declared so loud anindignation of the severity of the sentence, that his guardians couldhold him in no bounds. And ever since, it was more than suspectedthat his influence was secretly used to maintain the interests whichthe expelled Prince still preserved in some parts of the kingdom.Mr. Athelstone was aware that hopes were now reviving, which it wassupposed had been finally crushed six years ago on the field ofGlenshiel. But a patriot king was still only a vision. There werefeatures in the personal character of George the First which renderedhim unpopular with a high-spirited and intelligent nobility. He washaughty, reserved, and severe. All sincere members of the reformedchurch, and friends of national liberty, amongst the middle classesof the people, had the good sense to compromise the defects of theindividual, for the general benefit of possessing a protestant king,and a limited monarchy. A large proportion of the nobility also, wereof this opinion; while others merely followed the stream of power;and the rest rather endured than rejoiced in the changed succession.Though the principle of the nation at large was thus firm to its ownmeasure of faith and of loyalty, yet parties ran high in the Englishmetropolis; and the court at St. Germain's, mistaking the rage offaction for public discontent, conceived new hopes of being recalledto the seat of its ancient glory. Elated with these expectations, thewidowed queen of James the Second, in one part of the continent, andthe Prince her son in another, drew around them all whom personaldevotion, fancied interest, or a spirit of adventure, could animate totry again the often-disputed cause. The policy of Europe contributedto keep alive these pretensions; for whenever any new circumstance ofnational jealousy excited a country to disturb the peace of England,the rival Power had only to exchange ambassadors with St. Germain's,and make the restoration of its family a pretext for hostilities.Such had been the case in 1715, and also in 1719, when Spain assistedthe Chevalier Saint George in his descent on Scotland. But with newministers came new systems; and it was now whispered that Philip theFifth was veering round to the side of the house of Hanover.Mr. Athelstone hastily ran over these preliminaries to the inferencehe meant to draw; observing the fluctuating complexion of his nephew;and believing that in guessing the subject of the Duke's discourse, hehad also discovered its motive. In his morning's conversation with theMarquis, that nobleman had told him an anecdote of the Duke which boreon his present surmises. During the preceding Christmas, the Spanishambassador at Paris had met Wharton at a diplomatic dinner given bythe French minister. Flushed with wine, half-jest, half-earnest, thegay Duke interrupted a discussion on the desperation of the Stuartcause, by declaring himself its champion. "My master's interest," criedhe, "has hitherto been mismanaged. Perth and two or three other oldwomen, like Macbeth's witches, have met together under the portal ofSt. Germain's, to prophesy of crowns, and produce halters. But theyare now laid in the red sea! And man and determination are called uponto act. I bring both in my own person, and am ready to run a tilt withGeorge of Hanover, and Robert Walpole to boot, whenever your good kingswill open the field to me!""My dear Louis," continued the Pastor, "here, I doubt not, this zealouschampion has come to collect for his lists; and you would be a secondto gain him a triumph."Louis surprised, turned his eyes on his uncle."Yes, you,--as a promise of your father.""My father Sir! how could I engage for my father? and how could myfather serve the cause you suspect the Duke has at heart?""Your father was the energy of Holland; and, I understand, is thewisdom of Spain. We knew that he was respected by the Spanish nation,and possessed the confidence of its monarch. But I was not aware of theextent of his power in that country, till I learnt it yesterday fromthe Marquis Santa Cruz. He tells me, that since the removal of CardinalAlberoni from the place of prime minister, others may have the title,but your father dictates the measures. Indeed, added the Marquis, inany state he must ever have proved himself a great man; but Spain ishis country; and restored to that, he flourishes like a tree in itsnative soil."Louis knew that his family was originally Spanish. That hisgrandfather, Don Juan de Montemar, Duke of Ripperda, had removed fromSpain in a pique against his sovereign. On further provocation hejoined an insurrection in the Netherlands. The King retaliated, byconfiscating his patrimonial estates in Andalusia, and degrading himfrom the rank of Grandee. Separated for ever from his native country,and loathing its very remembrance, he laid aside his Spanish titlewith disdain, and became a citizen of Groningen. On purchasing largeestates in that province, the States-General gave him the rank ofBaron; and soon after he married the only daughter of the late PrinceCasimir, of Nassau. Her brave father had been killed in battle againstthe Spaniards; and the proud and resentful Ripperda, therefore, gavehis hand to her with particular complacency. A son was the fruit ofthis marriage, who its happy mother named after her uncle and cousin,both so famous for their patriotic virtues; one, the then existingStadtholder of the Netherlands; the other, winning by his valiantdeeds the future distinction of being King of England. Never havingany more children, the illustrious parents lavished every species ofcare upon this; and with a pride, which all the adopted republicanismof the father could not subdue, they saw him grow up with the proofsof his noble ancestry manifested in his spirit; courteous, brave, andambitious. While he was yet a youth, he fought for Holland and forEngland, under the standard of his kinsman the great King William;and particularly distinguished his name at the celebrated siege ofNamur. But the elder Ripperda did not long enjoy his son's fame. Hedied before the young hero returned to Groningen. His mother, whoinherited the intellectual ambition of her princely house, exerted allher persuasions to turn the passion of her son from military gloryto political honours. She effected her purpose; for nature secondedher views. The young Baron was born to be a statesman. There was anextraordinary intuitive intelligence in his mind, that seemed torequire no more than to turn towards a subject, to comprehend it; allits bearings became present to him; and the energy of action followedthe moment in which its utility was perceived. He early became theconfident of statesmen; and as every element takes its level, soonfound his proper sphere, as their adviser; the suggester, and impellingagent of their boldest plans. In fact, he was the spirit of theircouncil, without appearing in its body; for he professed the religionof his father, which was Roman Catholic. His mother's church was thatof her country. And the bigotry of her deceased husband not havingbeen imbibed by her son, she found no difficulty in converting him tothe simplicity of the Hollanders' faith. The only obstacle being thusremoved, the next assembly of the States-General saw him seated amongstthem as representative of the province of Groningen. His civic honourswere quickly succeeded by his mother's death. Two years after thatevent, he married the beautiful daughter of Sir Hedworth Athelstone.But his lot was not to be found in a domestic circle. His youngbaroness died in the first year of his nuptials; and he relinquishedhis only child to the prayers of its maternal grandfather.Thus, separated from every object that might have had a near claimupon his heart, Ripperda gave up his soul to the commonwealth. Hetravelled throughout Europe, to study the characters and politics ofits rulers, in the seats of their governments; and he returned with anextent of information which rendered his judgement on general policy,almost omniscient. His influence too, was not less far-reaching;for he never forgot the gracious courtesies of life, in the sternpursuits of the statesman.--In him was mingled a strange, but imposingunion; the republican independence of a citizen of Holland, withthe chivalric gallantry and feudal grandeur which distinguish thegrandee of Spain.--His house was a palace; his retinue superb; andhis table open every day to the first men in the States, and to allnoble strangers who visited the country. His thoughts, his time, hisfortune, all were dedicated to the Republic:--but he would bestow thatall according to his own humour. Not by a covert, silent, channel; butopenly, bounteously, magnificently; as he thought became him who madethe dedication, and the great people by which it was accepted. Withthis profusion, he was no prodigal. His estates in Groningen and theadjacent provinces, were immense; but they were not his only means. Hisexpansive genius had grasped the various resources of commerce; andthe treasures which poured into him from every point of the compass,rendered his expenditure exhaustless. Thus absorbed in a wide-spreadingvortex of public duties, which seemed by each successive movement toseparate his thoughts still farther from domestic recollections, itis not surprising that he almost ceased to remember he was a father.Indeed the image of his absent son never presented itself, but whenoccasional letters arrived from Mr. Athelstone; and then the thoughtonce or twice occurred to him to have Louis to Holland. The next publicdispatch dissipated the idea; and it never crossed him again, till someother letter recalled the wish--to be as speedily forgotten. Meanwhile,the great events of Europe were operating an unlooked for change in thedestiny of Baron de Ripperda.When Louis the Fourteenth of France died, his descendant Philip theFifth of Spain, felt himself released from a yoke in which there hadbeen more of the despot than of the parent.--And, in consequenceof certain political changes which he immediately proposed, theStates-General found it necessary to confide their affairs at his courtto some man of diplomatic genius, capable of coping with the mysteriouspolicy of Alberoni, and the variety of talent possessed by the foreignministers assembled at Madrid. Their universal suffrage named the Baronde Ripperda, and without demur he undertook the embassy.During a long and complicated negociation at Madrid, he became theobject of general interest and curiosity. His fine person, andexquisitely polished manners, were themes of amazement and admirationwith the Queen and her ladies. Such graces of mien, and eloquence ofdiscourse, could hardly be native or acquired by a Hollander!--But whenit was understood that his father, and all his paternal ancestors wereSpaniards, the enthusiasm of the Queen was excited to re-unite so muchtalent to the service of his original country. His favour with theroyal Isabella was no trifling object of observation with the foreignministers. But the jealousy which his acute penetration, and alertturns in diplomacy might have kept on the alarm, was beguiled of itsvigilance by the suavity of his manners, and his talent of winningtheir confidence, while he gained his object. He knew how to wear histriumphs with discretion; for, content with victory, he never displayedits ensigns. Thus, he noiselessly pursued his diplomatic advantages,and had subdued the whole field, before his adversary even perceivedhis banner on the ground.--The object of his mission being obtained,he returned to Holland. The States-General received him with publictestimonies of satisfaction:--but he found his former sway in theircouncils traversed by a number of new representatives, impatient ofdictation, and jealous of his former supremacy in the state. Though hehad brought in his hand a treaty, that proved his unswerving fidelityto Holland, these turbulent men affected to suspect he might hereafterbe too well inclined to favour a country which had just invited him,with every maternal persuasion, to return to her bosom. Despisingthe juvenile demagogues who presumed to insinuate suspicions againsthis public faith; and indignant at the timidity of his colleagues,in suffering the utterance of such slanderous insults; he boldlydeclared, that the ingratitude of the States-General now determinedhim to re-unite himself to the land of his fathers.--"But," said he,"the unchecked obloquy of these novices, shall not provoke me toforget, when returned to my mother country, that Holland, until thisdisgraceful moment, was my affectionate nurse!"Whilst disposing of his estates in Groningen, and turning the tide ofhis commercial affairs to the coasts of Spain, new revolutions weretaking place in the political theatre of his future action.--Alberoniwas dismissed the kingdom, in consequence of a trifling accident, whichhad the momentous effect of discovering all his long concerted plans tothe eyes of alarmed Europe. A scheme was developed to aggrandize Spainat the expence of all other nations; and had not Philip sacrificed histoo-daring minister to the indignation of the monarchs, he would havefelt their resentment on every side of his kingdom. The cabinet ofMadrid was in tumults; and the King and Queen, doubting to what handthey could safely commit the helm in so dangerous a storm. At thisjuncture, Ripperda returned; and was received with open arms. Besideshis acquaintance with foreign courts, his eminent situation, some yearsbefore, at the congress of Utrecht, by bringing him into diplomaticcontact with the most efficient statesmen of the different nations, hadinformed him so thoroughly of their individual characters, and generalviews for their respective countries, that he found no difficulty inpresenting his now acknowledged sovereigns, with a chart by which theymight navigate the vessel of the State out of the perilous track intowhich the adventurous Alberoni had plunged her.All this was transacted in the private boudoir of Her Majesty. To theinconsiderate part of the world, Ripperda appeared to have strangelyresigned himself to a life of mere amusement; for to the inconsiderate,all is what it seems. His fine person was excuse enough to them, forthe high favour in which he stood with the Queen; for though no lipof slander had ever moved against her honour; all knew, that like theroyal Elizabeth of England, she was fond of the attentions of handsomeand accomplished men.Ripperda purchased a villa near Segovia, and a superb mansion atMadrid. His household establishment and equipages were not lessmagnificent, than when he was one of the merchant princes of Holland;and his table, in like manner was surrounded by the best company ofSpain. The gayer part believed that his evening attendance at theBuen Retiro was to play picquet with the Queen, or chess with HisMajesty; but the graver sort were fully aware that, whoever were theostensible ministers of Philip, Ripperda was the one in fact. Theycould trace to his suggestion, and covert execution, various changes inthe constitution, to consolidate its power and augment its resources.Plans of commerce were devised and put into practice; and manufacturesintroduced at Segovia and Gaudalaxara, which threatened the stapletrade of Great Britain. Considering the immediate instruments ofnational greatness to be wealth, and the power of defending it; heformed a design for rendering Cadiz one of the noblest ports in theworld; and to establish around the coast, docks and arsenals, andevery other means of constructing a formidable navy. This was theinternal policy of Spain, under the secret influence of the Baron deRipperda. With Alberoni's dismission, its external measures also tooka new aspect; and with regard to the disputed accession in England,seemed meditating a change. A few years ago Philip had assisted thechevalier Saint George in his descent on Scotland; but he now resistedall applications to the same effect; and openly professed a growingrespect for the house of Hanover. Notwithstanding similar repulses fromthe French minister, the irrepressible hopes of James Stuart were kepton the alert by repeated assurances from his partizans in England;that a schism in the parliament had aroused corresponding jealousiesamongst the people, which were daily expected to break out into aninsurrection, not likely to be quelled by a king and an heir-apparentavowedly hostile to each other."At so critical a juncture, as the cabinet of St. Germain's supposedthis to be;" observed the Pastor, "it is not surprising that DukeWharton should grasp at any means of averting the absolute secessionof Spain from his master's cause. He is aware of the Baron deRipperda's power with King Philip: and by seeking to involve the son ina project for a second rebellion, he hopes to engage the father's prideor his fears, in the same adventure."The mind of Louis was powerfully excited during a discourse whichembraced so many topics; and all connected with himself, by means ofa father, who he knew by fame only; but such a fame as filled his sonwith an admiration, only to be equalled by the emulation which brokeat once over his heart. While listening to the enumeration of hisfather's patriotic acts for Holland and for Spain; he contemned theairy pretensions of every brilliant, but inferior aim to celebrity: allbut substantial worthiness vanished before him, like the bursting oflight upon darkness. He had heard of his father; but now he seemed tofeel his presence: and he sat with his hands clasped, absorbed in theimmensity of the subject.Mr. Athelstone observed the workings of his countenance; the flashingbrightness of his complexion, as his thoughts darted from Lindisfarneto Holland, and from Holland to Spain. He had not heard his uncle'slast observation with regard to Wharton's views on his father andhimself. Mr. Athelstone understood the abstraction of his mind. He wastoo well read in the human character not to guess what was passingthere. He gazed on him a few minutes in silence; contemplating with theanxiety of parental affection what might be the issue of the passion hesaw was then conceived in that ingenuous and ardent soul."But it must not be for treason!" cried he to himself, and gentlyshaking the arm of his nephew, he repeated his last remark on theDuke. He perceived by the start Louis gave, in recalling his divergedfaculties, that he was now attended to; and for a while he pursuedthe subject with other observations. At the conclusion, he added ina solemn voice, "you know, my child, I require no reply to this headof my discourse. But I beseech you, weigh well the true nature ofthings before you act. In no case allow imagination to mislead you.To be on the suffering side of a contest, is generally sufficient, inthe judgment of generous youth, to make it the just one. And it isa beneficent disposition of nature, to prompt man to the immediatesuccour of distress. Oh, that our judges would consider this, in causesof rebellion, before they condemn the young enthusiast, who would asreadily raise his arm for exiled Brunswick, as for banished Stuart! Itis the circumstance that draws the sword of unreflecting youth; thoughtand principle unsheath that of age; and their trial and sentence shouldbe accordingly. But let not such reflections be your apology, Louis!Another time I will give you the experience of my seventy years, by afull explanation of why England changed the nature of her ruler; andthen if you err," added he with a melancholy smile, "it will be againstknowledge, and not even my partial indulgence can excuse you."He rose as he spoke, and pressing the hand on which his nephew wasthoughtfully leaning his head, the worthy Pastor left him to meditateon what had passed.CHAP. VII.Mrs. Coningsby found the Marquis and his son seated amongst somepine-clad rocks on the southern side of the Parsonage. She made anapology for the length of her absence, and the continuation of Mr.Athelstone's, by relating to his Lordship much of what her nephew hadcommunicated.Meanwhile, Cornelia and her sister had joined Ferdinand, and sat withhim in a recess of the cliff which fronted the sea. Its genial airs,warm from the south, suggested the more balmy ones of Italy and Spain,to the imagination of Alice, and she soon saw all vestiges of gloompass from the brow of the young Spaniard, as with encreasing animationhe answered her various questions on the subject of his travels andof his country. Cornelia enquired about the remains of ancient Rome,the eruptions of Vesuvius, and who, amongst the celebrated livingcharacters of Italy and France, he personally knew. Alice paid littleattention to his replies on these subjects, but made him describe thegardens of Naples, and the luxuriant landscapes which double theirbeauties in the translucent waters of its bay. She then talked ofthe orange groves of his own country; and asked whether it were truethe Spanish ladies reposed every day after dinner by the sides offountains, under the shade of these delicious arbours. He listened toher questions with delight. It was the ingenuous curiosity of fifteen,seeking information with the confidence of innocence; and he answeredher with a minuteness, that shewed his pleasure in dwelling on themescongenial to her taste.Cornelia perceived that the share she wished to take in the discourse,was almost wholly disregarded; but pleased to see their guest restoredto good humour, and Alice interested in such improving conversation;she cheerfully moved towards her mother and the Marquis, and soonbecame wholly absorbed in their discussions.The dinner-hour of the Parsonage once more assembled its family andguests around the social board. Peace had resumed her sway in everybreast. The voice of unconscious tenderness had soothed the jealousirritability of Ferdinand, and his smiles diffused a complacency overthe seriousness of his father, that harmonized with the beneficentserenity of their host. Mrs. Coningsby discoursed with the energy of animagination whose first fires still glowed in their embers. The equableCornelia looked around with satisfaction on the general cheerfulness,while Alice, whatever might be her volatile changes of place, alwaysfound herself settle by the side of the entertaining Spaniard. Gay asjoy itself, and vibrating in every nerve the happiness she bestowed,she sported, like the young halcyon on waves of sunshine.Louis was not less animated. His heart no longer upbraided him; and inhis own element of blameless enjoyment, with unchecked delight his eyesfollowed the movements of Alice, as Ferdinand instructed her emulouscuriosity in the native dances of his country. The young Spaniardseemed to have passed through the cave of Trophonius, so completelywas he transformed from the reserved, frigid being of the morning.His late sallow complexion now flashed with the tints of health, andthe vivacity of his conversation almost obliterated from Cornelia'sremembrance the moody wretch who had rushed from her presence only afew hours before. Alice hovered round him, like one of the zephyrswhich fanned their evening festivity; and at her desire he took hermother's lute, and played and sung to it several Spanish ditties. Hereclined on a low sofa, beneath the open ivied-window, through whoseGothic interlacing the breeze entered, with the soft light of thestars. The tender melancholy of the airs shed a similar influence onthe spirits of the youthful party; and while they listened with pensivedelight to the last stanza of a plaintive seguedilla, the church clockstruck twelve.From the distant quarter of the room where Mrs. Coningsby sat with heruncle and the Marquis, she had observed the amusements on the oppositeside. On hearing the hour strike, she rose from her chair, and tellingthe young people, it was not merely the witching time of night, butthat the sabbath morning was begun; she broke up their revels, anddismissed them to their pillows.Cornelia alone found uninterrupted slumber; Ferdinand did not sleepthat night; Alice wondered why she did not close her eyes; and Louislay meditating on the last four-and-twenty hours, till day dawned, andwearied nature sank into repose.The morning brought him a letter before he had quitted his bed. Itsseal was Wharton's manche and ducal coronet. Louis held it sometime unopened in his hand. What new contention might it demand of him?Was it to upbraid him for his flight? or was it an apology from theDuke for his attempt to detain him? Whatever were its errand, the sightof the letter recalled to him all the fascinations of its writer; andwith trepidation he broke the seal. His heart clung to every line,while that of the volatile writer seemed winged, and lightly skimmingthe surface he professed to dwell on. The latter ran thus,"Et hi Brute! was a mighty dextrous Parthian bolt, but it whistledaway, I know not whither. Would Csar have been so bad a marksman, asnot to have distinguished his own Anthony from the wretch who playedthe brute part in the capitol? Why, de Montemar you are as much likethe lantern-jawed Cassius, as I to that nose-led Stoic! You are tooprofound in canonization not to have read of a certain saint, no matterhis name, who, with a pair of convenient red-hot pincers, clutched thedevil by his feature of honour, and so dragged him roaring round theworld. Cassius was no saint, whatever he might be of a conjuror; butI never hear your king-killing demagogues vaunting of their princeof patriots, without seeing the pincers at his nose. So, prithee, mydainty Csar, no more misnomers if you would not have me requite you inkind!"And so, you even took the flood! I would not for happier hours, thaneven those your stubbornness wrested from me, I would not have lostthat proof of your substance. You know I am a being of vapour!People who say so, must not wonder that I should be glad to play theatmosphere round something worth my while. Louis! had you not believedthem, would you have fled me like a pestilence?"Being of a gentle nature, as full of ruth as perhaps I ought to be ofruefulness, I will not bristle the grey locks of your venerable unclethis Saturday night, by likening him to any old woman on earth or inheaven. But I have a shrewd guess, that like the good lady Calphurnia,he pretends to dream; and on the evidence of such whimsies will reportyou my orisons!----Pulchra Laverna,Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri.--Oh, wizards, how little do you know the mettle of Philip Wharton!--Inthe face of day, and of these darkling augurs, I avow that it is myobject to make you my own! My true spirit, wearied with the tricks ofmen, and their sordid chemistry,Delights to quaff the yet untasted spring,And pluck the virgin flower!"Is there a cloak over this dagger, my panic-struck Csar?"However, that there may be no more alarms in. Saint Cuthbert'ssanctuary, tell the holy man I have met Romulus's fate. If you lookfor me to-night it must be amongst the stars; for, after this isdispatched, neither Bamborough nor England, will hold your faithful."Bamborough Castle, Saturday night.""Gone!" cried Louis, pressing the letter between his folded hands,"neither Bamborough nor England now holds its noble writer!" He turnedtowards the window, which commanded a view of the sea. The distantwaves were sparkling beneath the beams of the morning sun: "beyondthose he is sailing away, far from dark suspicion, and ungrateful deMontemar.--Ah, if he, indeed, knew I had so readily imbibed my uncle'sbelief, that he is deceitful, and seeking to betray me in the dearestinterests of man!--would he thus subscribe himself my Faithful?--Doeshe not, by that single word, avow his trust in my honour, and his owndisinterested attachment to me?"Again he read the letter; it contained nothing which he might notshew to Mr. Athelstone. There was not a word in it, excepting thedeclaration of reciprocal fidelity in that of the signature, whichimplied a confidence; or even hinted at the preservation of his secret;and this implicit trust still more affected Louis.--"Noble Wharton!"cried he, "this is Alexander drinking the suspected bowl!--and youshall find that I am faithful."He sprang out of bed, and hastily dressed himself. But just as he washurrying out of the door with the letter in his hand, he paused.--"Whyshould I be thus eager to put myself into purgatory?"--He returnedinto the room.--"My dear, good, but precise uncle," continued he,"cannot understand this man! He will find an argument to blame all thatI admire in this open, daring spirit. But at least, he must acknowledgethat here he is no hypocritical designer! I will shew it to him."Louis continued to fluctuate amidst a variety of reflections andresolutions, till the bell for family morning prayers roused him fromhis indecisive meditations; and putting the letter in his breast, hedescended to the library.When the duty was done, and he arose from his knees, he found the youngSpaniard by his side; and rising from the same posture, which he hadtaken between him and Alice. Louis looked surprised: Ferdinand smiled;and without waiting to be questioned, said, that the preceding night hehad enquired of Miss Coningsby what was meant by the vesper and matinbell, which rang after he and his father had withdrawn to rest, andbefore they appeared in the morning. She was so good as to explain itto him; and he had thus taken the liberty to join the family devotion.While the domestics were making their reverential bows to the Pastor asthey retired, Mrs. Coningsby observed her young guest. She expressedher pleasure at meeting him in so sacred an hour; "but you are not ofthe church of Calvin or of Luther?" asked she."No," replied he, "but I am of the church of their master. And that, Itrust, does not exclude me from yours!""That plea will open the gates of Heaven to you!" cried the Pastorwith a benign smile, as he passed from the reading-desk into thebreakfast-room.It was some time before the Marquis came from his chamber; but when hedid join the morning group, being ignorant of his son having mingledin what he would have deemed an heretical rite, he contemplated thatson's renovated appearance with comfort unalloyed. He could not accountto himself how such a change from weakness to activity; from despairingmelancholy to gay cheerfulness; could have been wrought in the shortspace of two days; unless he might attribute it to the influence of theSaint, before whose defaced shrine he had knelt the preceding day, whenhe wandered alone to the solitary abbey. While he sat absorbed in thesethoughts, Mrs. Coningsby mentioned to the younger part of the circlewhat had been discussed the evening before between herself and Mr.Athelstone.As the season approached when she and her family usually emigrated toMorewick-hall, she now proposed going earlier; and that the Marquis andhis son, accompanied by her nephew, should make a tour with herself andher daughters to the interesting scenery in the neighbourhood. "Youwill find the Hall more befitting your reception than this lonelyrock," continued she, addressing the Marquis; "but Lindisfarne is myuncle's Patmos; and when here, he loves to live like a hermit in hiscell.""Rather," returned Ferdinand, with an answering smile: "like theprivileged saint, emparadised with angels!"Louis guessed that one view in this scheme, was to take him out of theway of the Duke; and with something between a sigh and a smile, inthinking the precaution was no longer necessary; he warmly secondedhis aunt's proposal. The eyes of Alice and of Ferdinand met in pleasedsympathy. And Cornelia, addressing the Marquis, soon awakened aninterest, in him, he did not expect to find in the projected excursion.She talked to him of Alnwick, of its chivalrous trophies; and of thestone chair of Hotspur, which still overlooks its battlements. Shethen passed to the Castle of Warkworth: and spoke of the anchorite'schapel, dug in the heart of its rock. As she discoursed of the hero ofHalidown; and narrated the sorrows of his friend, the devout penitentof the hermitage, her share of the Percy blood glowed on her cheekand in her language: and the Marquis, aroused to all his military andreligious enthusiasm, often grasped the cross of his sword, and mingleda prayer with the aspirations of a soldier.Meanwhile Alice enumerated to Ferdinand, the charming variety of theirwalks at Morewick; particularly along the meandering banks of theCoquet, and in view of the very hermitage Cornelia was describing tohis father. Ferdinand accepted with delight her promise of conductinghim to the cell by her own favourite path; over a little rustic bridgethat joined the Morewick-grounds to an old romantic mill, which stoodon an island embowered in trees, and dashed the foaming waters of itswheels through the pendant branches which swept the surface of thewater. A boat, paddled by the miller's son, would convey them, underas deep a shade, to the opposite shore; and then, by a winding walk,traced in the wild wooded scenery by the hand of the hermit himself,she would lead him over the rocky heights to the cell; where for sixtyyears the mourning lover of murdered beauty had fed upon his tears dayand night! "I know the pleasure with which Louis will accompany us;"added she, "and if it be moon-light he will like it better, for heoften tells me, the garish hour of sunshine is no time for visiting thehermitage of Warkworth."Louis did not hear what was passing, for he had chosen the opportunityof his uncle's guests being engaged in conversation with his cousins,to inform Mr. Athelstone that Duke Wharton had left Bamborough. Whenthe good old man had read the Duke's letter, he pressed his nephew'shand as he returned it, and said with a playful smile, "It is well, andwe will not grudge him his apotheosis!"The remainder of the sabbath passed in the Pastor's family, as becamethe purity of its master's faith, and the simplicity of his manners. Atthe usual hours for the public celebration of divine worship, he andhis little household, all excepting his Roman Catholic guests, repairedto the parish church.Towards the close of the afternoon service, (while the Marquis hadagain absented himself, and was retired to the interior ruins of theabbey;) Ferdinand placed himself at the window of his bed-chamber,which commanded a view of the church-path, to watch the re-appearanceof the only saint which now engaged his idolatry. With whatpleasureable curiosity, excited by his sentiments for Alice, which gavehim an interest in all that concerned her, did he see the massy oakendoors unfold from under the low Saxon arch, and the island train issueforth in their clean but coarse Sunday attire! Four generations in onefamily, first met his eye. A hale old fisherman, with grizzled locksand a ruddy though weather-ploughed cheek, supported on his sinewy armthe decent steps of his dame; who, dressed in a camlet gown of her ownspinning and a linen apron and cap of spotless white, looked smilinglybehind on the group that closely followed:--Her athletic son, and hiscomely wife; each restraining the capering steps of a chubby boy andgirl, as they led them forth from the house of God. The aged patriarchof the race, his head whitened by the winters of nearly a century,closed the procession; leaning one hand on a staff, and the otheron the arm of his youngest grandchild; a pretty young woman, whosedown-cast eyes shewed how cautiously she was guiding the faulteringsteps of her venerable grand sire.--Of such simple and sincereworshippers was the congregation of Lindisfarne; and as Ferdinandobserved their composed and happy countenances, he felt that their'smust be the religion of peace."Yes;" cried he, "where innocence dwells, there must be genuine piety.Nothing is there to impede the free communion between earth and heaven.The blameless spirit does not fear to lift up its eyes in the presenceof its Creator: it is still clothed in the brightness of His beams. Butthe guilty wretch--polluted--bereft!--Oh, what can hide his nakednessfrom the Omniscient eye?--Not the unction of man.--I have had enough ofthat.--What breath of mortal absolution can still this raging fire!" Hesmote his breast as he spoke, and tore himself from the window.Mrs. Coningsby and her daughters had prepared tea in the drawing-rooma long time before the different members of her little circle drewtheir chairs around it. The Pastor was paying his customary sabbathvisitations to the infirm from age, sickness, or sorrow. Ferdinand wasyet in his chamber; struggling with an agony of soul, more grievousthan penance that priest ever inflicted. And Louis, having accompaniedhis uncle to the door of one of the fisher's huts, instead of returninghome, walked on unconsciously, till he found himself in the cemetery ofthe old monastery, and saw the Marquis approaching him from the westernaisle.Supposing his Lordship had come there, merely as an admirer ofantiquity, Louis did not hesitate to join him; and entering intoconversation on this idea, he began to point out the most perfectspecimens of its ancient architecture; and to name the periods ofBritish history which they commemorated, as the times of the abbey'serection, enlargement, or repairing. As he was master of his subject;and spoke of its early founders, Oswald and Aidan, with not merelyhistorical accuracy, but reverence for their holy zeal; Santa Cruzpressed the hand of his young companion; and attended with questioningcomplacency, till he almost forgot he was not listening to a goodCatholic. He could not comprehend how a disciple of heresy, could havemore toleration for the professors of the Roman creed, than he had forheretical infidelity; and therefore, with a hope that the CatholicFaith, which Baron de Ripperda had abjured, was latent in his son,the Marquis willingly gave way to the predilection he had conceivedfor him; and strolled with him over the whole ruin. After having beenascertained of the place where rested the mortal part of the exemplarySaint Aidan; he again bowed to the vacant spot, at the right side ofthe high altar, which had once contained the stone shrine of the holyCuthbert.--Louis conducted him to a cell, now choaked with docks andnettles, which had once been the penitentiary of a King. Near thishalf-buried vault, lay several flat crosiered tomb-stones of differentdates; and amongst them were two mitred brothers of the Barons ofAthelstone and of Bamborough."You are nobly descended, Mr. de Montemar!" observed the Marquis; "Byyour mother's side from these powerful Northumbrian Barons.--By yourfather's, from the princely house of Nassau, and the more illustriousRipperda of Andalusia. These were all faithful sons of the cross!--butnow that their posterity have embraced the schisms of infidelity--oh,my ingenuous young friend, are you not at this moment ready to exclaim,How am I fallen!""No, my Lord," returned Louis, "I have too British a spirit, toregret the feudal power which was founded on the vassalage of myfellow-creatures,--and though my father may have forfeited all claimto the restitution of his paternal rights in Spain, by having become aproselyte to the religion in which I have been educated; I cannot deemany depression of rank a debasement, which is incurred in so sacred acause."Santa Cruz drew his arm from his companion. Such adherence toprinciple, had it been on his side of the argument, would have filledthe Marquis with admiration; but in the present case, it gave hisgrowing partiality for the son of Ripperda, so severe a shock, that hesunk into stern silence and turned out of the abbey. Not a word wasspoken during their walk homeward. And when they entered the Parsonage,the Marquis bowed coldly to the Pastor; while, with a similar air ofreserve, he accepted the seat presented to him by the side of Mrs.Coningsby.The whole party were now assembled; but an embarrassing gravitypervaded them all. None knew exactly how to explain it; but it arose,rather from the several individuals thinking too intensely of eachother, than from indifference to each other's society. Louis alone hadstraying thoughts; and they were wandering far and wide:--sometimeswith his noble friend, throwing himself in loyal gallantry at the feetof a dethroned Queen and her Son. Then the image of his father, and ofSpain, would occupy his mind. He seemed to be present with him in thatcountry; where, though denied the honours of his race, the fame of hisservices proclaimed that he did more than possess them--he deservedthem!--"I am not fallen;" said Louis to himself; "when sprung fromsuch a father! What is there in mere title or station, to render a mantruly great?--It is action, that makes the post, that of honour, ordisgrace.--And, God of my fathers! give me but the opportunity to servemy country; and no man shall say the name of Ripperda has suffereddegradation!"Louis started from his chair, in the fulness of his emotion, andhastily crossed the room. He chanced to take the direction to a recessbetween the book-case and the porcelain cabinet."You are right to remind Cornelia of her duty," cried the Pastor, "openthe door; and she will then recollect, that nearly an hour has elapsedsince she ought to have given us our Sunday's evening anthem."Louis immediately threw open a pair of small folding-doors, anddiscovered an organ, with the oratorios of Handel on its music-stand.Cornelia did not require a second reminder.--She took her seat beforethe instrument; and with tones that might--"Create a soul under the ribs of death,"sang the divine strains of "I know that my Redeemer liveth."As the pealing organ swelled the note of praise, the Marquis almostimagined himself in his own oratory; and that he heard the seraphicvoice of his daughter Marcella, chaunting her evening hymn to theVirgin. Tears Filled the father's eyes; he drew near the instrument;and crossing his arms over his breast, with the silent responses ofthe heart, he re-echoed every word and every note of the holy song.When Cornelia struck its last triumphant chords, and was rising fromher seat, he entreated her to prolong strains so well suited to thevesper-hour, and the feelings with which he listened.Mr. Athelstone joined in the request; remarking, that as he loveda peculiar consecration of the instruments of worship, he neverpermitted this organ to be opened but on the seventh-day, or other holyfestivals; and, that when it was once touched by his Saint Cecilia,his greatest pleasure was to hear its sounds, till the hour of nightclosed them in prayer. Cornelia re-commenced, with the overture of theMessiah; and the evening ended in unison with the piety of her uncleand his guest: in hymns to the great Author of universal harmony.CHAP. VIII.The morning of the 1st of October, if it were piercing as a flight ofarrows, was as dazzling too; for the clearness of the atmosphere gavean unusual splendour to every object: and the larks that carrolled highin the heavens, seemed exulting in the brilliancy of their course. Theexhilarating property of the air had its effect upon the party from theParsonage; who gaily stepped into the boat that was to convey them to acreek on the opposite shore, a little below Bamborough. To touch at thecastle was out of the question; for no second flag of amnesty had yetpassed between the angry baronet and his quietly expectant nephew.On landing, they found horses which the Pastor had sent forward atdawn; and mounting, in full confidence of the animals being accustomedto the rough roads in prospect, the happy groupe commenced the day'sexcursion. Nearly a week's sojourn in the island had blunted most ofthe Marquis's prejudices against the amiable followers of Luther whomhe found there; and the familiar companionship of minds not essentiallydiscordant, had mingled them all into an intimacy almost amounting tofriendship.They proceeded along the classic banks of the Tweed, and the romanticborders of the Till, to the distant towers of royal Norham. Much foodwas there, for memory and meditation. The friends wandered for severalhours amongst its legendary ruins; and then pursued the debateablestream to Flodden Field. They found another train of thought on thatsolitary track. Two centuries before, it had borne the bannered host oftwo brother nations; and now lay a desert, as if curst by the kindredblood then spilt upon its soil.Having treated the Marquis with a rustic dinner at a farm-house inthe pretty village of Branxton, which stands a little to the north ofthe memorable field, Mrs. Coningsby and her highly-gratified partyre-embarked at the mouth of the Tweed. Before them lay a magnificentsetting sun. As the little bark tracked its way through a floodof molten gold, Ferdinand leaned behind the bench that supportedAlice, and in a soft under-tone pursued the subjects which seemedmost congenial to her youthful taste. Cornelia reclined near them,contemplating the receding shore, but listening to the Marquis; whosat between Louis and her mother, comparing with them the strangecoincidence in the fates of James the Fourth of Scotland, Sebastian ofPortugal, and Roderick of Spain; all of whose deaths were as doubtful,as their disappearance was certain, in the fields of battle where eachlost his crown and existence to the world.In these discourses time passed lightly, till the breeze wafted them,under the rising moon, into the sheltered cove of Lindisfarne.On entering the Parsonage, Mr. Athelstone presented a packet tothe Marquis; and its contents put to flight all their ready plansfor future rambles. It had been forwarded through Holland by BaronHeinsius, and contained dispatches from Spain. They conveyed the royalPhilip's orders to the Marquis Santa Cruz, to repair immediately toMadrid; where he was required to take his seat in the council on anaffair of importance.Ferdinand turned pale at this intelligence."Oh, that your Lordship would take me with you!" exclaimed Louis,impetuously. Mr. Athelstone interrupted him with a look. "Pardon me,Sir," cried he, "but my father,--am I never to see my father?" "Whenhe wishes to see you. But you must not break upon his presence."Louis said no more, but bowing to his uncle, with his heart full,hurried out of the room. The Marquis looked after him in silence.Ferdinand had turned his despairing eyes on Alice, and saw her headbent on her bosom, with tears trickling down her cheeks. Those tearsacted on his soul like dew on the parched earth, and, unconscious ofthe intention, he found himself at her side; he had taken her hand, hehad murmured some indistinct sounds in her ear; but they suffused herface with blushes, and confused and agitated she withdrew her hand,and glided out of sight to a seat behind the window curtain. Ferdinandfollowed her with his eyes; but while he exultingly felt that her pureimage possessed him wholly, he shrunk from the recollection of howunworthy his transgressions had made him of aspiring to the possessionof so spotless a being. Nay, were it possible that penitence couldso wash his stains away, as to restore him to the self-respectwhich is indispensible to the manly character, and above all to theconsciousness of him who takes upon himself to be the protector and thehappiness of a virtuous woman; was he not aware that even this blessedregeneration could not avail him here? He well knew that his father'sbigotry would sooner see him die than allow him to perish, soul andbody; which he would suppose must be the consequence, should he permithim to marry a daughter of the church of England. To acknowledgehis sentiments for Alice to the Marquis, was only to call down hismalediction on their object. And, under these circumstances, to revealmore of them to herself, than his surprised heart had already betrayed,seemed to him a base sacrifice to his own immediate gratification,at the expence of his honour and her future comfort. He was not soillread in female character as to be ignorant that he had made animpression on the heart of this artless child of nature. No one presentappeared to suspect what was passing in the bosoms of either. Could hethen, knowing that the bar was insuperable between him and her, couldhe act the double treachery of fastening affections, that must behopeless, upon him; and make so ungrateful a return to the hospitalityof her uncle and her mother, as to devote the youth of their belovedchild to tears and disappointment? "No," said he to himself, "I willnot load my already burdened soul with the guilt of rendering herunhappy; of having come hither on a demon's errand, to lay waste allthat paradise of smiles! I deserve to go hence, as I came, a lonely,unregretted wretch."While these thoughts were occupying the mind of Ferdinand, the Marquiswas explaining to Mr. Athelstone that he must abide by the letter ofhis sovereign's commands; and not only relinquish the pleasure hehad anticipated in visiting Morewick-hall, but take his leave even ofthe island, the following day. Finding this decision was not to bequestioned, Mrs. Coningsby withdrew to give some necessary orders forher guest's early departure; and Alice, taking the opportunity of theopened door, hastily quitted the room. Cornelia having expressed hersincere regret to Ferdinand, that they must lose his father and himselfso soon, in a few minutes followed her mother.The gracious spell of tranquil enjoyment which an hour before hadencircled them all, was now broken. Mrs. Coningsby hurried from placeto place in hospitable bustle, ordering all kinds of travellingcomforts to be put up for the service of their departing friends. TheMarquis and the Pastor sat till a late hour, conversing in the library;but the young people continued dispersed, rather as if some cause ofdiscord had fallen amongst them, than an order to separate hearts sowell inclined to join. Once Alice had summoned courage to descend tothe drawing-room, but on entering, she saw no one there but Ferdinand,who was resting his head upon her harpsichord; and hastily retreating,she did not come down again till summoned to supper.The ensuing morning's meal was passed, like that of the precedingevening, by the younger part of the group almost in silence. But whenbreakfast was over Louis drew a letter from his pocket, and presentingit open to Mr. Athelstone, told him he had written that to his father,and he hoped the Marquis would have the goodness to take charge of itto Madrid. Santa Cruz bowed his acquiescence, and the Pastor perusedthe letter. As he ran his eye over its contents, he could not butadmire the generous submission which had with-held the writer from evenhinting the wish which so thoroughly possessed him. "You have writtenlike an affectionate son," said the Pastor, as he returned the letter,"but you have not dropped one word of what is so much at your heart.Why do you not ask your father's permission to pay your personal dutyto him?""And you give me yours, dearest Sir, to express that wish?""Certainly; and when the Baron's leisure will allow him to preside overhis son's introduction to this perilous world, then, I doubt not, hewill grant your petition, and I must resign you."Louis gladly retired, to add, as a postscript to his letter, whathe had found so much difficulty in preventing himself from makingits primary subject. The ladies had already withdrawn; and Ferdinandseeing their waiving gowns through the distant shrubbery in the garden,believed that without any breach of his resolution, he might once morecool his feverish pulse with the breeze at their side; and for thelast time sooth his disturbed soul by feeling himself near Alice, andlistening to her tender accents.The wish was no sooner formed than he was in their path. Mrs. Coningsbywas not there. Cornelia was calmly gathering flowers to replenish herbeau-pots, and Alice was walking pensively towards the wicket thatopened to the hill. Ferdinand followed her, and with a bound of joy hecould not conceal from his better reason, saw her open the little gateand pass through. A few sheep were cropping the grass on the pasture,and her favorite lamb frolicked before her. She did not notice it, butturned to the base of the hill. Ferdinand heard her draw a deep sigh,as she seemed to think herself removed from observation, and, in anagitated voice, she ejaculated his name. He required no more to be ather side,--at her feet. What he said he hardly knew, but he felt allhis high resolves vanish, and that words failed under the impetuousdeclaration of his heart. Surprized at so unthought-of a disclosure;and alarmed at a language and vehemence she had never known before,Alice would have fled; but he detained her with her hands clasped inhis: and while he wept upon them in the wild emotions of his soul, hertears flowed also; and he wrought her to confess that she had retiredalone, to weep at his departure.Ferdinand forgot all the wretched past, in the transport of thatmoment; and amidst the burning blushes of a timidity that trembled atevery word she uttered, he drew from the guileless Alice all the secretof her heart. His dominant passion had again seized the rein; andclasping her hands to his breast, he ardently implored her to pledgehim her faith before the Supreme of Heaven,--That, however long mightbe his absence, she would never be persuaded to become the wife of anyother man. Then growing in his demands on the tender girl, he conjuredher to promise not to continue that "exquisite softness of manner, toMr. de Montemar, the sight of which had already more than half maddenedhim."--With a glance, which shone like a shooting star over the dewynight, she gave him the solemn pledge he asked; and she smiled, whenshe made a promise she deemed so unnecessary. But both engagementswere hardly pronounced by her ingenuous lips, before his ungovernableselfishness smote upon the conscience of her lover."Alice," cried he, "I am unworthy of your angelic nature. I know I donot deserve that you should even look upon me. But I cannot bid youretract your vow. It is that alone which saves me from despair:--Itis that alone which can support me in life, till we meet again.--Oh,Alice, you saw the wretch that came to this island, at war withhimself, and sinking fast to an untimely grave!--You recalled me toexistence!--You re-generated, and healed my broken heart!--But myfather, should he know I love you, he would separate us for ever."Alice raised her eyes, drowned as they were in tears, and looked on himaghast. "Is his rank so very great?""That is not my fear," returned Ferdinand, "his rank is not higherthan your own illustrious blood. But he is so rigid a Catholic; I toowell know he would rather see his whole race extinct, than one of themmarried to a Protestant."Poor Alice was now seized with a violent trembling, and turning deadlypale, leaned for support against a tree. Ferdinand pressed her coldhand. "But I am no bigot, my beloved Alice; and there is a circumstanceconnected with my family, which may have power to influence a happierfate. It shall be tried; and it is of such importance, I hardly doubtits success." She revived at this assurance, and, with deepenedtenderness, he resumed."Meanwhile, as we hope to be blessed hereafter in an union asindissoluble as our love; forbear to disclose what has now passedbetween us, to any of your own family. They would communicate it tomy father; and the consequence I seek to avert, must then inevitablyfollow: an eternal separation."The arguments of love, and the pleadings of despair, at last prevailedupon her to make this promise also. Her head was in a whirl ofdistracting thought. She had never known such distress as overwhelmedher, when, in making this second vow, she felt as if she had at oncerelinquished her claims on the affection of her nearest relations; andsaw the being, for whose sake she had made this boundless sacrifice, onthe point of leaving her for an unlimited time, perhaps for ever!Ferdinand beheld the agony of her soul, and too well guessed herapprehensions. Now he felt the mischief he had wrought; now he sawthe ruin he had begun in that so lately happy bosom. He had not onlyawakened a passion there, to feed upon her heart; but he had introducedthe scorpions of an accusing conscience, where only a few momentsbefore all was innocence and peace. "Wretch that I am!" cried he tohimself; "to repay the blessing of thy tenderness with all this evil!"But striving to sooth and to cheer her, he vowed to see her at allevents early in the spring; and at the feet of her mother and heruncle, implore their pardon, and consent to an eternal union. When shebecame a little composed, he besought a ringlet of her hair to consolehim in his lonely absence; and having pressed the trembling hand thatbestowed it, to his heart and his lips, he allowed her to break fromthe clinging arms that vainly tried to withhold her. She rushedthrough the garden into the house; and locking herself within her ownroom, gave way to the anguish of her soul.Ferdinand turned towards a remote winding of the cliffs, fuller ofself-arraignment than of satisfaction; yet though he detested theselfishness of his recent conduct, the headlong impulse he had yieldedto his passion was too strong to allow him to make the only restitutionnow in his power:--to release her from both her vows.At noon the boat was announced that was to bear the travellers tothe carriage on the mainland, which was to convey them to the placeof embarkation for Spain. In the hurrying moments of departure, theabsence of Alice was remarked by none but the heart of Ferdinand; andit yearned towards the sensibility which prevented her sharing theselast adieus. He touched the cheeks of her mother and sister with anemotion they did not expect. He hastily embraced Louis; and puttingthe hand of the Pastor reverentially to his lips, hurried down therocks to the beach.The Marquis's farewell was more composed; but as he crossed the sandsto the boat, he stopped, and gathering up a few of the entrochi, (hehad heard called Saint Cuthbert's beads,) he bent his head to the greytowers of the monastery, and turning towards Mr. Athelstone, said witha smile, "these shall be my rosary, in grateful remembrance of thisholy isle!"The venerable Pastor answered him with a benediction. He saw the fatherand son embark; and stood with his silvered head bare to the wind, ashe waived his handkerchief to the diminishing vessel; and breathed aprayer for the safety of its freight, in every movement of his upliftedhands.If Louis ever felt a touch of envy, it was at the moment when thedistant sail disappeared from the horizon; and as he slowly followedthe homeward step of his uncle, he sighed to himself; "they will soonsee my father!--They will understand all his glorious plans for theservice of his restored country!--They will witness his honours!--WhileI----down, my rebellious, my ungrateful spirit!"CHAP. IX.The remainder of the autumn was passed in Lindisfarne by the differentmembers of the Pastor's family, with no change in the tranquil routineof their occupations, and little apparent alteration in themselves.Sir Anthony had made ample apologies to his nephew, and concessions tohis uncle, to justify a renewed reconciliation. He pleaded surprise andinfatuation; and as the eccentric planet, whose influence created both,had some time reached its perihelium; it was hoped the attraction wouldbe too powerful to allow of its return. Mr. Athelstone, therefore,permitted his nephew to visit as usual at the castle, till the closingin of winter rendered the shores dangerous, and commanded theemigration of his family to the more sheltered regions of Morewick-hall.Louis's elastic mind, like the principle of life shooting into everyfaculty of vigorous manhood, recovered all its spring; and allowinghimself to think no more of his father nor of Duke Wharton, than whatwas sufficient to keep his emulation in active career to attain thepatriotic talents of the one, and the disinterested enthusiam of theother; he devoted himself, heart and soul, to the perfect acquirementof every branch of study which could possibly promote the great endsof his ambition. Accustomed to labour, the buoyancy of his spiritnever admitted the touch of fatigue. Bodily exertion could not wearyhis practised limbs; nor diversity of mental pursuits, distract noroverstrain his faculties. In the full power of health, and of a mindwhich care had never traversed, all things were easy to him. One hourhe was absorbed in mathematics, history, or languages; and the nextsaw him in the chace, with his gun on the moor, or bounding along theicicled heights of Morewick, by the side of Cornelia.Alice alone had exhibited a change in her person and manners sincethe visit of the noble Spaniards. She, who used to be the mostconstant companion of her cousin, now hardly ever joined him in hisrambles; and always refused to be his partner in the evening dances,which usually diversified the amusements of the hall, when any ofthe neighbouring families made a part of its winter fire-side. Herspirits and her bloom were gone; and Mrs. Coningsby at length becameso alarmed, that she seriously talked with the Pastor about takingher in the spring to some milder climate. Louis was not insensibleto the alteration in his cousin. But those anxious attentions which,in any former indisposition, she had always received from him withgrateful affection, were now, not merely avoided, but repelled withevident dislike. At first he attributed this strange conduct, to someunintentional offence on his part; and he tenderly asked her if it wereso. She burst into tears as she hurryingly replied in the negative,and left the room. On mentioning the circumstance to Mrs. Coningsby,it only confirmed her opinion of her daughter's illness being a latentconsumption; and that her present distaste to what before gave herpleasure, was a symptom of that fatal disorder.Such was the state of the family; when about four o'clock, onedreadfully severe day in December, a person of a middle age and agloomy aspect, alighted from a chaise at the door of Morewick-hall;and almost speechless with cold, was ushered into the presence of Mr.Athelstone. The Pastor was alone in his library: and the stranger inbrief and broken English, announced himself as the Senor Castanos,confidential secretary to the Baron de Ripperda, and a messenger to theguardian of his son. While he spoke, he presented two packets; one fromthe Baron, the other from the Marquis Santa Cruz. With his accustomedhospitality, Mr. Athelstone bade his guest welcome; and was enquiringafter the health of the Baron and the Marquis, when Louis entered theroom. In passing through the hall, the porter told him that Peter hadjust shewn an outlandish gentleman in to his uncle; and impatient toknow whether he came from Spain, Louis hastened to the library."My child," said the Pastor, "I believe you are near the goal of yourwishes.--This gentleman comes from your father."The secretary bowed to the son of his patron. And Louis, looking firstat him, and then at his uncle, exclaimed--"my father!--and does he--?"He hesitated, he stopped; the eagerness of his hopes interrupted hisarticulation."We will open this packet, and see," returned the Pastor, taking thatfrom the Baron into his hand. But glancing at the shivering figure ofhis guest, who had drawn near the fire, he did not break the seal, butdesiring Louis to ring the bell, requested the Senor to permit theservant who attended, to shew him to an apartment where he should havea change of warm garments, and proper refreshment after so inclement ajourney.As soon as the Spaniard had withdrawn, Mr. Athelstone opened thepacket. It presented one for himself, and another for his nephew.Never before had Louis received a letter directed to himself, fromhis father. Though he always persevered in the duty of addressing hisonly parent, yet, until this moment, the answers were never more thanacknowledging messages through his guardian. It was, therefore, with apeculiar feeling of recognition; a conviction of being now owned byhis father's heart as his son; that Louis opened the first letter hehad ever received from his hand.--Its contents were these:"My dear Son,"I hear from the Marquis Santa Cruz, that you are worthy the name youbear.--That your acquirements do credit to the liberality of youreducation; and that you are not deficient in ambition to bring theseimplements to the test. I offer you an opportunity. Accompany thebearer of this, to the continent.--He is my secretary:--and has mycommands to present you to a person there, who will put your talentsto the trial. Should the result be to your honour, you shall not belong withheld from the embrace of your father, WilliamBaron de Ripperda."Madrid,"November, 1725."Louis pressed these welcome commands to his lips: then turning, tocommunicate their happy tidings to Mr. Athelstone, he saw the eyes ofthe venerable man still bent on the other packet; while the spectacles,which he held in his hand, bore tearful proofs how little was hissympathy with the joy that beat in the heart of his nephew. Louis tookthat trembling hand, and kissed it without speaking."I know, my child, that you are going to leave me.--I know that you areglad to go;--and it is natural, but an old man's tears are natural too."Louis grieved for the grief of his uncle: and anticipated his own pangsin the moment of separation from so paternal a friend; from an auntand cousins so beloved: but he did not feel the most distant wish toescape these pangs an hour, by delaying the journey that was to drawhim nearer to his father, and to the indistinct, but, he hoped, sureobjects of his ambition. He was indeed drawn by two attractions: theone tender and persuading; the other, powerful and imperative; and hissoul leaped to the latter, as to its congenial element.In a few minutes Mr. Athelstone recovered his wonted serenity. "Thetime is now come," said he, "when I must put forth from my bosom thesacred deposit I have so fondly cherished.--Yes, Louis; your spirit,more than your years, demands its active destination; and I will notmurmur that the moment for which I have educated your mind and yourbody, is at last arrived!" He then read aloud, and with composure,the letter which the Baron had addressed to him; but it was not moreexplanatory than the other, of the circumstances in which he meant toplace his son.The secretary soon after re-entered. On Mr. Athelstone putting somecivil questions to him respecting his present fatigue, and his latelong journey; he abruptly answered, "That as his arrival had beendelayed by contrary winds at sea; and the severity of the seasondid not promise a more propitious voyage, in returning; it would benecessary for him and Mr. de Montemar to take leave of Morewick-hallthe following morning."The Baron's letter to Mr. Athelstone, told him that Louis must yieldimplicit deference to the arrangements of Castanos. And in reply tosome remonstrance from the Pastor, for a less hasty departure, theSenor coldly observed--"That at Ostend, he and his charge were to meetinstructions for proceeding: and should they arrive there a day laterthan the one fixed by the Baron, the consequence might be fatal totheir safety. Indeed, that no appendage should encumber their progress,his Lord had commanded him to deny to Mr. de Montemar the indulgence oftaking a servant from England."Mr. Athelstone made many enquiries, to gather something of the objectof so peremptory a summons; but he received no satisfaction from thesecretary, who, with even morose brevity, continued to affirm histotal ignorance of what was to follow the introduction of his charge tohis new guardian. His own office went no further than to conduct Mr.de Montemar by a particular day to the continent: but who he was tomeet there, or how he was to be employed, future events must explain.The frank-hearted Pastor, became uneasy at this mystery. And the moreso, as from the secretary's hint, (which he appeared vext at havingdropped) it seemed connected with danger. "Yet it is his father, whosummons him into such circumstances!" said he to himself; "and surely Imay trust a father's watchfulness over his only son!"Louis's imagination had taken fire at what chilled the heart of hisuncle. That there was a demand on his courage, in the proposed trial,swelled his youthful breast with exultation. He thought, as yet hehad only tried his strength like a boy; in exercise, or in pastime.He wanted to grapple with danger, with the heart and the arm of aman; and for a cause that would sanctify the hazard of his life. "Andto something like this," cried he mentally, "my father calls me! Hecalls me, as becomes the son of his race, to share the labours, theperils, of his glorious career! I am now to prove my claim to so noblea birth-right.--And I will prove it! O gracious Heaven, give me but todeserve honour of my father; and I ask no other blessing on this sideof eternity!"Mr. Athelstone saw that strong emotions were agitating the occupiedmind of his nephew, and reading their import, in the lofty expressionsof his countenance, he did not check their impulse, by recalling hisattention to present objects; but proceeded in silence to open thepacket from Santa Cruz: hoping that its contents might cast a lightupon the destiny of Louis.The letter was short: chiefly thanking the Pastor and his family,for their kindness to himself and his son during their visit atLindisfarne. Writing of Ferdinand, he added that his health wasmaterially improved, though his spirits were yet very unequal. Toremedy these remains of his indisposition, he meant to engage himselfin the expected hostilities between Austria and Spain, who were likelyto quarrel on a question of maritime and commercial prerogative.The Marquis concluded his letter by saying, that he enclosed threepackets from Don Ferdinand, as offerings of respect to the ladies ofLindisfarne.Mr. Athelstone believed he had found a clew to the affair of danger,to which Louis was to be introduced. He did not doubt but that theBaron also meant to engage his son in the anticipated warfare betweentheir Catholic and Csarian majesties. The halting at Ostend seemedto corroborate this surmise, as its new commercial company was thevery dispute between the rival Powers. But still, the immediate perilwhich threatened any delay in arriving there remained as unexplained asbefore.When Louis perused the Marquis's letter, he also supposed he was calledto a military life; and as that was the point to which he had mostwistfully directed his glory-attracted eye, the intimation at oncefixed his vague anticipations; and rising from his seat, while histhoughts glanced on Wharton's gay demand to write man upon his brow,he smiled on his uncle and said, "this is the Toga virilis that hasever been the object of my vows!""God grant," cried the Pastor, mournfully returning his playful smile,"that it may not be steeped in blood!""And if found in the bed of honour," replied Louis, "I should not restthe worse for it!""Yon sport, my child, with these gloomy suggestions; and may you everhave the same cause for smiling at the advance of death! I know thepassion of your soul is to be always in the path of duty; and that insuch pursuit, the rugged and the smooth, the safe or dangerous, are toyou alike. Nourish this principle as that of your part in the covenantof your salvation. But keep a clear eye in discerning between duty andinclination. Remember, that no enterprize is great that is not morallygood: that war is murder, when it commences in aggression; and thatpolicy is villainy, when it seeks to aggrandize by injustice. In short,in whatever you do, consider the aim of your action, and your motive inundertaking its accomplishment. Be single-minded in all things, havingthe principle of the divine laws, delivered by the Son of God himself,as the living spring of every action throughout your life. Then, myLouis, you may smile in life and in death! You will be above the breathof man, beyond his power to disappoint you in your reward; for it willabide with you in the consciousness of virtue, and a sure faith in aneternal glory."While the Pastor was yet speaking, Mrs. Coningsby and her daughtersentered from a Christmas visit they had been paying in the neighbouringtown of Warkworth. They started at sight of a stranger dozing in thegreat chair by the fire. Overcome with fatigue, Castanos had fallenasleep almost immediately after he had given his last unsatisfactoryreply. The entrance of the ladies roused him, and he got up heavilyfrom his seat, when Mr. Athelstone presented him to his niece, andbriefly told his errand. Surprize at the suddenness of the summons, anddismay at parting with a companion so dear, overcame Mrs. Coningsby,and she sunk fainting into a chair. Tears stole down the cheeks ofCornelia, and Alice stood motionless, pale, and silent.After the emotions of the shock of such intelligence had a littlesubsided; anxious to divert their thoughts, Mr. Athelstone presentedhis niece and her daughters with Don Ferdinand's three packets; andrepeating the young Spaniard's request that each lady would inspect herpresent alone, he added his own wish, that they would indulge the donornow. The hint was immediately adopted, for Mrs. Coningsby understoodits purport. Divining her uncle's tenderness for the sensibility ofhis nieces, she left him to discuss with Louis the many arrangementsnecessary to a separation, that might be final to most of the party.The remainder of the day was hardly long enough, for the preparation ofthe various comforts each inmate of the hall was solicitous to produce,to render the journey and voyage of their beloved Louis as free ofprivations as possible. In the consequent bustle, no time was allowedfor dwelling on its occasion, or giving way to the regrets whichoften turned the heart faint in the midst of the body's exertions."To-morrow, in the hour of parting, we will indulge our sorrow. We willthen shew our Louis our love, and our grief at the separation!" Withthese thoughts, Mrs. Coningsby and Cornelia stilled their often-risingemotions; while Mr. Athelstone, reading in the feverish activity oftheir services what was passing in their minds, meditated how to sparethem and his nephew the agitating hour they anticipated.When the family parted for the night, it was settled that Louis andhis foreign conductor should not leave the hall the next morning untilafter breakfast; and therefore they should all meet again round thatdear domestic table, and there exchange the dreaded word farewell. Mrs.Coningsby observed, that before she slept she was going to write a fewlines to Don Ferdinand, to thank him for the fine Moorish shawls hisgratitude had presented to herself and daughters, and she would givethe letter to Louis in the morning. Then, as was the custom in thisaffectionate family, on retiring to their rooms, he touched the cheekof his aunt with his lips, and shook hands with his cousins when hebade God bless them!With a body unwearied, and a mind too excited, to admit of any sleepthis night, he was passing to his apartment, when his uncle openedthe door of his own chamber, and beckoned him in. The venerableman, there informed him, that he alone of all the family, would bidhim farewell the next morning. That he feared the fortitude of Mrs.Coningsby and his nieces in so severe a trial; and had therefore madearrangements to prevent it. Louis listened with gratitude, though withbrimming eyes, to the good old man's account of his having orderedthe travelling-chaise to the lodge-gate at day-break; and that he hadprepared Senor Castanos to be ready at so unexpected an hour, and topermit his charge to see his maternal uncle. In the usual routine ofhis movements, Sir Anthony had been some time at Athelstone-manor,where he always opened his Christmas hospitalities. As that mansion wason the banks of the Tyne, not far from Newcastle, where the travellerswere to embark, his nephew would have an opportunity of paying hisparting duty to him, without impeding his journey by going out of theway.Louis left his kind guardian, with a promise of attending to the firsttap at his door next morning; and in a more pensive mood proceeded tohis dressing-room. On opening the door, he saw Alice seated by histable. Her lamp stood beside her; and its faint light gleamed upon herpallid features. He started with astonishment; for she had so longestranged herself from his slightest attentions, that Alice was thelast person he could have expected to find at such a moment in hisapartment. However, he approached her tenderly. On seeing him, shecovered her face with her hand, and evidently wept, though silently;for as he spoke and soothed her, (though vaguely, as he could not guessthe reason of this solitary visit,) he felt the tears trickle throughher fingers on his hand. At last she was able to command her speech,though she still concealed her face; and when she did find utterance,it was some time before she dared touch upon the secret that preyedupon her peace and life. She told him that she was miserable; that herhealth was consuming under a sense of her deception to the best ofmothers, sisters, and of guardians; and that unless she did seize this,her last opportunity of unburthening her soul to the only friend towhom she could do so, without breaking a fatal vow; she felt that shemust die, she could not exist much longer under the tortures of herconscience, and the miseries of her heart.Amazed, and alarmed, Louis listened to her, tried to calm her, andencouraged her to repose a full confidence in him. At length, amidstparoxysms of tears, and agonies of shame, she narrated all that hadpassed between herself and Don Ferdinand; and that since she had sorashly made him the vow of concealing their attachment from thosewho ought to know all her thoughts, she had never known a moment'shappiness.Louis was struck dumb with this recital. The brevity of heracquaintance with Don Ferdinand, might yet be long enough to allow hisaccomplished manners and interesting state, to make an impression on soyoung and sympathizing a heart; she therefore found a ready excuse withher cousin. But what was he to think of Don Ferdinand? Of the advantagehe had taken of her tender and guileless nature, to betray her into aconfession and a vow, so sure to sacrifice her peace; and which couldbring no gratification to him, but the disgraceful consciousness of atriumph to his vanity!Louis's fixed silence, while occupied in these thoughts, struck Alicelike the voice of condemnation. She gazed distractedly in his face,and exclaimed in despair, "You think I am unpardonable.--You thinkI deserve to die, miserable and unforgiven! Oh, wretched, guiltyAlice,--break, break your heart, for there is none to pity you!" Asshe uttered this, in a hardly articulate voice, she threw herself backinto her chair, sobbing and wringing her hands in bitter anguish.The violence of her emotions recalled Louis to recollection, andsoothing her excessive remorse with every palliative that affectioncould suggest, he at last succeeded in restoring her to some degree ofcomposure. She told him, that her purpose in revealing her wretchedstory to him at this time, was not merely to unburthen her loaded soul;but to prevail on him to convey a letter to Ferdinand, in which sheimplored him to release her from her guilty vow of concealment. "I havewarned him," continued she, "that if he hold me to this impious pledge,it will not be for long; for I cannot live in my present self-abhorringcondition. But, should my life be lengthened under these circumstances,to be my punishment, I will never consent to see his face again, tillhe has released me from so sinful an engagement."Louis warmly applauded her resolution."Do not praise me," cried she, "do not call it resolution. I amunworthy of approbation for any thing. I do not resolve; I only feelthat I can know no happiness, endure no person, but continue to detestmyself, till this guilt is taken from my mind, by a full confession,and prayer for my mother's pardon."She shewed a letter, which had come in the packet directed to herby Ferdinand, and which he had secured her receiving free fromobservation, by his apparently whimsical request that each lady wouldinspect her present alone. The letter contained protestations ofinviolable attachment, petitions for her constancy; and exhortations tokeep their secret, till the success of the plan he had in view, broughthim again to her feet. He had inclosed a miniature of himself in theshawl which was his ostensible present to her. "I will never look on ita second time," said she, "till he removes from himself the guilt ofholding me in this wicked undutifulness to my family."Louis engaged, should he not meet him at Madrid, to forward her letterto Don Ferdinand, and to inclose it in one from himself, enforcing herentreaties with his arguments; and giving his thoughts on the subject,as became his relationship to her, and fraternal regard for herhappiness. He assured her, he would do it with a scrupulous attentionnot to irritate the feelings which had excited her lover to deprive himof her sisterly affection. Aware that her self-accusing state of mind,could not bear up against the representation he would fain have madeof Ferdinand's entire selfishness in thus binding her, Louis contentedhimself with advising Alice, as a restitution she owed to her familyfor all the misery her melancholy and illness had made them suffer, todismiss as much as possible all painful retrospections; and to consoleherself with the conviction that she was now re-treading her steps tothe path of duty. "Cheer yourself with this thought," said he, "tillthe tidings shall arrive which will take the seal from your lips. Thenyou may confess all, and reconciled, by pardon, to your family andyourself, you will again become the happy Alice."She wept as he spoke. But it was no more the stormy grief of despair;she shed the balmy tears of penitence and hope. It was the genialshower upon the thirsty ground. "You have spoken comfort to me, Louis.I have not been so happy, since the dawn of the fatal morning, when myimpious adjuration called down these months of misery upon my wretchedhead.--Oh, if Ferdinand could have guessed this, would he have deniedme such a comforter!"Louis gently reminded her, that as he was going, she must seek acomforter in a Superior Being; and in the exertions of her own mind:"you have ever, my Alice," said he, "been the idol of your family;and even to this day, been supported with a watchfulness, as if youwere still in infancy: yet, you see, how inadequate has been all thisanxiety to preserve you from error, and its consequent sorrows! Byexperience, you must now feel, that the care of the tenderest relationscan be of no permanent effect, unless you assist it with your owncircumspection and strength. Look not for comfort from one side oranother, till you have found its principle in your own bosom; thatis to say, till you resolve to act according to your duty. And thisis, not merely to grieve over your fault, and yearn to confess it andbe forgiven; but to lay a restraint upon your sensibility, and theviolence of your regrets; and from this hour to devote the whole ofyour mind to the re-establishment of happiness in your family.--Returnto your former occupations.--Meditate less upon Don Ferdinand andyourself; and think more of your mother, your sister, and yourguardian.--For their sakes, try to be cheerful, and you will be so.--Inone word, my dearest Alice, remember, that to perform our duty in thisworld, we must sustain our own virtue, and not habituate ourselves tothe uncertain support of others.""Why, my dear Louis, have I never heard these sentiments before? Withsuch forewarning, I should never have erred.""You might have heard them often; for my uncle has frequently talkedto me in this way in your presence. But, my sweet Alice was not thenawakened to such subjects. You regarded them as grave discourses, inwhich you could be as little interested as in the map of a country younever intended to visit.""And I went astray in that very country!" cried she, "simpleton that Iwas; always to turn away from every thing but the pursuits of a child!"She was anxious to engage Louis to correspond with her; but as hecould not write any thing to her that would not pass under the eyeof the whole family, he told her she had best rest satisfied withhis exertions for her release; and when he had obtained it from DonFerdinand, he would then write openly, and tell her all his thoughts onan affair so momentous to her present and future happiness.The hall clock struck one.Alice rose: she put his hand to her lips, and smiled through hertears:--"I cannot be at this morning's breakfast.--But now--dear,dear, Louis,--best of friends--farewell!"--Her head dropped upon hisshoulder, where she struggled with two or three convulsive sobs. Hepressed her to his heart, and in vain tried to repel the tears whichstarted to his eyes: they flowed over her face as he supported hertrembling steps to the door of her apartment. When he had broughther to the threshold, she uttered a breathless God bless you! andbreaking from his arms, threw herself into the room. The door wasclosed:--he heard her sob:--but tearing himself away, he returned witha heavy load at his heart to his own chamber.CHAP. X.The silver gleams of a winter morning streaked the horizon, as thechaise which conveyed Louis de Montemar from the friends of his youth,mounted the heights of Warkworth, and gave him a last glimpse ofMorewick-hall, lying in its shroud of mist at the bottom of the valley.The smoke of his uncle's chimney, beside which he had just receivedthat venerable man's parting embrace and blessing, was mingling itsdark volumes with the ascending vapours. A bleak and gusty wind tossedtheir white billows around the ancient pinnacles of the building;but no smoke arose from any other chimney!--; There was no openedwindow-shutter; no sign of any other of the dear inhabitants beingawake. The good old man was then weeping alone, and mingling with histears, the earnest prayer of solicitude for the preservation of hisbeloved nephew!"And the prayer of the righteous availeth much!" said Louis to himself,fixing his eye on the golden disk just peeping above the distant rim ofthe ocean: "lovers have preserved their constancy, by a promise thateach would remember the other when the sun set or rose! Why shall I notpreserve my constancy to a better love than that of woman, whenever Ilook on yon rising or setting orb, and remember, that at those hours myvenerable uncle is on his knees to Heaven for the conservation of mysoul?"As the turning of his carriage down an abrupt declivity snatched thewhole of the vale of Coquet from his view, Louis thought of his auntand Cornelia; how, in another hour, they would be looking in vain forhis entrance into the breakfast parlour: and, what would be the burstof their grief, when they should be told that he was gone; that he hadfound the heart to leave them without one affectionate farewell! Healmost regretted that he had spared himself and them a pang, which,he began to think, would have been more tolerable than the idea theymight entertain, that a passion for novelty had rendered him neglectfulof their parting tenderness. The wan countenance, and piteous accentsof Alice, next presented themselves to his imagination; and, painfulas were many of his thoughts connected with her recent disclosure,he could not but rejoice that her timely remorse, and as critical aresolution, had afforded him an opportunity to make his last act in thehome of his youth, one that would eventually repay his vast debt ofgratitude to her mother.These reflections accompanied him over many a heathy track, cavernedwith coal-mines; and at night, the gleaming fires on their bituminoussurface, with their wandering vapoury lights, lit him along moor andfell, till the sulphurous cloud which usually canopies the city ofNewcastle, received his vehicle as it whirled down the steep northernhill into the town.At Athelstone-manor, a few miles south of the city, he met his uncleSir Anthony; and, as he expected, had to listen to many a roughremonstrance against obedience to so abrupt a summons. Louis did notuse much argument in replies, the reasoning of which, good or bad, heknew would be equally disregarded; but with assurances that neitherdistance nor time should lessen his affection for the friends he leftbehind, he sought to dissipate his uncle's thoughts from the subjectof debate; and so far succeeded, as to pass the remainder of the daywith him in tolerable cheerfulness. But when the captain of the vesselthat was to convey the travellers to Ostend, appeared at the manor,to announce that the wind served and the ship was ready to sail; thenewly-restored good-humour of the baronet was put to the proof: andit did not stand the trial. He burst into invectives against theBaron, for reclaiming his son; against the Pastor, for admitting hisauthority; and poured forth a torrent of reproaches on his nephew, forso readily consenting to quit relations who loved and honoured him, tobecome dependant on the caprices of a father who seemed to considerhimself rather the patron than the parent of his son.Louis saw it would be vain to reason with this violence; and that allhe could do, was to take a grateful and steady leave of his uncle.Sir Anthony clung to him, mingling entreaties for his stay, withupbraidings for his departure. And amidst vows of entailing all onhim, if he would remain; and oaths, to cut him off with a shilling, ifhe persisted to go, Louis tore himself away; leaving his uncle in anagony of grief and exasperation in the arms of his servants.Distressed by the outrageous emotions of Sir Anthony; so differentfrom the chastised feelings of the Pastor, whose profound affectionssmoothed by their fulness the rising sorrow of the parting moment;Louis found a refuge, though a dreary one, in the solitude of hiscabin. He sat for some hours, alone and silent, in the encreasinggloom. The evening-gun fired from the fort at the mouth of the harbour;and in a few minutes Castanos appeared with a lamp. He set it on thetable, and silently threw himself into the birth appropriated to hisuse. Louis was not in a mood to desire companionship; and with littlemore than a gracious word or two of thanks to the civilities of thecaptain and his mate, as they stepped in at intervals to enquire how hefared, he passed the remainder of the night.Next morning at dawn, when he pressed his repeater and counted thehour, he calculated that if the breeze had continued, his vessel mustnow be far from the coast; and fearing to lose a last look of theshore where he first remembered consciousness of being, and where hehad imbibed, from friends dear to his heart, all the valued impulsesof his soul; he sprang from the cot on which he lay, and stepped upondeck. The lonely helmsman was at his post, gazing at the stars, andsteering, slowly to leeward.--To windward, stretched darkly along thehorizon, lay the embattled cliffs of Northumberland."Majestic England!" said he, as he turned towards them; "How do thylofty rocks declare thy noble nature! There, liberty has stationed herthrone; there, virtue builds her altar; and there peace has planted hergroves! I leave thee, to prove myself worthy of being thy adopted son.I go far away, to send a good report to the dear friends slumberingbehind thy promontories. England, beloved, honoured! Where shall Ifind a country like thee? Will gorgeous Spain be to me what thy simpleglades have been?" He smiled at his own soliloquy."I go not to luxurious groves, and gorgeous indolence," cried he, "myerrand is to the arena of populous cities; to win, or lose myself, inthe Olympian struggles of man with man."Louis forgot the receding shores of his country and its belovedinhabitants, in the ideas these images suggested; and forgetful alikeof the wintery blast, he only drew his thick cloak closer aroundhim; and cradled in the coiled rope of the anchor, with his eyeshalf-closed, he continued to muse on his future destiny: dreaming ofmartial achievements, and a succession of visionary triumphs, till thebright phantoms were lost in the chaos of sound sleep.CHAP. XI.A prosperous voyage brought the travellers safely to Ostend.--Castanosfound the instructions he expected from the Baron de Ripperda; andhe informed his charge, their commands were that they must proceedimmediately to the metropolis of Germany, for there he was to meet hisfather's friend. Surprised, but not displeased at this extraordinaryroute, Louis cheerfully set forward; and did not permit the curiositynatural to his thirst for knowledge, to detain him a moment in any ofthe countries through which he travelled.On a dark evening in January he and his guide arrived at Vienna. Thestreets were in so profound a gloom, he could not have guessed he wasnow in one of the most magnificent capitals of the world, had he notreceived some intimation of its greatness, by the extent of pavement hewent over from the point of the town at which he entered to that whichwas to be his destination. As he drove along, he perceived some otherproofs that he was indeed in the modern Csarean metropolis. He passednoble houses, whose open gates shewed they were superbly illuminated,and whence proceeded strains of gay music that gave sign of life andfestivity within. Castanos remarked, that these were palaces of thenobility. Exhilarated by the splendour of the lights, Louis enquiredwhether the house he was going to, promised as much consolation after atedious journey. "But I flatter myself it will," added he, "from what Iunderstand of the general rank of my father's friends.""As the Baron de Ripperda is a nobleman of an universal acquaintance,"replied Castanos, "he has friends of every rank, in every country."In this instance, as in others, Louis saw he could get nothingsatisfactory from his companion, and aware that a little patience mustexplain whither he was going, and what was to be his errand, he askedno more questions. As his carriage passed out of the brilliant halowhich surrounded the immediate vicinity of these palaces, it seemed toenter the regions of tenfold night; so severe was the contrast from gayillumination to rayless darkness.After an intricate drive of another half hour, the wheels no longerrattled on pavement, but turning abruptly down a narrow avenue, theleafless branches brushed across the carriage windows, as it joltedonward over a very rough road. A speck of light appeared in the extremedistance. As the heavy vehicle rumbled forward, the light seemed toencrease in size, and Louis soon after perceived it to be a flambeauheld in the hand of a man. When the carriage approached him, he openeda pair of large iron gates under a high archway, through which thetravellers immediately passed. All around was dark, vast, and dreary,as no lamp chased the deep shadows from a court-yard of immense extent.The man mounted the steps of a huge black building, sufficientlycapacious for a palace, but gloomy enough to be a prison. Louisfollowed his conductor and the flambeau-bearer across a large coldhall, up a wide-painted stair-case, mildewed and crazy, and through along echoing gallery into a saloon whose distant extremities, like theouter court, were lost in deep shadow. A pair of wax lights, flaringin the wind, stood upon a great claw-table whose once gilded surfacewas browned by time and neglect. Little more furniture was visiblethan a couple of chairs of similar fabrick, two or three giganticpier-glasses, reflecting the persons in the apartment in ghost-likeobscurity, and a brasier of newly-kindled fuel, sluggishly glimmeringon the hearth.Louis started at so dismal a reception, so different from the cordialcomforts of Morewick-hall; so different from the social welcome ofAthelstone-manor; so widely different from the anticipated magnificenceof a palace at Vienna, and the hospitable greeting of his father'sfriend! He paused at the threshold, then smiling at the effeminacy ofhis disgust, entered light of foot and of heart, saying to himself, "DoI shrink at so poor a trial of my spirit? My father has guessed the sinof my breeding; and thus disciplines the spoiled boy!"Louis might have been wearied, body and mind. He had travelled sincethe moment of his landing without other sleep than that he had caughtby snatches in his indefatigable vehicle. He might have been hungry,for he had tasted nothing since the break of day. But he felt none ofthese wants of nature, in his eagerness to meet, if not his father,his father's representative, and to receive from him that father'scommands.When Louis entered the saloon, and so far took possession of its dismalhospitality, as to lay his hat and sword upon the table; Castanoscalled to the attendant by the name of Gerard, and whispering tohim they withdrew together. Louis sat for some time, expecting there-entrance of the Spaniard, but no one appeared. He looked at hiswatch: it was near ten o'clock. From the hour, he supposed the taciturnsecretary was staying away in his usual care of manufacturing hissupper; and that he would presently return with his wine and omelet.Louis sat composedly ten minutes after ten minutes, but at last hisimpatience to know why he was brought to so deserted an abode, and whohe was to see, got the better of his determination to quietly awaitevents, and he rose to ring the bell. He took one of the candles toseek for this indispensible piece of furniture, but in no corner ofthe grim-visaged tapestry could he find even its remains. He opened thedoor, and called Castanos. No voice made answer, but the dull vibrationof his own from the numerous vacant apartments. With the candle in hishand he retraced his way to the great hall, still calling on Castanos,and then on Gerard, and with as little success.Determined to find somebody, he turned down a paved passage to thequarter that seemed to lead to the offices. Not a living creaturepresented itself, and all doors which appeared likely to open to theair were padlocked, and therefore resisted his attempts to forcethem. He returned to the hall to examine the great door, and foundit unbolted, but locked, and the key taken away. He now comprehendedthat Castanos, and the only apparent inmate of the house, had left theplace, that he was alone, and fastened in; but for what purpose he wasthus betrayed into solitary confinement, time only could shew. To quellthe vague alarm that rose in his breast, he had again to recollect hewas brought into these circumstances by his father's orders."But at any rate," thought he, "whether I am to meet friend or foe,there is no harm in keeping my sword at my side. It is just possibleCastanos may not be honest. He may not hold the rank in my father'sestablishment, to which he pretends, he may not be the very Castanos;should he be a menial domestic, instead of a confidential secretary,(and from his avoiding my presence at all opportunities, and being sounwilling to converse, when obliged to be with me, it does not appearvery doubtful!) then I may, indeed, be in the hands of a villain. Heknows the generosity of my two uncles, has made me a no contemptibleobject for plunder, and--in short, I do not like appearances!" Withthese ideas he hastily re-ascended the stairs to the saloon. He foundhis sword safe, and lost no time in returning it to his belt. "What,"cried he, "would be the reproaches of Sir Anthony, could he guess mypresent situation? What the distress at dear Morewick, did they knowthat their Louis, for the first time in his life, now feels the touchof fear?"Murder in this loneliness! To die under the hands of ruffians, and beno more heard of by the beings he loved best, haunted his imaginationwhile he walked to and fro, examining again and again the locks of hispistols. He had one in his hand, when he heard the rumbling of wheelsin the court-yard. Shortly after, the steps of a man sounded in thegallery, and the saloon door being open, Louis saw Castanos approachingwith his usual slowness. He entered the apartment, and laid a letter onthe table."For me?" said Louis, "from whom?" "Its contents will tell you, Senor."When Louis glanced on the superscription, he saw it was thehand-writing of his father. While he broke the seal, Castanosdisappeared again. The letter was as follows:"Louis!--It was the dying injunction of your mother to your grandfatherAthelstone, that you should be brought up to honour me with a doubleduty. You can never forget the contents of the letter which she wroteto her infant son from her death-bed, and which your uncle Richard wasto open to you on your twelfth birth-day. It told you to love yourfather as she had done, and to commit yourself in all things to hisguidance."You are now called upon to act by this sacred exhortation. To beobedient in love and in fear, to a parent who received her legacy oftenderness for you, in his own bosom, and who will hereafter pay itwith interest from his heart.""Now that she is gone, you are the only creature existing with whomI can identify my own being, that is, communicate my thoughts and myactions without reserve. Your interest is my interest: and till timeand experience have given you judgement to guide your own proceedings,my judgement must be yours. You are yet a boy in years; though a manlyperson, and, I understand, a mind of no common capacity, give you attwenty the appearance of maturity. But remember, it is appearanceonly. Talents and good dispositions are the implements of wisdom,not wisdom's self, she is born of time and experience, and shews herproof in hard probation. The scenes in which you have hitherto been anactor, amongst the simple inhabitants of a remote province in England,are child's play to the parts you may now be called to perform. I amabout to present you to the world, to aspiring, subtle, treacherousmankind!--You must be instructed in every movement; prompted, andsupported. I have provided means to these ends; and all you have todo, is to resign yourself with docility to the masters I set overyou. Should impertinent curiosity, or refractory wilfulness, or anyother perversity in your conduct, traverse my present trial of yourcharacter, we never meet! You shall return whence you came; and only asone dead, hold a place in the memory of your father. The child of myspotless wife shall not be denied an ample provision; but I will nevercherish as my son, one who is an alien to my spirit."On the night of your arrival at Vienna, my secretary Castanos has mycommands to introduce you to a person, who will give proof of comingfrom me, by shewing you a duplicate of that picture of your mother,which your grandfather bequeathed to me.--Being so assured, you mustrevere and obey that person in word and deed, as you would revere andobey me; and ever hope to behold the face of your father, William,"Madrid.                                          "Baron de Ripperda."There were family references in this letter, which affected the heartof a son;--and though the style was generally severe, yet there wasalso a promise of such full future confidence, that Louis could not butpress it to his lips as the earnest of a fellowship with his father hewas determined to deserve. The first sight of the letter had removedall suspicion of his guide from his mind; and having read it with abeating heart, he walked up and down the room, impatiently awaiting theintroduction of his father's friend.Again he heard the approach of steps; but it was now of two persons.He stopped in the middle of the floor, his eyes rivetted to thedoor, which, in a few minutes was thrown open by Castanos; and a manof a commanding stature, wrapped in a cloak, and with a large hatflapped over his brows, entered alone into the chamber. The door wasimmediately closed. He stepped a few paces forward; and putting up theprojecting brim of his hat, over which hung a heavy black plume, thatstill threw a deeper shade over his eyes, their piercing glance shot atonce through the soul of Louis.The stranger stood; and, without speaking, continued to looksteadfastly on his future charge. With a progressive movement of hispowerful eye, he perused the lineaments of Louis's face and figurefrom head to foot. Louis gazed on him in turn; and wondered at theawe he felt of an unknown being, whose haughty port and unceremoniousinvestigation, rather announced the future tyrant, than guardian of hisconduct. Hitherto his independent spirit had been wont to start likefire from the flint, at any touch of oppression; and he could not butmarvel within himself, why he should both fear and respect the sternaspect of this extraordinary man. The loftiness of his mien was welladapted to the countenance which the raised brim of the hat disclosed.Dark mustachios and a pointed beard marked his lip and chin; whilethe marble hue of his commanding features seemed to turn even luridlypale, as the brightness of his deeply-set eyes flashed from under theirshadowy brows, upon his immovable companion. Louis could not withdrawhis riveted eye from the searching gaze of the stranger; and he saidto himself, "I am thus struck, because it is the representative of myfather that stands before me: it is he, who that father has commandedme to reverence as himself!"--As he ended this short soliloquy, heunconsciously obeyed the sentiment of his mind, and respectfully bowedhis head.This action seemed to recall the stranger from the abstraction withwhich he was scanning his future pupil; and approaching him with astep which mingled a prince's dignity with the firmness of a soldier,he took Louis's hand, grasped, and wrung it, as if with some suddensting of mental anguish; and then abruptly relinquishing it, threwhimself into a chair, and pulling the beaver of his hat over his face,sat for some time leaning his head upon his hand, and preserving thesilence which had not yet been broken.Louis stood opposite to him, contemplating with interest andexpectation, the further developement of this friend of his father. Atlast the stranger spoke.--"Louis de Montemar," said he.At the sound of his name, ejaculated by one who had continued soportentously silent, Louis started; and his heart laboured in hisbreast. He was now going to be told the secret of his destiny!--What itwas his father demanded of his strength of mind, or bodily exertion;and how he was to prove himself worthy to be received as his son.The stranger had paused, on uttering his first address.--But it wasonly for a moment. Again the lightning of his eyes flashed upon theface of his auditor, and he resumed; but what he said was in the Frenchlanguage."Louis de Montemar, you have read the letter which I conveyed to you,from your father the Baron de Ripperda?""I have."Again the stranger bent his head on his hand. The long plumes coveredhis face from observation; but Louis perceived that his whole frametrembled. After another, and a longer pause, he spoke again.--"Andyou are prepared to obey your father's injunctions, contained in thatletter?""I am. For I believe my father would not so entirely commit thetemporal, and therefore eternal, welfare of his son, to any man who isnot worthy of the charge."The stranger rose from his seat.--"I am the man to whom your father hasconfided this awful trust; and I accept your obedience. Know me as theSieur Ignatius: and whatever else I may seem hereafter, it is not yourinterest to pry into. Your duty is to know of me no more than what Itell you; and to obey me, as if you knew me without reserve. To-morrow,at noon, your task shall be appointed.--Meanwhile, stir not hence.Refresh yourself from the fatigues of your journey; and rest confidentin me and your father. There is my pledge."Before Louis could find words in a foreign language, to answer,satisfactorily to himself so extraordinary a speech, the Sieur Ignatiuslaid the promised miniature of the late Baroness upon the table, anddisappeared from the room.CHAP. XII.Having partaken of a slight refreshment, which the solitary domesticof the mansion set before him, Louis desired to be conducted to hisbed-chamber. The man opened a door at the further extremity of thesaloon, and the weary traveller followed into an apartment even moredesolate than the one he had left. The dull cold light of a wintermoon, shrouded in snow-clouds, gleamed through the mouldering remnantsof what had once been damask curtains. These perishing relics ofdeparted grandeur were all of furniture that presented itself to theeye of Louis, as he looked around for a place of rest. At last, in adistant recess deep in darkness, the candle he held in his hand sheweda mass of something heaped together. He approached, and found his owntravelling palliasse on the floor, and his baggage so disposed, as tosupply the place of chair and table.In recognizing even these poor necessaries to the repose he needed,Louis cast not a thought on the comforts he did not see, but thankingGod for the good provided, stretched himself upon his hard bed, andsoon was wrapped in balmy slumber.After a night of profound sleep, the bright smile of the awakened sunplayed on his eye-lids, and starting from his pallet, with his usualmorning-spring of joy he hailed the brilliancy of the opened day. In anapartment close to his chamber he found that luxury of the continent(which even this deserted mansion retained), a bath, and having enjoyedits refreshment, with spirits ready for whatever task might be assignedhim, he prepared to meet again his mysterious visitor.On re-entering the saloon, the gloominess which had appalled him thepreceding evening was no longer there; it had disappeared before thechaser of shadows, and he advanced to a window to see what evidence ofneighbourhood would present itself without.A view, as novel as it was gay and picturesque, burst upon his sight.Under the windows stretched a high balustraded terrace, with broadstone-steps leading down to a garden intersected with parterres andlong vistas foliaged with glittering icicles. The ground was white withsnow, which had been falling all night, and nothing having tracked thedeserted walks, it lay in shining smoothness as far as the low wallwhich bounded the garden. Beyond the parapet, trees of loftier growthstretched their ample arms over a plain that banked the mighty watersof the Danube, now arrested by the mightier hand of winter into a vastsubstantial causeway.At this early hour in the morning, and on that long line of ice, whoselimits were lost in the horizon, all Vienna and its surrounding countryseemed assembled. Carriages of various forms and colours elevated onsledges, and filled by their owners of as various quality and habits,swept along in every direction. Men and women mounted on scates,darted past each other with the velocity of light; some with basketsof merchandize on their heads, and others, simply wrapped in theirbear-skins, speeded forward on errands of business or of pleasure.Many of the sledged carriages took the direction of a beautiful islandin the midst of the river. It was crowned with cedars, and every treeof perpetual green; they parted their verdant ranks to give place toa sloping glade, on whose smooth bosom stood a splendid but fantasticmansion. A thousand strains of music pierced the distant air, while thegay traineaux advanced in succession before its gilded colonades.Louis gazed and listened. How different was this unexpected, thisglittering scene, from the sombre-suited winters of Northumberland!There, the black and sterile rocks frowned horrible over the frozenstream, which lay in death-like stillness under their gloomy shade. Butyet that awful pause of nature was dear to his contemplative and happymind. It filled him with recollections of the gracious voice, which hadspoken the world into existence from the sterner solitude of chaos! Andthen, when his mood for loneliness changed, he had only to quit hismeditations amongst these caverns of cold and silence, to emerge atonce into the warm, social circle of endearing kindred, and animatingfriends!While, with a fixed eye, he was thus musing on the present and thepast, Gerard entered the room, and placed a tray with breakfast on thetable. Louis enquired for Senor Castanos. The man answered, he wasengaged. "With whom?""I do not know.""Then I am not to expect him at breakfast?""He went out at sun-rise."Louis asked no more questions, seeing that all around him were underthe same law of la Trappe.His lonely meal was soon dispatched; and as he found it impossibleto fasten his attention to a book, or even to writing to the friendshe loved, until he knew when he was to be removed from his strangesituation; he left the table, and returned to his contemplations at thewindow. He was standing with folded arms, his eyes rambling over theever-varying scene on the river, and sometimes wishing to be one in theanimated groupe; when, hearing a step on the floor, he turned round,and beheld his expected visitor.He wore the same enveloping dress as before, and, as before, shookaside the overhanging plumes of his hat as he advanced into the room.Louis was recovered from the amazement into which the mystery of hisnew guardian's address had thrown him on their first interview; buthe did not attempt to dispel the awe impressed by his deportment, andhis relation as the Baron de Ripperda's friend; and, therefore, hegreeted his re-appearance with a collected, but a profoundly respectfuldemeanor.The Sieur Ignatius approached him."I need not enquire of your health this morning: you look well andcheerful; and these are signs of a constitution indispensable to thefulfilment of your future duties."Louis answered with a grateful smile, that he had to thank Heaven for avigorous frame, and for a destiny which, hitherto had not afforded himan excuse for being otherwise than cheerful."The cheerfulness of a life passed in retirement," observed Ignatius,"being the effect of active amusements rather than of active duties,is habit and not principle; and must be re-moulded with stoutermaterials, to stand the buffets of the world. Louis, you are calledfrom the happiness of self-enjoyment to that of self-neglect. You arecalled upon to toil for mankind.""Point but the way, Sir!" cried Louis, in a subdued but earnest voice;"and I trust, you shall not find me turn from it.""It is in all respects different from the one you have left. Fond oldage, and female partiality, have hitherto smoothed your path. In themidst of this effeminacy, I know you have meditated on a manly life,on the career of fame, its triumphs, and its crown. But between thestarting point and the goal, there is a wide abyss. The imagination ofvisionary youth overleaps it: but, in fact, it must be trod with strongunwearied feet; with wariness, privation, and danger." The eyes ofLouis, flashing the brave ardours of his heart, (and which he believedwere now to be summoned into licenced exercise,) gave the only answerto the Sieur's remarks, but it was eloquent of the high expectations hehad raised."Young man," continued his austere monitor, "I come to lay open thismomentous pass to you; and, once entered, you are no longer your own.You belong to mankind: you are devoted to labour for them:--And, aboveall, to sacrifice the daintiness of a pampered body; the passions ofyour soul; the affections of your heart; to the service of the country,which was that of your ancestors, and to which your father is nowrestored.""I am ready, Sir," exclaimed Louis, "to take my post, be it where itmay, and I trust that I shall maintain it as becomes my father's son.""At present," replied the Sieur, "it is within these walls."Louis looked aghast. The animation of hope springing forward tomilitary distinction, faded from his countenance.--"Within thesewalls!--How?--What can be done here?--I believed--I thought the army--"This incoherent reply was suddenly arrested by the steady fixture ofIgnatius's eyes. A pause ensued, doubly painful to Louis, on accountof the shock his expectations had received, and because he had soweakly betrayed it. With the tint of shame displacing the paleness ofdisappointment, he stood before his father's friend, looking on theground; at last the Sieur spoke."What army do you speak of?"With encreased embarrassment, Louis replied: "the Spanish army; thatwhich the Marquis Santa Cruz gave my uncle to understand was soon tomarch against Austria, to compel the Emperor to fulfil his brokentreaties.""And to meet that army in the heart of the Austrian capital," saidIgnatius, "you thought was the object of your present summons?"Unable to speak, from a humiliating consciousness of absurdity, Louiscoloured a deeper scarlet, and again cast his eyes to the ground."No," continued the Sieur, "there are ways of forcing sovereigns to dotheir duties, besides that which the sword commands. If it will soothyour disappointment, to think that you labour in one of these, believewhat you wish, and rest satisfied.""I am satisfied," returned Louis, "and ready to be confined withinthese walls, at whatever employment, and for whatever time, my fathermay chuse to dictate.""Follow me."As Ignatius pronounced this command, he opened the saloon door, andcrossing the gallery, stopped before another door at its extremity.He unlocked it; and Louis, who had obeyed his peremptory summons,followed him into a room furnished with an escritoire, and a largetable covered with implements for writing."This, Louis de Montemar, is your post," cried the Sieur, closing thedoor and bolting it. "Here you must labour for Spain and your owndestiny; and here," added he, in a decisive voice; "you must take anoath of inviolable secrecy, that neither bribery of wealth, honours,nor beauty; nor threats of ruin, torments, nor of death; shall everinduce you to betray what may be confided to you in this chamber."Appalled at this demand, Louis did not answer. The Sieur examined hischanging countenance."You cannot hesitate to give me this pledge of honour!""Honour does not need such a pledge," replied Louis, turning on him theassured look of conscious worth; "trust me, and you shall find, thatin no case where honour enjoins silence, death itself can compel me tospeak."Ignatius shook his head.--"This will not do, in an affair like the present. When the interestsof millions may hang upon a yea or nay; he, who has it in his power topronounce either, must be bound on the perdition of his soul to utterthat only which ensures the general safety."He paused for an answer. But Louis remaining silent, as if stillunconvinced, his stern monitor resumed with augmented asperity."I do not like this mincing nicety. It savours more of effeminatedreaming, than of manly intention to observe and to act. At a word,take the oath I proffer you; or, prepare to set out this night onyour return to England; and to the absurd people who have taught youto pant for glory, and to start from its shadow." The Sieur turnedhaughtily away.--The reasoning faculties of his pupil became confused.Was he doing right or wrong in resisting this demand? It called on himto stake his salvation on the preservation of secrets, of the natureof which he was entirely ignorant. It seemed to him more than just,that a stranger, however sanctioned, should, at so early a stage ofacquaintance, expect that perfect reliance on his virtue, as wouldwarrant a man in so awful a venture as that of vowing to adopt all thatstranger might propose. But the authority with which he pronouncedthe sentence which should follow persisted refusal, struck Louis withastonishment. Who was he, that durst so fearlessly take on himself theresponsibility of banishing, without appeal, and with disgrace, the sonof the Baron de Ripperda? As Louis looked up, with something of thisquestion in his eyes, he met the searching glance of Ignatius. "Youngman," said he, "you think your honour insulted, by the mention of anoath. Your honour, which is yet untried! Which has passed through noordeal, but those presented by phantastic imagination! What must theBaron de Ripperda think, when he hears of a son who so insults hisfather's approved honour, as to doubt whether he ought to pledge hisfaith on that father's virtue? And, after all," added he, "what moreis demanded of you, than the surety that is offered every hour by therest of mankind, on the slightest requisition, and on the commonestoccasions?""What is slightly assumed," returned Louis, "would be as slightlyrelinquished. And I trust that my father will not condemn, and that hisfriend will not continue to misjudge, a hesitation which springs fromthe inexpressible awe in which I hold the nature of an oath. By thatmost solemn of appeals, I have never yet called upon the presence ofmy Creator; and therefore I tremble to do it now. But," added he, "asit is the will of my father; who, through your agency, demands it ofme; on the probity of his soul, I commit mine, and am ready to swear.""Then," cried the Sieur, "subscribe that paper with your name."Louis took it, and read a form of words in the Spanish language, whichclaimed his allegiance to Spain; by the privileges and pledges of hislong line of ancestors born in that realm, by the reunion of his fatherto that realm; and by the restitution which the King and council hadmade to him of the Ripperda territories in Andalusia and Granada,forfeited to the crown in the year 1673, by the rebellious conduct ofDon Juan de Montemar Duke de Ripperda. In just return for this gracefrom the land of his ancestors, William, the present Baron de Ripperda,had taken an oath of fealty to Philip and to Spain. And Louis deMontemar, his only son, and heir to all his possessions, honours,and civic duties, was called upon, by the same solemn rite to devotehimself to Spain, as his country; and to Philip as his liege-lord.At the end of this official document, a postscript was written inthe Baron's own hand, demanding of his son, to add to the signaturerequired, on oath to perform all that might be appointed him by hisfather directly, or indirectly through the Sieur Ignatius, for theservice of the King; and to hold all secrets confided to him for thatpurpose, inviolable as his Christian faith.Louis saw nothing in bonds which his father's hand-writing hadsanctified, to suggest further hesitation; and, without reluctance, heset his name to the paper, and pressed to his lips the sacred volumepresented by the Sieur."Now Louis," said he, "your task is easy. Will, is a conqueringsword!"--as he spoke, a smile played for a moment on his stern lip;but like a sun-beam on a dark cloud, it suddenly disappeared, and allwas gloom again. He opened the escritoire, and took from the shelvestwo thick scrolls in strange characters. Louis continued to gaze onthe face of this mysterious man, as he arranged the sheets on thetable. The smile, which had just lit up those lurid features withthe nameless splendors of mental beauty, was passed away; but theimpression remained on his pupil's heart. Louis congratulated himselfon the assurance that it gave him, and said inwardly, "I shall neverforget that magic smile, so eloquent of every ineffable grace of mindand spirit! It is a pledge to me, that I may love, as well as reverenceits possessor."Ignatius placed the papers before his attentive pupil, telling him,they comprised his duty for the day; that he must copy them strokeby stroke, for the inaccuracy of a single curve, might produceconsequences to burthen his soul for ever. The Sieur then sat down togive minute instruction respecting the execution of these momentousdocuments. The task was complicated, and of a nature totally differentfrom any thing Louis had ever practised, or could possibly haveanticipated. However, he cheerfully engaged in its performance; andhis employer, having seen the precision of his commencement, rose towithdraw. Before he quitted the room, he turned and said, that hesupposed it was hardly necessary to enjoin the propriety of alwayskeeping that chamber locked, both when it was occupied and when it wasvacant. On Louis's bowing to the implied command, he added, that Gerardwould strike on the door, when dinner was served in the saloon; andthat at midnight, he would himself return to the chateau, to inspectthe papers, and affix his seal to their contents.Louis continued from noon, till the gloom of twilight, at hislaborious penmanship. He knew nothing of the particular purport of anyone of the numerous sheets he was transcribing. The characters wereunknown to him; but he was assured by Ignatius, all were directed tothe service of Spain; and with alacrity and exactness he had completedhalf his task before the duskiness of the hour, and the promised strokeof Gerard, gave him a short respite.Solitude was again at his temperate meal. He had heard enough fromthe Sieur, to warn him against the imprudence of putting unnecessaryquestions; and determined to allow all unimportant circumstances, atleast, to pass by him unnoticed by oral remark; he said nothing to histaciturn attendant about the continued absence of Castanos. His dinnerwas dispatched in a few minutes, and taking the candles in his hands,he returned to the locked chamber to finish his work. At the appointedhour, Ignatius reappeared.The several heaps of papers were arranged for his inspection, and,with a nod of approbation he examined them one by one. He approvedwhat was done, and turning to the escritoire, sealed them, and affixedto each packet its appropriate address. What were the names on thesesuperscriptions, Louis had no guess, though he did not doubt they wereall to be consigned to the Baron de Ripperda; and, (as he observed bythe proceedings of the Sieur, they were ready to be put into theirlast envelope,) he ventured to ask whether he might not add one packetmore to his father. Ignatius remained silent. Though Louis saw noencouragement on his contracting brow, he would not be so repulsed, butsteadily repeated his request, adding, that he was particularly anxiousto dispatch this letter, as it was not only to assure his father of hisdevotedness to his commands, but to beg him to forward one on mosturgent business, which he had inclosed for Don Ferdinand d'Osorio."Your father will have sufficient assurance of your obedience, in theexecution of these papers," returned the Sieur, "and as to promoting acorrespondence with Don Ferdinand d'Osorio;--in your situation, thatis out of the question. Your residence here is unknown to any one, andmust continue so, till the affair that commands your service, is madeor marred. Burn your packet, therefore; it cannot go."During this speech, he opened the leathern-bag that was to be thetravelling case of the dispatches.Louis sighed convulsively as he put his letter back into his bosom.Ignatius took no notice of this heart-struck sign of disappointment,but calmly continued packing the papers. Louis thought of the unhappyAlice; of the tears she shed on his neck at parting; of his vow torestore to her, her peace of mind; and he could not endure his owncowardice in having been over-awed to the appearance of giving up hercause, even for a moment. He resumed in a firmer voice."I seek no correspondence with Don Ferdinand, Sir, I never desireto hear from him in return for the letter I am so anxious he shouldreceive. It is only to demand of him an act of justice to a lovelywoman whose happiness he has destroyed. And to do this, I have solemnlyengaged myself to her and to my own heart.""Louis de Montemar," replied the Sieur, "you are entered on a courseof life that will not admit of romantic trifling. There is but onedirection for all your faculties:--the public good.--Private concernsmust take care of themselves."He closed the leathern-case over the dispatches, and covering itspadlock with wax, stampt it with his seal. "I repeat, Sir," criedLouis impetuously, "I have pledged my honour, to the forwarding thisletter to Don Ferdinand; and the public good will not deem it necessaryto make me a private deceiver!"Ignatius turned on him a look of haughty reproof."Young man, you know little of your duty towards the public good, ifyou can put its smallest tittle into competition with the adjustment ofan amour between a weak girl and a profligate youth. Her folly must beher punishment."The indignation of insulted virtue burnt upon the cheek of Louis."You mistake me, Sir! She for whom I am interested, is as pure fromunchaste weakness, as my father's honour from stain. It is her soulthat is enthralled, by a vow extorted from her by this ungenerousSpaniard; and to release her from the wretched load, is the solepurport of my letter to him." "You love the girl yourself," saidthe inflexible Ignatius, taking no visible notice of the encreasingagitation of his pupil."I do love her," returned he, "but not in the way your observationwould imply. I love her, as becomes the son of the Baroness de Ripperdato love the daughter of her sister; that sister, who has been tohim in the place of the mother heaven took from him at his birth!Alice Coningsby is the person to whom I have bound myself to releaseher conscience from the bonds of an artful man. And, after thisexplanation, I cannot believe that the friend of my father will longerwithhold my letter!"The Sieur listened with his eyes bent to the ground. He looked upwhen Louis ceased speaking; and saw, by his proud indignant air, thathe rather expected occasion for further braving a refusal, than toreceive the permission he affected to think could no longer be denied."Louis," said he, "I see what is passing in your mind; but I willnot be rigid to your present feelings. Your letter shall go to DonFerdinand. But you must expunge from it all reference to where you are,and tell him, to send the acquittal of your imprudent cousin, direct toherself."Surprised and thankful, Louis readily undertook to re-write the letteraccording to these injunctions; a few minutes put it into the formrequired, and inclosing the irresistible appeal of Alice herself, toher ungenerous lover, he sealed the packet, and delivered it to theSieur. The dispatches being fastened up, it was to be committed to theparticular charge of Castanos, who was to carry the bag to Madrid.Louis's grateful heart was again going to pour itself out, but Ignatiuschecked the ingenuous effusion, by turning severely round, as he movedto the door."This time," said he, "I have yielded to your request, inconsideration of its pious motive. But you must fully understandme; and then you will not presume more on this indulgence, than thespirit of your recent oath will sanction. Here not only ends yourcorrespondence with Don Ferdinand, but closes your communication withevery person without these walls, until our affair is terminated. Noteven the inhabitants of Lindisfarne must know of your being at Vienna.""I lament my ignorance of the necessity for such precaution," repliedLouis, "but the interdicted intimation is now beyond my recall. I wroteto both my uncles from Ostend; and twice during my journey to Vienna.""Such an accident was provided against," answered Ignatius; "Castanoshad the Baron de Ripperda's orders to destroy all such letters in theirway to the post; so be at rest on that head. Your father himself willtake care to let Mr. Athelstone and Sir Anthony know that you arewell, and conducting yourself to his satisfaction.""I am in his hands, and in your's," said Louis, bowing his head; whilestruck by so strange an act of precaution, he had not power to utter aword more. The Sieur drew his cloak over the dispatches, and withoutfurther observations, left the apartment.END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.CHAP. I.
Next morning's rayless sun found Louis passing from his hardly pressed
pillow, to the prosecution of his appointed task for the day. Ignatius
had laid before him new papers, of a totally different character from
the former, and much more difficult to transcribe.
As he continued to write, he heard the furious beating of a snow-storm
against the windows, which, in this apartment, were not only grated
but too high in the wall to allow of outward view. The heat of a
well-filled stove excluded the encreased cold of the season; and the
fierceness of the elements made him the less regret the exercise he
must relinquish, or lose all hope of reducing the immense piles before
him.
The Sieur appeared at his former nocturnal hour, to receive what had
been finished, and to leave other manuscripts to which he desired
duplicates. Day after day Louis was kept close to his desk, and every
night delivered to his unrelenting task-master the labour of the day.
At the expiration of a week, the Sieur told him he should not see
him again till the first of the ensuing month; but that he had a
correspondence to leave with him, which he must completely transcribe
into a regular series, by the time of his return. Louis received
his orders in respectful silence, and when he was again left to his
solitary toil, he found that his voluminous task was in the Sclavonian
and Turkish characters. Neither of these languages had been parts of
his studies; so he pursued his monotonous employment each succeeding
day, from morning until midnight, without the accession of one new
idea, or a moment's leisure for retrospection on former acquirements.
The sun rose, and the sun set; the weather, foul or fair; gloomy in
storm, or gay with the scintillation of exhilarating frost, all found
Louis de Montemar close at his desk. The iron-bound windows had never
opened to the air; and the charcoal fumes which warmed the apartment,
having no egress, hung in narcotic vapours on the vaulted roof. A heavy
languor fell on its lonely inhabitant, and grew on him from day to
day, till it left him hardly any other consciousness of being, than
the faculty of moving, his now habituated hand, perpetually over the
infinite reams of paper which lay before him.
On the night of the 1st of February, according to his promise, Ignatius
entered the prison-room of his unrelaxing secretary. The piles which
were completed, at last extorted from his unbending loftiness, an
exclamation of admiration at such faultless execution and indefatigable
perseverance. Louis's face no longer lighted up, as it was wont, at the
voice of praise; but he bowed, though in silence. Had Ignatius spared
a glance from the laborious heap to its unrepining artificer, that
face would have told the tale his tongue had not uttered. The bloomy
crimson of his cheek had perished under the withering breath of stoved
confinement; and his eyes, before so luminous in health, so bright in
youthful enjoyment, were sunk in languor under his darkening brows.
So thoroughly was the Sieur absorbed in the business of his visit, he
might not have observed these changes, had he not accidentally come in
contact with the hand of his pupil in taking one of the packets. He
started, as the touch seemed to scorch him.
"How is this?" cried he, eyeing Louis from head to foot, "you are ill."
"Perhaps the confinement, Sir," returned he, "may discompose me a
little. But custom will enure me to it, and meanwhile it is of no
consequence."
"No," said Ignatius, "your diligence has been too severe; you must have
air and exercise. To-morrow you shall try their efficacy. I will send a
respectable servant of my own, to attend you over the city."
Louis thankfully embraced the proposal.
The morrow's sun rose brilliant, as on the first morning he had hailed
its beams from his chamber at Vienna. Louis dismissed a breakfast, for
which he had no appetite; and with a spring of joy, he could not have
conceived it possible to have experienced by merely stepping forth into
the open air, he followed Martini, (the promised attendant from the
Sieur,) out of the great gates of the Chateau.
The man was an Italian, and possessed none of the taciturnity of
his mysterious master. With the respect due to a superior, but the
garrulous gaiety of his country, he freely remarked to his companion
on every object of sight, as he conducted him along the hoar-frosted
avenue to the extensive glacis before the fortified walls of Vienna.
Martini led the way through the Leopoldstadt-gate. Louis followed, but
paid no attention to street nor square, palace nor cathedral; he was
all occupied by the reviving aspirations he drew at every breath from
an atmosphere whose ethereal quality seemed to penetrate every pore,
and by an enchanting inebriation to restore him at once to his wonted
elasticity of spirits.
Martini conducted him through the finest squares of the city, and along
the most magnificent part of the suburbs towards the frozen Danube.
It was now the hour of high gala. The noise and bustle of a countless
multitude, passing and re-passing in a thousand different directions,
soon summoned the concentrated senses of Louis to regard outward
objects. The beams of the sun played over the landscape; hues of light
blue, intermingled with bloomy purple deepening into shade, checquered
the hills on the horizon. A waving line of shining snow marked the
heights of Calemberg, and a sky of the purest azure canopied the scene.
At the distance of his windows from the river, he could only view a
various and interminable mass of human beings moving on its surface;
but now he could distinguish the peculiar dress and aspect of each
individual of all the nations assembled on that universal theatre.
Turks, Tartars, Greeks, Muscovites, Swedes, and Italians, English and
French, all appeared as if travelling to some vast senate of mankind;
or rather, so gay were their habits, so gorgeous their equipages, it
might be taken for a pageantry in fairy-land.
Delighted to see the attention of his charge at last arouzed, Martini
allowed him, for some time, to gaze around in pleased amazement;
then, resuming his office of Cicerone with augmented eloquence,
he particularized the objects most worthy observation, and explained
them with the accuracy of an itinerary. The Asiatic structure, raising
its gilded domes over the cedars of the island, and which Louis had
noticed from his window, Martini informed him was the Favorita; the
favorite palace of the imperial family. It was now their temporary
residence; and in that direction he saw numerous carriages, of strange
shapes and capricious magnificence, shoot along the ice. Fancy seemed
to have exhausted all her varieties of form in the construction of
these whimsical vehicles. Some were fashioned like triumphal cars,
others like the fabled shells of marine deities, and many of shapes
so fantastical and grotesque, that the incumbent seemed lying in the
grasp of some sea or land monster. All were garnished with gilding,
emblazoned arms, or gallant devices; while the master, wrapped in
ermines, guided with silken reins the flying horses, who, caparisoned
in glittering housings, flashed by the spectator like the steeds of the
sun. In some of the gayest traineaux, formed like scallop-shells and
bedded with fur, beautiful women were seen reclining, while gentlemen
sat on the sledge behind, managing the horses, and conversing with the
ladies.
Louis was particularly struck with the singular beauty of the animals
which drew these carriages. They were evidently of the Arabian breed,
slight of limb, and carrying their branching necks with the grace of
an antelope. The peculiar airiness and freedom of their pace, suited
well with the Eastern magnificence of their trappings. An equipage with
four of these fine creatures had just engaged his attention, when he
found himself hurried forward by a crowd of foot-passengers, rushing
to meet a cavalcade which preceded the Empress. At the moment of
general clamour, he thought he heard his own name suddenly ejaculated.
He listened,--it was repeated, and in the voice of Duke Wharton.
Louis's heart leaped to the sound. He turned towards it, and saw the
Duke standing behind the car of one of the Arch-duchesses. Another
gentleman shared his post of honour, and guided the reins, while the
Duke's eyes met the eager recognition and out-stretched arms of his
friend. The carriage shot swiftly onward, but Wharton also extended his
arms to Louis, and, as he was snatched from his sight, pointed to the
Favorita. Louis understood that it was there he must seek him; and
thither he determined to go, when he should walk out the following day.
The sight of the Duke, not merely recalled the enthusiastic feeling
with which he originally regarded him, but presented to Louis the image
of England, and all that it contained dear to his habits and to his
heart! Tears rushed into his eyes: they seemed to overflow his soul,
as he clasped his hands and inwardly exclaimed, "England! beloved land
of liberty and tenderness! renown may be sought in other countries, but
happiness is to be found in thee!"
For the first time since his arrival at Vienna, did he allow his heart
to speak even to himself, to acknowledge that he was unhappy! That he
had exchanged the generous freedom of the home of his youth, for harsh
imprisonment in a foreign land. That he had parted with relations, who
loved and honoured him, to become dependent on a stranger, and bound to
the toil of a slave!
"Is such to be the purpose of my life?" said he to himself, as, with
eyes blinded by emotion, he turned from the gay scene; "is such to be
the oblivion of all that I took so much pains to acquire? Such, the
grave of talents, my too partial relations cherished with so many
hopes? My boasting ambition! Where has it led me? Oh, Wharton, what
will you see me now? Crushed in spirit, and bowed with servitude;
cheated into vassalage; and chained to an employment, that any hireling
might perform as honourably! For, what trust is confided in me? I copy
an unknown character; from whom, and to whom, I am completely ignorant.
No, it cannot be the will of my father, thus to degrade and sacrifice
his son!"
With these thoughts goading his fevered nerves, un-noting the way he
went, he hurried from the Danube. By accident he took the path to
the Chateau, and his guide, marvelling at the fitful humours of the
young secretary, followed in silence. With a pulse in every vein, and
feelings exasperated at the present, from immediate comparison with
the past, and yearning for the moment of throwing himself into the
arms of Wharton; as if that one embrace would restore to him at once,
his liberty, his country, and his friends; Louis did not recover his
attention to visible objects, till he found himself again within the
dreary walls of the Chateau. He locked himself into the room of his
labour, and throwing himself on the floor, gave way to the regrets that
overwhelmed him in restrainless floods of bitter tears. In Lindisfarne,
he had wept in tenderness and in sorrow. He had known the pangs of
parting, and given the tribute of his tears to the racking moment. But
he had never felt completely unmanned until now.
Hour passed over hour; Gerard knocked at the door, to announce that
his solitary meal was prepared, but he knocked unheeded. At last, the
deepening glooms of evening enclosing him in darkness, reminded him
the day was past, and that his demanded task of the morning was yet
to begin. Aware that the man, whom he was required to revere as a
guardian, but whom the pangs of recollection made him now abhor as
a tyrant, would exact it from him at midnight; he started from the
ground. At that moment of self-recall to labour, the yoke of bondage
pressed with insupportable weight upon his soul.
"I will not endure it!" cried he, "why should I immure myself like
a condemned wretch? Shut up in solitude, fastened to the duty of a
machine; Without sound of human voice, but that of my hard task-master!
Without breathing the free air of Heaven; unless accompanied with
lackies! Is this a fate, chosen by the Baron de Ripperda for his son,
his only son? It is mockery, and I will not endure it."
The fever in his blood exaggerated to his perturbed mind every
mysterious circumstance in his situation. He might be now the
unconscious instrument of treason, or the cheated agent of political
treachery. His father's confidence might be abused by the impenetrable
Ignatius, and he be ignorant, alike of his son's being at Vienna, and
of the illiterate drudgery to which he was consigned.
All this seemed the strange effect of Louis having seen Duke Wharton.
But much sprung from a distempered imagination, and disordered nerves;
the consequence of loneliness, want of exercise, and long confinement
in a deleterious atmosphere. However, the sudden appearance of
Wharton was certainly the circumstance which at once awoke all his
sensibilities to the perception of his changed state; of the liberty
he had been persuaded to relinquish, of the liberty he might, perhaps,
regain by the Duke's interference. The last idea was a vague one, but
still it was visible; it had a shadowy existence between hope and
despair, and Louis clasped at the delusive shade.
A prey to these confused imaginations, he could not command either the
desire or the power to resume his labours. Leaning his throbbing head
upon the table, he allowed the gloom of black night to surround him;
without even the wish to dispel it, by going into the adjoining room
for one of the candles which had been for so many hours burning to
waste.
As the old clock of the mansion struck ten, he was aroused from his
moody position by a gleam of light. He looked up, and saw the Sieur
Ignatius standing before him, with a lamp in his hand.
Louis started, disordered, from his chair.
"What is the meaning of this?" asked the Sieur, in a kindly voice; "I
fear you are seriously ill."
Louis, in attempting to speak, was agitated to suffocation. Ignatius
fixed his eyes on his haggard countenance.
"Your zeal has over-wrought your strength. Health is as necessary as
will, to the completion of your duty. In these respects you must learn
to be an economical, as well as a generous servant to your country; for
that is the only way to be an efficient one. I see you have been too
ill to prepare this night's papers."
The unusual interest in his feelings, which this address intimated; and
the perfect confidence in his will to perform, what he had not done,
smote on the heart of Louis; and, embarrassed and miserable, he bowed
in silence.
"Sit down," continued the Sieur, evidently struck with the changed
appearance of his charge; "I was improvident not to calculate on the
ardour of your character, and give you orders to make pauses in your
work, and take daily exercise in the garden. I ought to have thought
on the garden before; for your walk of to-day without the walls, has
already been productive of vexation. You have been seen, and to my
great embarrassment, recognised. Have you any idea by whom?"
"By the Duke of Wharton," returned Louis, with all the recollections of
that moment flushing his cheek; "I saw him on the Danube."
"And you saluted him first?" demanded Ignatius.
"No;" answered Louis, "but I turned to a voice calling on my name
through the crowd, and met the eyes of my friend."
"And he recognised you, and you him?"
"We did."
"Mischief upon mischief!" ejaculated the Sieur, starting from his
chair, and striding across the room in extraordinary discomposure. He
turned suddenly upon Louis.--"So thoroughly did I believe you incapable
of conduct so inconsistent with your awful engagements, that I have
absolutely contradicted the mutual recognition. On being told of it
to night by the Emperor's confessor, and the inferences drawn from
the fact; I empowered him to affirm that he knew from an authority he
could not dispute, that Louis de Montemar was not in Vienna; and that
whoever had occasioned the report, must have mistaken some other person
for the son of the Baron de Ripperda. Think then, faithless boy, into
what a dilemma your recognition of Duke Wharton has brought the friend
of your father! Into what a danger you have precipitated the cause, in
which that father has embarked his fortunes and his life!"
"Sir," said Louis, with the dignity of conscious probity answering a
man who had so lately put his affirmation to a falsehood; "my office
here is inconsistent with my awful engagements. I bound myself to
the dedication of all my talents, all the energies of my mind and
heart, to the service of my father's country, now become mine; and
to be obedient to him, as its agent. But I find myself, and all
these talents, few or many, which have been the labour of my life to
cultivate, chained down to the one mechanical act of writing on this
table, in a character unknown to me, and on subjects concerning which
I am as ignorant as the messenger that carries them to and fro! I am
not treated with the confidence of a son, but the suspicion of a slave;
and I have my doubts that I am really so degraded by the commands of my
father."
"This is new language Louis de Montemar! You have spoken with the Duke
of Wharton. He knows all that you know: and he has put this complexion
on the affair! well he knows how to sap and to overturn--and a fit
agent for a father's ruin, he has found in the son of the Baron de
Ripperda."
As the terrible Ignatius delivered this, he approached close to Louis,
and seizing his arm, fixed on him his powerful eyes, as if to look
into his soul.
"I can bear your scrutiny, Sir," said he, "were you to rip open my
breast with the poniard your hand rests upon. It is not in me to betray
any man. I have not spoken with Duke Wharton."
"And you must not," returned the Sieur, recovering his presence of
mind, and dropping his hand from the dagger's hilt he had unconsciously
grasped; "you must avoid, avoid even the chance of his seeing you
again. You are ill, and you are moody. You require air and action; and
you shall have them: but henceforth they must be found in the garden
of the Chateau. Be obedient to this necessity; and I will forget
the phrenzied language, which, if not Wharton, some demon must have
conjured, to betray your reason and your duty."
"Sir," replied Louis, in great emotion; "I do not wish you to forget
it. I wish you to answer me to all its points. I wish to know at once,
whether I am a trusted servant, or an abused slave? Trust me, and
that labour will be happiness--distinction!--which is now misery, and
degradation insupportable!"
For some time the lofty Ignatius regarded his pupil's almost convulsed
features with a steady perusal of their varying expressions.--At last,
putting his hand on the shoulder of Louis, he said in a calm voice;
"Compose yourself; and listen to me. Hear from my lips, truths that
must be your future guide in the destiny you have chosen; but to combat
with the evils of which, you come totally unprovided. You have educated
yourself for the service of your country.--You are full of ardour to
engage in it. But how? Not as she directs; but as yourself chuses. You
would fight her battles in the field of blood; you would fill her cars
of triumph! But you disdain to watch for her in secret, to labour in
obscurity for her ultimate peace. This last, is virtue in her purest
simplicity; and, therefore, your father awarded to the virgin honour of
his son, the unblemished sacrifice."
Louis believed that he now, indeed, listened to truth. But why did he,
who could impress it so powerfully, why did he utter so mean a denial
of the fact, as to affirm that the son of Baron de Ripperda was not in
Vienna?
The prompt intelligence of the Sieur's rapid glance, had seen the
effect of this assertion on the mind of his pupil; and while he pursued
his remarks on what had passed, he noticed the equivocation he had
made, as a common style in diplomacy: "your being in the suburbs,
and not in Vienna," said he, "afforded me the advantage of this
ambiguity. Always hold in mind, that no advantage, however trivial, is
contemptible to a negotiator. The smallest causes often produce the
greatest effects. Alberoni's mysterious policy, which held Europe in
awe for five years, was revealed and destroyed in one moment by the
dropping of his courier's cloak-bag into a river!"
While Louis sighed to think, that subterfuge could ever be a duty,
he was filled with ingenuous shame at the suspicions he had dared
to proclaim; at the reproaches with which his impatient doubts, and
personal feelings, had provoked him to insult the trusted friend
of his father. The forbearance of the Sieur Ignatius, under this
unexpected flood of impassioned violence, augmented the contrition of
the disordered offender; and when he rose to withdraw, Louis could only
say, "bear with me this night. I am incapable of speaking--almost of
thinking--but bear with me! and to-morrow, you shall find that I have
not listened in vain."
CHAP. II.
Next day found Louis in a state far from tranquillized. Thorough
dissatisfaction with himself, had prevented his eyes closing
during the night; and he arose in the morning, only to continue
his self-accusations. He condemned the indulgence of feelings so
inconsistent with his usual candour in dubious circumstances, and
which had hurried him, not only into an unreasonable despair of his
own situation, but, with the most dishonouring suspicions, to provoke
the man, who, it was madness to doubt, was the confidential colleague
of the Baron de Ripperda. And yet, while he vowed to himself, that no
privation of air or action, no solitude and monotony of life, should
ever excite him to a second murmur; while he panted for the moment in
which he might repair, by a full apology to the Sieur, the indignity he
had cast upon him; he could not warm the chill at his heart, when he
recollected that the first amends Ignatius was likely to demand of him,
would be to relinquish all hope of seeing the Duke of Wharton.
This conviction threw his still agitated mind into tumults. In the
parting interview between him and Mr. Athelstone, that venerable man
had taken off the absolute terms of his interdiction respecting the
Duke. In the wide and busy world, his nephew and Wharton might meet
again; and in circumstances that Louis could not bend to his promise
of avoidance. On this ground, the Pastor now left him to his own
discretion. "But, remember," added he, "it is to your discretion!"
Louis thought on this licence from his revered uncle, with the
outstretching arms of his soul towards his beloved friend; and, he
vainly pursued his laborious penmanship, to get rid of the attendant
ideas. The well-known voice, calling on him through the crowd, haunted
his ear. Again, and again, the form of his friend, leaning towards
him from the car, rose before him. He threw down his pen, and rested
his working brain upon his hand. He could not recollect how Wharton
looked, for he had not seen how he looked; all that his glad eyes had
taken in of that dear apparition, was, that it was him! That it was his
resplendent countenance which shone on him from that gay eminence!
"And I must not see it again!" cried Louis, "all with whom I am
connected, seem leagued at one time or other to exclude him from my
society. But they never can shut him from my heart. His gracious
selection of me, from a crowd, older and of more approved merit than
myself; his own distinguished qualities and irrepressible confidence
in my honour, have bound me to love him through a life that is
condemned to fly him, as if he were my direst enemy."
Louis opened his writing-case to recreate his eyes with the sight
of Wharton's letter, that he might hear him speak through that at
least; but as soon as he touched it, and saw the superscription, whose
characters again recalled the image of the writer, and with it the home
in which he had first read the letter; he dropped it back into the case.
"I will not further un-nerve myself," cried he, "by pressing memory on
my heart! I will not pervert hours of past happiness to the purposes of
present wretchedness. I must remember that I am called to self-denial;
and you, dear generous Wharton! fated to be my first, are to continue
my repeated sacrifice."
Louis was found at noon by his punctual visitor, seated at his desk
with his former diligence. A slight hectic coloured his cheek as he
rose to receive him.--The Sieur smiled. Louis again saw the heaven
open, which had beguiled him into confidence on his first arrival, and
this smile was not so flitting as its predecessor. It dwelt on his
features like a bending seraph lingering on its cloud.
"Louis," cried he, "I come to trust you."
Louis caught the hand which was extended to him, and pressed it to his
lips.
"I come to trust you," said he, "but not as I see you expect; I come to
call again upon your faith, to fulfil the whole of this affair, while
you must yet remain ignorant of its particular purpose; to trust in
your honour, that you will not further doubt the integrity of the
man on whom your father has conferred confidence without reserve. His
interests and mine are united, never to be separated in this world:
we rise, or we fall together. You redden Louis! But I do not trifle
with you. It is possible that accident, if not design, may betray a
scheme of such important bearings; and I will not leave it in the power
of malice to accuse the son of Baron de Ripperda of treachery, or of
imprudence in such a case."
"My recent conduct," replied he, "gives you no reliance on my prudence;
and you believe me unworthy of fuller confidence."
"No, Louis,--that I still hold you in ignorance, is a greater proof of
my dependence on your fidelity, than if I bound your personal interests
with your honour, by unfolding to you any part of the glorious plan
on which you are employed. Your oath ties your conscience to the
fulfilment of your duty, but I want your free-will. I want, what I
thought I had. The open eye of faith in the virtue of your cause,--the
forward hand of zealous devotedness in the execution. Give me your
mind, Louis, and I shall no longer see that changing cheek and languid
frame? Zeal is life."
"Again I pledge myself," returned he, "I will be all you require,
only trust me!" Then with a sudden paleness displacing the flush of
resolution, and with a forced smile, he added, "I know I must prove my
sincerity by a victim; and I yield a dear one. I will not see the Duke
of Wharton, till you or my father grant me that privilege."
"To see him," replied the Sieur, resuming his usual austerity, "it is
probable you may one day have perfect liberty, but never to cultivate
his friendship."
"How?--Wherefore?"
"He is the enemy of your father."
"O, No--I have reason to believe he would gladly make my father his
friend."
The moment this had escaped him, Louis could have plucked his tongue
out for having uttered so inconsiderate a speech; so much did he
fear that Ignatius would immediately demand what was that reason. But
for once, the sagacious politician lost an opportunity of acquiring
information respecting the views of a rival. Absorbed in the haughty
consciousness of his own pre-eminence, he did not put the dreaded
question, but with a scornful motion of his lips, replied.--
"I doubt it not.--But Philip Wharton would purchase without gold. He
may defraud, but he cannot bestow."
"I do not understand you, Sir?"
"Future events will speak plainly," returned the Sieur, "and meanwhile,
I rely on your engagement to avoid him."
Louis smothered an indignant rising in his bosom, and without
answering, bowed his head in ratification of his promise.
Ignatius turned to the table, and gathering up the manuscripts
prepared for him, told his now silent companion, that he need not
resume his labours till he had taken the air on the terrace. "But,"
added he, "you must not forget that for every day, until I direct
otherwise, the garden is your utmost limits."
"I shall not wish to extend them," replied Louis, with a resigned but
lofty bow, and the Sieur left the room.
With his expanding heart again closed by the repulsive demeanor of his
governor, Louis saw him depart. A feeling of complete desolation spread
over his soul. Without having found comfort in his presence, he felt
a more dreary loneliness when he was gone, as the hope of winning at
all on his unbending nature, seemed utterly at an end. He had tried
it, by anticipating what he knew would be exacted, the resignation
of his friend. But Ignatius had received the sacrifice, not merely
without sensibility, but with the most unsparing remarks. The tender
care with which all his good dispositions had been fostered by the
secluded guardians of his youth, made him doubly feel how sterile is
the communion of the world. Interest may bind man to man, and extort
the convenience of virtue; but affection is not there, to nourish or to
reward its growth.
"Misjudging Ignatius! he demands my mind, when he might have my heart!
I would love him, but he will not let me. In vain I watched for another
of those smiles; the first, I hailed on my arrival as an earnest of a
gracious master! And the second, which greeted me to-day, as a pledge
of forgiveness of my yesterday's impatience, how soon was it displaced
by the hard aspect of despotic command! But I deserve it," exclaimed
he, "did not my humiliation, at having so frantically rebelled, vanish
as soon? I was even on the point of a second violence, had not some
good angel stilled the tumult in my breast." Having walked his dismal
apartment some time, continuing the same soliloquy, he threw himself
into a chair to compose his mind, and to confirm it. He arraigned
himself for the weakness of his present discontents, and summoned his
best reason to the forming a steady resolution of pursuing his duty
upon the principle of enduring as well as acting. He reviewed the past
and the present with an impartial eye; and where he saw he failed,
condemned himself with an inexorable judgement.
In this hour's communing with himself, he found how different is the
real from the imaginary contest; how wise is speculation, how absurd
practice; how easy profession, how difficult performance; and that of
all conquests, that of reason over a refractory heart, is the hardest
to acquire. After these humbling reflections, he walked forth a victor,
though a wounded one, to cheer himself with the glories of the setting
sun. Its reclining orb had never failed to recall the compact which
his heart had made, when he beheld it for the last time on the verge of
his native hills. But this evening, its mild religious light, gradually
withdrawing into the clouds, as the golden disk sunk beneath the earth,
reminded him so touchedly of the venerable saint whose emblem he had
called it, that he could not forbear exclaiming,
"Yes, my revered uncle! Those pious hands shall not always be raised
in vain. I trust, that henceforth I shall do my duty in a manner
more befitting the character you fondly believed mine; but on which,
recent experience has too repeatedly shewn me, how slight ought to
have been my dependance. For your sake, dear instructor of my youth!
I will do all, and be all, that is required of me. I will forget your
graciousness, that, in this land of severity, I may act worthy of your
hopes. They who led me away captive, require of me a song, and melody
in my heaviness! and, for thine honour, gentlest of human beings, I
will take my harp from the willows, and be as happy as this stubborn
heart will let me."
For several succeeding weeks, Louis steadily obeyed the law he had
enjoined himself. The exasperation of his mind gradually subsided;
his awakened sensibilities sunk to repose; and he concentrated his
thoughts as much as possible upon his unchanging toil. As he constantly
passed part of every day in the open air, he found companions, and even
social ones, in the birds he fed with the crumbs from his breakfast.
Their grateful chirpings were cheerful; and as he paced the snows of
the garden, his blood regained its vigour, and the elasticity of his
spirits revived. Again his cheek wore the brightness of health; and his
volant step, too often reminded him how narrow were his boundaries.
His eye, however, was yet free to range; and its excursions were wide
as the horizon. It sought the heights of Mount Calemberg, whose hoary
summits mingled with the hazy west; or when the winter day put on a
fairer garb, he contemplated their snowy peaks piercing the glittering
sky, and cloathed in all its splendor. A little convent, like
Paraclete's white walls and silver springs, stood in an umbrageous
cleft of the mountain; whose icicled trees, and frozen stream, promise
a luxuriant scene in verdant summer.
But Mount Calemberg, with all its beauties, was not as fair to him, as
cloud-capt Cheviot, clad in her storms, and standing sublime amidst
the roaring torrent, and the shouts of the hunters echoing from her
hills. He sighed for the joyous chace, for the jocund hour of return.
He thought the voices of his uncle's boon companions, would no more
sound discordant in his ear; even for the cry of their dogs, and their
own loud halloos, reverberating from the walls of the old hall of
Bamborough, what would he now give?
"Churl that I was," cried he, "not to allow people to be happy, but in
my own way! And fool too, to despise them for being happy, with the
humbler talents bestowed on them by the God of nature!"
Louis blushed to feel, that we must suffer, to value all that is
bestowed.
His wandering eye could not elude the attraction of another point. It
often turned to the yet frozen Danube, and tried, by straining its
powers, to discern amongst the variegated groups, any thing like the
person of his interdicted friend; but he gazed in vain. The river was
too distant to distinguish individuals; and all he saw, was a moving
pageantry, which might interest, but could never satisfy him, as it was
probable it contained Wharton, and it was impossible for him to see
him, if it did.
Louis was constant in these walks, and the Sieur as regular in his
evening visits. The one, always greeted his governor with cheerfulness;
and the other, his pupil, with a stateliness, which shewed approbation,
only by silence from reproof. But Louis was content, and the whole
glided smoothly on.
The name of Wharton never occurred between them, to disturb the
unruffled surface, but once; and that was occasioned by the Duke's
parting letter to Louis, dropping out of his private portfolio, one
evening when Ignatius asked if he could furnish him with a sheet of
paper bearing the English water-mark. As the letter fell with the seal
to the floor, the Sieur's observing eye recognised the hand-writing,
and, though unused to the bending mood, he stooped to take it up.
"You have corresponded with Wharton!" cried he, holding the letter in
his hand; "what, did he tell you, was his object in leaving England
last autumn?" "Nothing, Sir;" replied Louis, stretching out his hand
rather too eagerly to receive the letter; but Ignatius retained it.
"That was the first, and the only letter, with which he ever honoured
me."
"It is in answer then, to one from yourself?"
"No; I have never written to him. That was sent to me the night
he quitted England, to go----he did not say whither; and so the
correspondence ended."
"And, as certainly, he did not desire its continuance," replied the
Sieur. He observed Louis start, and redden with an air of offended
incredulity. "Else why," resumed he, "did he omit naming to you
the place of his destination? But," added he, throwing the letter
contemptuously on the table, "Wharton was always a creature of caprice,
and you will not be the last ball his racket will strike out of his
careing."
Stung with the sarcasm of this remark, mortified at being supposed
liable to such trifling, and jealous for the sincerity of his friend,
with flashing eyes Louis took up the letter, and held it silently in
his hand. He stood a few minutes, struggling to subdue the resentment
that was ready to burst from his lips. The Sieur appeared to have
already forgotten the matter, and was calmly examining the manuscripts
on the table. This apathy was more galling, than perhaps further
remark. Louis pressed on his swelling heart the recollection of the
vow he had made to himself, to bear all, as well as to do all, the
will of this arrogant man; and turning towards his port-folio, he was
replacing the letter in the case, when Ignatius looking up, said in a
voice that was careless of being heard,
"It is pity, to see ingenuous youth treasure a counterfeit, for true
metal."
"Your observation, Sir," said Louis, "does not touch the Duke of
Wharton."
"But it might you, Louis;" coolly answered the Sieur, "for you hold a
proof of his ephemeral attachments, in your hand."
Louis felt an instant impulse to disprove at once this contemptuous
inference, by requesting Ignatius to read the Duke's letter; but the
next moment he bethought him, whether there were ought in the contents
his misjudged friend might wish not to be exposed to an enemy. For
such, he could not but perceive the inveterate Ignatius was to Wharton.
There was a mixture of malignant contempt, with evident apprehension
of his influence somewhere, which marked the sentiment the Sieur
entertained for him; but whether from personal dislike, or solely on
account of the asserted hostility between him and Baron de Ripperda,
Louis could not be sure; though he certainly saw hatred in his
governor's deeply sunken eyes, whenever he spoke of the Duke.
To persist in silence, seemed to Louis to be sanctioning these
calumnies on his friend, and to continue asserting without offering
proof, he was aware would only redouble the scorn of his antagonist.
Placed in a torturing dilemma, he stood recollecting whether the
contents of the Duke's letter were such that he might safely shew; when
the Sieur, rising from his seat, said in an exasperating tone of pity;
"put up your relic, Louis! though I see you are properly ashamed of a
credulity too natural to the vanity of youth."
"No, Sir;" returned he, opening the letter with a trembling hand; "I
should detest myself, if I thought I had a spark within me of any
thing so mean as vanity. But if I had, Duke Wharton is of too noble a
nature to play upon credulity so worthless. That letter, Sir, if you
will condescend to read it, will shew you that I am honoured with his
friendship."
Ignatius had now wrought Louis to the point at which he aimed, but
maintaining his air of indifference, he took the letter from the
agitated hand of his pupil, without observation. Louis presented it
with a proud look, and stood as proudly watching his countenance while
he read it. The Sieur went over it twice; he then coldly returned it,
with the remark, "it is beyond my skill to expound so curious a riddle,
but as you are his friend, you doubtless have a key?"
All the self-confidence, which a moment before had dilated the
indignant heart of Louis, fell in an instant. He did not anticipate
this sort of observation on the letter, and alarmed at the impressions
which must have given rise to it, he stood in speechless embarrassment.
"This piece of paper," continued Ignatius, "is mere nonsense to me;
and proves nothing, of what you to wish prove, unless you can do it by
explaining its meaning?"
Louis remained silent.
The Sieur proceeded:--"You ought not to have put such seeming foolery
into my hands, unless you were prepared to be its commentary."
"Then return it to me, Sir," cried Louis, overwhelmed with confusion,
"and forget that you have seen it."
"I never forget any thing that I have seen, and, I am not to be trifled
with. You have called my attention to this letter; you have shewn it
to me, as a proof of Duke Wharton's confidence in you: but I see only
a farrago of words, which, you have now pledged yourself to put into
reasonable meaning by your explanation."
Louis's consternation was so great, at so unlooked for a consequence
of what he had done, that he could not recollect what he had said,
or might have implied to the Sieur; and he continued to gaze on the
ground, humbled to the dust. "Oh!" cried he, in the depths of his soul,
"was I then under the immediate control of detested, mischievous
vanity, at the very moment I disclaimed its presence in my heart!
Wretch that I am, to have been betrayed by any motive, to open the
faintest glimmering of light upon the secrets of my friend, to this
inexorable man!"
The recollection of Wharton's words, I put my life into your hands!
rose before his mental sight in characters of blood; and turning sick
at heart, he supported a momentary failure of his limbs, by grasping
the back of a chair. The sight of this agitation only stimulated the
curiosity of Ignatius, or, whatever else it was that impelled him to
persecute his unoffending charge to such a point of distress.--He
resumed.
"You have gone too far, to be silent now, I can comprehend, that
certain phrases in this enigmatical epistle, refer to former
conferences with you. Brutus and Cassius are not usually masquing
names in affairs of gallantry, therefore, the nature of your mutual
confidence I can guess; and it is necessary for your own, as well as
the Duke's honour, that you should tell me their object."
"Sir," said Louis, "I have already done too much for my own honour.--The
Duke's can never be injured by any thing I can say or withhold. And, I
will mention his name no more."
"Young man," said Ignatius, "you must not add obstinacy to rashness.
You have allowed yourself to be made privy to the schemes of a man who
is suspected by his country! Be aware, that to conceal treason, is to
share it."
Louis did not speak.
The Sieur continued: "Besides, you are answerable to your country, and
to your father, who has devoted you with himself, to her interests, to
reveal to him, as to your confessor, every event of your life. Much
more, then, a circumstance like this. For, on your father's intimate
acquaintance with every political device which could possibly disturb
Europe, depends his guiding to perfection the mighty machine he is
now constructing to give peace to the world. Hence, the glory of your
father, as well as your vow to Spain, commands you to bend all minor
considerations to the great duty of your life; and to confide to him,
through me, every confidence of a political nature which has passed
between you and the Duke of Wharton."
"The glory of my father," replied Louis, "can never be augmented by
his son's faithlessness. And could Spain require such a proof of my
attachment to her, the law of God, which is the everlasting appeal from
all human ordinances, would sanction me in abjuring my vow!"
"You grant that Wharton has engaged your faithfulness! A secret
implied, is a secret revealed; and further withholding a full
acknowledgement, is finesse with me, and irreverence to your father.
The Duke left Vienna a few weeks ago, secretly, and I have reason to
believe, you could guess whither he is gone?"
"Sir," answered Louis, "I neither say, nor do not say, that I have
been honoured with any confidence whatever, by the Duke of Wharton;
but I repeat, that neither to my father, nor to any man living, do I
think it necessary to betray a trust in me. Therefore, as I cannot
repeat discourses I have never heard, and will not repeat discourses
confided to me; you cannot be surprized that I hold my peace. My
inconsideration, to give it the mildest appellation, has gone far
enough, in shewing Duke Wharton's letter, however indifferent its
subject, without his permission."
The Sieur fixed his investigating eye upon the determined brow of his
pupil.
"Louis de Montemar," cried he, "you have imprudence enough in your
composition to ruin a state; and sufficient stubbornness of what you
call Honour, to ensure your own destruction. If you do not mean to
relax the one, you must learn to confirm your mind against the wild
influence of the other. Act less from passion, and more from principle.
Be wary of friend, as well as foe; and never speak from your heart,
till your words have paused in your head, to take the judgment of your
circumspection. Had you shewn this letter to one less interested in
your welfare, than your father's friend, the suspicion its style would
have awakened, might have wrought consequences ruinous to the Duke, and
not much less full of evil to yourself. I shall now drop the subject
for ever, because I see that you will not neglect its lesson."
With the gratitude of one escaped from a snare, into which he thought
he had desperately, and therefore blameably rushed, Louis took the
letter, which the Sieur presented to him. His ingenuous cheek flushed
with displeasure at himself for having been beguiled, rather than at
the subtle trier of his wariness; and respectfully, though silently, he
bowed his head to his unanswerable monitor. Ignatius fell immediately
into his usual abstracted mood, and soon after left the room.
CHAP. III.
Three days after this discussion, Louis had just seated himself at his
morning task, when he heard a knock at the chamber door. This was an
unusual circumstance, for Gerard never approached with such signal,
but at the hours when his stroke was to announce the frugal repast in
the adjoining apartment. The Sieur always entered with his own key;
and this was a time of the day he never visited the Chateau. Louis
thought it could be no summons to him, and that probably Gerard had
accidentally occasioned the noise in passing. But in another minute, he
heard a second knock, louder than the former. He then rose to see what
it was, and to his surprise beheld Castanos; whom he had not seen, or
heard of, since his departure with the dispatches for Spain.
Hoping to hear news of his father; and that his letter to Don Ferdinand
had reached him in safety; Louis eagerly bade him welcome from Madrid.
With a deepened gloom on his always sullen countenance, Castanos
roughly interrupted him.--
"I am sent to tell you, Senor, that the Sieur Ignatius is at the point
of death."
"Impossible!" cried Louis, "he was not here yesterday; but I saw him
the evening before, in perfect health."
"Last night he was stabbed in the porch of the Jesuits' College,"
returned Castanos.
Louis's tongue clove to the roof of his mouth, as grasping the arm of
his unfeeling informant, he seemed to demand, who had done it? For once
in his life, the morose Spaniard suffered his half-closed eyes to look
directly on the face of a fellow-creature. He was not insensible to
the horror depicted on Louis, and in more humane accents replied--
"Villains way-laid him in the porch at the outer gate of the College,
where he always quits his carriage. They closed on him: but he
struggled, and drew his dagger. The business, however, was soon over;
for the stroke of some heavy weapon felled him to the ground; and while
he lay insensible, to make sure work, they stabbed him, and fled. But
the drawn blood did a service not intended.--It recovered my lord
Ignatius from his swoon; and he managed to stagger to the gate, and
gain admittance. When I was sent for to his chamber, which was not till
this morning, I found surgeons and a priest with him; and they declare
his wounds dangerous."
"And am I not to see him?" cried Louis, forgetting his hard
task-master, in the image of a fellow-creature dying by murder; that
fellow-creature was his father's friend; and he repeated, "may I not
go to him?"
"I came to bring you to him," replied Castanos.
Shocked as he was by the horrid recital, Louis felt an emotion of
pleasure at this summons. To be to his severe, but he believed upright
guardian, a more soothing attendant than was in the power, if indeed in
the will of the rugged Spaniard, gave a generous satisfaction to his
heart. Having carefully locked the chamber which contained the secret
papers; that, whether the Sieur lived or died, his injunctions might be
equally respected; Louis accompanied his old conductor to a carriage
which awaited them in the court-yard.
While driving down the avenue, and crossing the esplanade into the
city, both Louis and his companion were lost in thought. At last
the former, hardly conscious of giving utterance to his meditations
suddenly asked Castanos whether he had any idea of the motive of this
horrid deed "Not robbery," replied the Spaniard; "they never stopped
for plunder. They wanted his life. And, I believe, we may curse the
jealousy of your father's political enemies for the motive. I brought
my dispatches from Madrid yesterday morning; and yesterday night these
daggers were at work."
"But how," returned Louis, "can the death of the Sieur Ignatius be of
such moment to my father's enemies, that they should load their souls
with this assassination, and leave my father alive?"
"Senor," said Castanos, "you know little of politicians. The agents
of such rivals are always in danger. So you will do well to look to
yourself."
"No man knows me in this capital."
"But some may know your employment; and that is the object of
grudge.--Since the stilleto has reached our master, we know not how far
it may be from ourselves."
Louis could not bid him not fear; for the assault on their employer
proved that danger was connected with their situation; and being
ignorant of what that situation really was, he could not foresee whence
the danger might issue, nor how it might be repelled. He therefore made
no reply; neither did he ask any more questions of a man, who, when he
did break his sullen taciturnity, was ever more inclined to engloom an
evil prospect, than to cheer it with a ray of hope.
The silence that ensued, was not interrupted till the carriage drew up
before a colossal column, surmounted by a bronze statue of the Virgin
Mary, and in front of which stretched the dark walls of the College. At
the portico they alighted.
"Here," muttered Castanos, "is the place of blood; and its marks are
yet on the stones."
As he said, Louis saw; for it might be tracked from the spot where he
supposed the Sieur had fallen, to where he rose and made his way to the
gate. Louis shuddered at such a proof of the most dreadful part of
the Spaniard's tale, and hastened to follow him through the porch. He
entered a large quadrangle, surrounded by cloisters. As they proceeded,
Louis perceived several persons in dark monastic habits, walking to
and fro under the colonades. When he approached, they eyed him with
curiosity; and when two or three were together, they whispered as he
passed. Castanos seemed vexed by this notice; but without remarking
on it, hurried his companion towards a great door at the extremity of
one of the cloisters. He struck it with his clenched hand, and it was
instantly opened by a man, who Louis recognised to be Martini, the
servant who had attended him in his only walk beyond the walls of the
Chateau. He immediately enquired whether the Sieur had undergone any
change since Castanos left him.
"No, Signor. The Superior of the College is with him now, but he is
impatient for your arrival."
"Shew me to his apartment," cried Louis; and following with fleet steps
the long strides of the Italian, the father of the Jesuits met him, as
he passed into the presence of the wounded Ignatius.
The chamber was then left entirely to the invalid, and to the
conference he had so strenuously desired to have with his secretary.
Louis advanced into the room. Ignatius lay on a low couch, which, from
its form and sombre appointments, looked more like a bier for the
dead, than a bed of rest for the living. It stood in the center of an
arched cove at the end of the apartment. Louis approached in speechless
awe. As he drew near, he saw the body of the Sieur extended under the
coverlid, in the position he should have expected had he been to find
him in his shroud. His head lay flat on the pillow, and was so veiled
in a black cowl, nothing could be discerned of his face, but his ashy
lips and grizzled beard.
Ignatius knew the step that so cautiously drew near his bed, and feebly
raising the arm, which his pupil now saw had lain enveloped in black
upon the dark coverlid, he put out his hand to him. Louis clasped it
gently in his, but forbore to speak. He felt himself pressed by the
cold fingers of Ignatius; and there was an expression in the touch
that said, he understood his sympathy. Louis bent his head to that not
silent hand, and put it to his lips.
"Son of Ripperda," said the Sieur, in a low agitated voice; "thou hast
a kindly heart!"
"The son of Ripperda," replied Louis, "could not feel otherwise
towards the friend of his father. But I would devote myself to watch
this couch, for the Sieur Ignatius's own sake." Again he felt his
hand pressed by the wounded man; and the smile, which was once so
beautiful, flitted over his shrouded countenance like a departing
spirit. Louis turned icy cold. He had never seen any one on a
death-bed; and that spectacle, which he believed was now before him,
shivered him to the soul.
"Louis," said the Sieur, after a pause, "I have not summoned you
hither, to wait upon the tedious hours of my recovery, but to perform
my part in the place, where jealousy of my success has brought me to
this. You must go to the Imperial palace; I am expected there in the
course of an hour; for none there yet know of this assassination. You
must see the Empress, and acquaint her with what has happened. With
difficulty I have written these few hardly legible lines, to assure her
she may trust you with any confidential paper or message to me; and she
too well knows my writing, to doubt their authenticity. My surgeons say
little to encourage hope, but tell Her Majesty, I feel a life in my
heart, that her enemies and mine have not been able to reach!"
Ignatius spoke this at intervals, checked at each sentence by internal
spasms from his most dangerous wound. But he shewed a vehemence at
the close, which his pupil had never before witnessed in his tempered
discourse. More than his usual caution seemed taken from his lips, and
as Louis apprehended the approach of delirium, he felt the hand which
still clasped his, flash at once into a scorching heat. The agitated
speaker gasped for breath, but after a momentary pause he began again,
and with rapid utterance went through a train of directions, to guide
his pupil in his conference with the Empress. In the midst of the most
energetic part of his discourse, his lip became convulsed, he suddenly
stopped, and dropping the hand he held, seemed as if seized at once by
the grasp of death. Louis sprang forward, to give air to the enveloped
face, but the moment Ignatius felt the attempt to withdraw his cowl,
he arrested the hand that touched it, and said in a stifled voice: "do
not be alarmed, I am not dying, but in pain. The villains struck well
through my side, but not quite home!--Go," continued he, "you will find
Martini in the anti-chamber. He has my orders to attend you to the
palace. You will then be conducted to the Altheim apartments; shew that
card to the page at the door, (it is written by the Empress's own hand,
to admit the possessor,) and he will immediately obey its command. In
those apartments you will see the Imperial Elizabeth."
Louis had been under no inconsiderable degree of surprize during many
parts of this discourse. Until now, he had supposed that the agency
of Ignatius was directed to some of the Austrian ministers, whom his
father probably wished to bring over to the present views of Spain.
He could hardly have suspected that so much caution and peril could
be connected with any negociation in which the sovereigns themselves
were principles; and that they should be principles, was astonishing
in itself. The Emperor's claims on the throne of Spain, and Philip's
repugnance to the Austrian possession of the Netherlands, united with
the pertinacious character of the two monarchs, and the usual turn
of human passions, would have made Louis affirm, that no political
adversaries could have been more naturally irreconcilable to amity
between them, beyond occasional shews of peace.
However the Sieur Ignatius had borne a reverse testimony. His pupil
could not doubt what he had said, and taking the credentials presented
to him, he was rising to withdraw, when the wounded man impressively
added; "remember, she alone knows that my secretary is Louis de
Montemar. In the guard-room, you will hear yourself announced as the
Chevalier de Phaffenberg."
Louis stood silent, without moving another pace to the door; "Oh!"
thought he, "another deception! How can that be right, which requires
so much wrong to support it!"
Not hearing his step, the Sieur guessed what was passing in his mind.
"I understand your hesitation," cried he, "though I cannot look on you;
the wound in my head, will not suffer my eyes to endure the light.
But Louis, you must not cross me at such an hour as this, with your
romantic prejudices. Should any want of caution discover you to the eye
or ear of an enemy, the blow that has only half reached me, may be made
sure; and the failure of our scheme at this crisis, would sink your
father's fame in everlasting dishonour."
"O! Sir," returned Louis, "I cannot connect dishonour with a scheme of
virtue, whatever may be its fortune! Is not my father labouring for
the happiness of Spain? For the peace of the world? If I had no other
repugnance, I cannot but shrink from giving up, even for an instant,
such a name as his."
"Louis," resumed the Sieur, his voice and manner evidently raised by
growing fever, "it is now in your power, and in yours alone, to keep
that name your distinction, or to brand it as your disgrace. Schemes
of policy have no character in the public mind, but according to
their issue. If success attend this of the Baron de Ripperda, it will
be sounded as a blessing to the nations; if it fail, obloquy will
proclaim it a conspiracy worthy their curses. Concealment now, is
present preservation, and victory hereafter. Remember, once for all,
that diplomatic simulation is no falsehood. It is expected; and is
no more a breach of honour, than an ambuscade in war. You are of the
Chateau Phaffenberg, while you reside in it. And thus we provide for
consciences of more sensibility than judgement. If there be sin, it is
on my head and your father's! Be satisfied with this, and depart on
your duty."
Louis placed his hand on his heart, as he replied, "my honour cannot be
satisfied by a quibble; nor my conscience with the responsibility of
another man. But it is possible I may overstrain the principles I hope
to live and die in; and therefore I obey."
As he left the room without further observation from the Sieur, the
virtuous pupil of the pious minister of Lindisfarne, folded his hands
together, and inwardly exclaimed; "these are labyrinths I never
expected to tread! and may the God I would not offend, be the guide of
my lips and of my actions!"
When he entered the anti-chamber, Castanos was sitting on a low bench
sulkily smoking a cegar, and Martini stood near him, discoursing in
a suppressed voice, but with vehement gesticulation. On hearing the
steps of Louis, the latter turned and caught up his hat.
"I am at your command Signor;" and without waiting for the order, he
led the way through the cloisters to the porch where the carriage
stood. Louis stepped in; and he followed, with the familiarity of a man
who felt his consequence in having been trusted with a confidence of no
mean bearing.
They drove on; and by the looks which Martini occasionally threw
towards him, Louis easily perceived his eagerness to be encouraged to
speak. Martini was as anxious to be always an orator, as Castanos to
maintain the character of a mute. But in the present case, Louis was
too much possessed with what he had just seen, and what he might soon
have to do, to be in any humour to gratify the conversational desires
of his conductor. In proportion as his frank countenance was inviting
to conversation, when he had no inclination to repel it; a dignified
reserve, which few persons would dare disturb, occupied every feature
when he wished to be left to his own thoughts. There was nothing severe
in the look, but it had the air of one accustomed to deference; and
though Martini would rather have met the social smile which Louis wore
on the Danube, he saw every thing to respect, but nothing to fear, in
the tacit command of his countenance.
Attentive to the Sieur's minutest injunctions, when Louis followed his
guide from the carriage into the palace, he folded his pelisse round
him, and drawing the fur of his winter-cap down upon his face, walked
on with little more than his eyes visible. On being saluted by the
officer in the guard-chamber, Martini announced Louis as the Chevalier
de Phaffenberg, who required to be conducted to the Altheim apartments.
A person was called to shew him the way, and as he turned to follow his
guide, Martini said aloud, "Chevalier, I await you in this chamber."
The man led him up the imperial staircase to a superb rotunda, whose
pillared arcades branched in all directions into long galleries of
equal magnificence. Through several of these, they took their way, and
in some of them, a few persons were seen passing lightly and silently
along, as if in the discharge of their respective services towards the
numerous august inhabitants. Louis thought of the palace of Thebes; and
as the smirking lips, but troubled brows, of these people met his eye,
he could not but think how base and how miserable is the coveted bread
of dependance.
He approached another of the many folding-doors which had led him from
gallery to gallery; and on opening this, his guide told the page within
to conduct the Chevalier de Phaffenberg to the Altheim apartment. "By
what authority?" asked the page.
The person from the guard-room had turned away on his return; but
Louis, without speaking, presented the passport from the Empress. The
youth bowed profoundly, and ushered him through a highly ornamented
vestibule, into first one, and then into another saloon still more
splendid. In the second, the page made another obeisance, and left him.
The Sieur had instructed him, merely to shew the imperial signature,
and not to ask for any body, but patiently to await, in this her
private boudoir, the arrival of the Empress. He had therefore leisure
to look around him, had his mind been sufficiently free from solicitude
to derive amusement from the endless varieties of art and nature
which decorated the place. In one part, an apparently interminable
conservatory, blooming with all the flowers of summer, wafted its
fragrance towards him. In another, opened a deep alcove of entire
mirror, which doubled the mimic garden; and in an opposite direction, a
stretch of canopied arches discovered chamber after chamber, till the
most capricious fancy might be sated with the gay variety.
Louis's eye hardly glanced along them, for he fell almost immediately
into an awful meditation on the scene he had just left, on the
probable death of the mysterious Ignatius; and, in the event of such
a catastrophe, what might be the consequence to his father. Would the
loss of so efficient an agent compel him to abandon his views? or would
he come to Vienna, and finish in person what his murdered friend had so
well begun? At the close of these melancholy cogitations, nothing but
gloomy images presented themselves; the dark-cowled priests flitting
around the bed of the dying Ignatius, and the dismal voice of Castanos,
presaging a similar fate to the Baron himself! In the midst of these
thoughts, he was startled by a sound in the adjoining chamber. He
looked towards it, and saw a lady, splendidly attired, approaching
him. Unused to courts, he hesitated whether he should go forward, or
await her advance; but as she drew near, the amazing beauty he beheld,
decided for him, and struck him motionless.
He had heard that the Empress was beautiful and young; but of any
thing like this bloom of youth, this splendour of beauty, he had no
expectation. It was more like the dream of the poet, than any mortal
mixture of earth's mould! He stood as one lost to recollection. The
lady did not seem less surprised, though certainly with less amazement.
On her first approach to him, when he took his cap from his head, and
his disengaged pelisse, falling back, discovered his youthful figure,
she retreated a step; but the next moment advancing, with a smile of
peculiar complacency, she observed, that "there must be some mistake,
for she came to meet a totally different person."
Louis tried to recover himself from the admiration her beauty had
excited, to the ceremonial due to her rank, and bowing with disordered
grace, he replied, "that he was sent by the person he believed Her
Majesty expected to meet in that chamber; and that he came a messenger
of distressing tidings. To say, that the Sieur Ignatius had been
attacked by ruffians, and was then lying in extremity at the Jesuits'
College."
The lady interrupted him; "Sir," said she, with an eager blush, "you
have done me the honour to mistake me for the Empress, whom I am so
happy as to serve; and being distinguished by my imperial mistress's
confidence, I came hither to request the Sieur Ignatius (whose
attendance she had required at this hour) to excuse her absence for
a few minutes. She is with the Emperor, and, when I deliver your
message, will expect you to await her commands."
With these words, the lady curtseyed and withdrew.
Louis gazed on the track through which she had disappeared. A vision
of some heavenly creature seemed to have passed before his eyes, to
give him assurance of what really did exist in the angelic world! The
apparition, the voice, had been seen and heard, and all was again
solitude and silence! Was it possible, he asked himself, that any thing
mortal could be so perfectly beautiful? that any thing earthly should
be too bright to look upon? Lost in the amazement of his senses, he
thought only of her; he had forgotten the majesty he came to visit,
and almost the disastrous tale that was his errand, when steps again
sounded in the adjoining apartment. He sprang towards the canopied
arch; the curtains were draperied back by two golden caryates, and his
eager eyes shot beyond; but another form appeared! another lady! of
beauty too; but blinded by excess of light, all other objects seemed
dark and indistinct before him.
She was less magnificently arrayed than her fair messenger, but
approached with so striking an air of dignity, that Louis could not
hesitate believing this must be the Empress. Respectfully meeting her
advancing steps, he bent his knee to her, as he presented the letter
from the Sieur. At the moment of her approach, his bewildered faculties
suddenly recollected that such was the attitude Ignatius told him, he
must assume in delivering his credentials.
The Empress stood still, and looked steadfastly on him for several
moments. Then taking the letter from his hand, in a voice of tender
commiseration, she bade him rise.
"The lady I sent hither, has informed me of your melancholy embassy,"
continued she, in the same gracious tone; "but I trust he is not
wounded past hope?"
"Not past his own," replied Louis, as he rose from his knee; "but the
surgeons are less sanguine."
With a troubled countenance, the Empress opened the letter and read it
hastily. She looked from its contents to its bearer; and fixing her
sweet but penetrating eyes anxiously on his face, said in a doubting
voice, "you are young, very young, for the trust I am called upon
to confide to you!" Still she looked on him, and still she spoke;
evidently without consciousness, uttering the remarks her observing
mind was passing upon his appearance. "A youth like you, must be too
fond of pleasure, to be a secure confidant! Too accessible--to much in
the power of circumstances. And at such a crisis too! But he tells me,
I may trust you as his son!"
Again she looked full at him. Louis's whole soul was fixed on that
look, and arouzed by its occasion. That the rigid Ignatius had given
such testimony of him, at such a moment, did not more surprise, than
determine him to perish, rather than dishonour it. He did not venture
to speak, but the expression of his eloquent countenance was more than
a thousand vows to Elizabeth.
She sighed deeply, and sitting down by a table, leaned her head upon
her hand. Louis remained standing where she had left him, regarding her
with respectful interest. At last she looked up, and waved her hand to
him to approach her.
"My heart is heavy," said she, "with the tidings you have brought
me. For, should my counsellor in all this, be indeed taken from me,
how incalculable are the difficulties into which I shall be plunged!
Nothing but full and complete success in the end, can excuse me to my
family and to the world, for the perils I incur in the progress."
Louis was silent.--Elizabeth resumed.
"You know to what I allude!"
"I know nothing," replied he, "but what the Sieur Ignatius has told
me; and that is, a general intimation of his possessing Your Majesty's
confidence: and that jealousy of so high distinction, he suspects to be
the cause of his present state."
The Empress took two or three turns up and down the room. She was
harrassed, and undecided, and often turned, to look again and again
upon the youthful secretary. She suddenly stopped.
"Did Ignatius tell you, who I know you to be?"
"He did.--That I am the son of the Baron de Ripperda."
As he made this simple reply, the pride he had in being the son of such
a father, seemed to encircle his brow with the before veiled diadem
of all his princely ancestors. "And where is your father?" asked the
Empress.
"At Madrid. And I cannot doubt that at such a moment, he would be eager
to hasten to the feet of the Empress Elizabeth; the generous truster in
his friend!"
The Empress shook her head--"Alas! Alas!" cried she; and again she
walked from Louis with a hurrying pace. For some time she continued
murmuring to herself, in a voice so low that he could not distinguish
what she said; but at last drawing near him, she again threw herself
into a chair, and spoke aloud. "You call me the generous truster in
his friend! I will be that to his son too. There is an honesty in
your countenance; an enthusiasm in your manner, so unlike a courtier,
that, I cannot but believe you trust-worthy! and, when he says
it," added she, pressing the Sieur's letter in her hand; "it is
conviction.--Hearken then to me." Louis drew near.--And the Empress,
in a low but steady voice, imparted to him certain subjects of national
dispute between the empires of Germany and of Spain; and personal
rivalries between their respective sovereigns; which she and the Baron
de Ripperda, through the secret agency of Ignatius, were labouring to
reconcile. She intimated that her Imperial husband retained so much
of his ancient enmity to Philip; and the Austrian ministers were so
jealous of yielding advantage to the Spanish cabinet; she was obliged
to move towards her end with the strictest caution. Besides, she had
some collateral objects in view, which, if obtained, would not only
establish a cordial friendship between the two countries; but so
balance the power of the continent; that war, for this generation at
least, could hardly find a plea for disturbing the tranquillity of
Europe.
"Some of these plans," added she, "are more than suspected by my
enemies, and the enemies of my children; and since they have engaged
a certain wily English Duke in their interest, an hour does not pass
over my head without dread of the whole scheme being blown into the
air. Like an evil spirit, he can transport himself when and wherever
he pleases; and while he is invisible, work a train of mischief that
is felt through many nations. It was only yesterday that he returned
from one of his secret flights; from Paris, I suspect----" She suddenly
paused; and putting her hand to her head, appeared to muse for a few
minutes.
Louis's blood chilled at this mention of an English Duke. From what
Ignatius had said to him on the same subject, he was compelled to think
that the Empress could mean no other than Wharton. And, how strange it
was, that every person who had named that Duke to him with censure,
had all concurred in giving him some epithet of duplicity. Elizabeth
looked up, with an abrupt demand of her auditor, whether he thought the
assassination traceable to Duke Wharton? adding, that she did not know
a source whence it was more likely to spring.
"Madam," returned Louis, "I should as soon suspect it from my own hand."
She gazed on him, astonished.
"Yes!" repeated he, in a determined voice; "though it is possible that
Duke Wharton may be hostile to Your Majesty's politics; and even be the
personal enemy of the Sieur Ignatius; yet I know him too well, not to
stake my head on his abhorrence of a crime like this."
The Empress did not withdraw her penetrating eye from his face.
"I now remember," said she, "that it was he who spread the report at
the Favorita, that the Baron de Ripperda's son was at Vienna. He met
you on the Danube. But Ignatius assured me, you had never seen him
since!" "I never have.--And I never will, while he is an object of
suspicion to Your Majesty, and to my father's friend. But I must again
aver, as I would at the judgment-day, that Duke Wharton is incapable of
assassination."
"He shall be the better for your vindication," returned the Empress.
And then entering into a detailed communication, of what her new
confidant was to impart to Ignatius relative to the most open part
of their scheme; she gave him a letter, which she wrote, and sealed
in his presence, to acquaint the Sieur with the recent progress of
their more secret views. When she put it into the hand of Louis, she
said with much emotion, "the last courier from Madrid, wrought so
favourably on the Emperor, that I was even now conversing with him in
the highest spirits, when I was called to hear this danger of my noble
coadjutor!--Should I lose him at this moment, their daggers had better
have reached me! Louis de Montemar, guard his life, as you would your
own. You know not the value of the charge."
Louis received her command to be in these apartments the next day, at
the same hour, to give her tidings of the Sieur. She then presented her
hand to him to kiss, in sign of her favour to himself. He touched it
on his bent knee; and as she turned to withdraw, she told him a page
should attend him to the guard-room; but he must take such cognizance
of the passages, as henceforth to find his way in the palace alone.
Again she proceeded to the door, and again she turned round, and said
with agitated solemnity; "should any fatal change occur, come to me
to-night.--We will discourse together for the last time; and all that
I have said in this conference, you must regard as a dream--to be
forgotten!"
Louis silently bowed his head, and Her Majesty passed on. So crowded
were his thoughts with the events of the last six hours, he hardly
noted the time, though he did the situation of the ground, as the
promised attendant brought him to the guard-chamber.--Martini sprang
to meet him; and, a moment after, he had left the mansion of royal
splendors and luxury, to seek the cloisters of world-forswearing men!
All without, was darkness and assumed humiliation; but within, dwelt
the rulers of kings, the universal dictators, the all-compelling
Jesuits! Louis now entered, to visit one of the most extraordinary
personages that ever came within their walls; one, to whom the vast
machinery was all unfolded, by which these mighty workmen moved and
controuled the world.
CHAP. IV.
The information which Louis brought to the suffering Ignatius, did not
fail to heal the worst wound his enemies had inflicted; suspicion,
that their machinations had reached the mind of the Emperor. When
the surgeons visited their patient in the evening, they gave a more
favourable report on his symptoms with regard to fever, which was the
threatening danger of the morning. The manner of his passing the night,
they thought would be decisive for hope or fear, and Louis entreated
permission to attend his couch until day.
The Sieur peremptorily put his negative on this proposal. But Louis
was steady in not being denied watching by the side of Castanos in the
anti-room. Martini, with a surgeon and a priest, remained all night in
the cell of Ignatius; and that he slept most part of the time, Louis
was satisfied; as, with his strictest attention, he could hardly hear a
movement within.
Castanos, and his anxious companion, kept true vigils. The act was
the same, though the motives were as different as the two men. In
one of the dreary pauses of the night, when the intensity of Louis's
meditations, on the various objects which bore upon the event of the
present hour, had wearied his unrested spirit; he observed Castanos
shake the exhausted embers from his pipe; and desirous of asking
some questions respecting the fate of his packet to Don Ferdinand,
he thought he could not have a better opportunity, and while the old
Spaniard was twisting out his tobacco, he addressed him in a low voice.
"Senor Castanos," said he, "you were so kind as to deliver a packet
from me to Don Ferdinand d'Osorio, into the hands of my father?"
"No," returned he, "your father was not at Madrid."
"Then, what became of my packet?"
"It was sent with the dispatches, to where he ordered them."
"Then I may assure myself of its safety?--and that my father was well?"
Castanos had resumed his pipe, and made no answer. After the second
volume of renewed smoke had wreathed away from his sullen features,
Louis addressed him again.
"But of course you saw my father, before you left Spain? Under the
present anxious circumstances, it would particularly cheer me to know
that he is well."
Castanos drew in, and puffed forth another cloud; then indolently
sliding his words out of the unoccupied corner of his mouth, he sulkily
replied, "Senor, the less, in the present circumstances, you talk
of your father; the better for the object of your anxiety, and for
yourself!--Walls have ears."
With this apothegm, he resumed his smoking with redoubled energy, and
Louis submitted to the silence imposed.
A few hours more, and the dawn brought a more communicative comforter
from the inner chamber. Martini issued forth with smiling lips, to
announce that his master's symptoms were those to please the doctors,
for that he had just awoke with little remaining fever. The priest and
surgeon soon after appeared, bearing the same testimony; and the latter
communicated the Sieur's commands, for the Chevalier de Phaffenberg to
attend him immediately.
Though Louis shrunk from answering to the name, yet he hastened to
obey. Again Ignatius took his hand, but it was no longer with the icy
tremor of expiring life, nor the burning clasp of raging fever; there
was languor, but not death, in the pressure; and with heart-felt joy
Louis congratulated him on the certain hope of his recovery.
"It is well," replied the Sieur, "and we shall not be ungrateful for
it, where thanksgiving is due. But we must now proceed to business.
They tell me, my wounds are too deep, to give prospect of my quitting
this couch for many days. Our affairs will not brook that time. Your
duty at the Chateau, and mine at the palace, must continue to be
discharged, and you must perform them both."
Louis's assent was as prompt as the delight with which he embraced
active service. And if the idea of the bright form he had seen only
for an instant, did flash across his mind with a hope of beholding it
again; the passing thought was too transient to materially alloy the
pure zeal with which he pressed forward to his new duty.
The Sieur then told him to return to the Chateau for certain of the
completed papers, and to bring them without delay, for his further
orders. As the carriage was now directed to be always in readiness for
the Chevalier de Phaffenberg, Louis found no tardiness in transporting
himself back to the Chateau, and thence to the College again.
On his return, he found the surgeons in the invalid chamber,
remonstrating with their patient against seeing his secretary again
for that day. But Ignatius was inflexible, and to prevent encreasing
the evil by further opposition, they withdrew. Louis obeyed the beckon
of his governor to the side of his bed, and there he received his
instructions respecting the papers he had brought. He disposed them
into several packets, and putting them into as many small leather-bags,
sealed them, and addressed them according to his orders.
At a particular hour, he was conducted by Martini to a dungeon-like
cell, in a distant and obscure quarter of the College, where the
Italian introduced him to a grey-headed brother of the order, who had
been entrusted by Ignatius with this part of the business. His office
was to receive, and to bring in succession, the messengers of the
correspondence which Louis held in his hand. The venerable Jesuit told
him, that several were then in waiting, but in separate cells; for no
one was to know of the other, and each were conducted out by different
passages.
Louis remained three hours in his gloomy hall of audience, before he
had seen every body he ought to see, and had delivered to them all
the packets of which they were to be the bearers to some of the most
distant nations in Europe. He gave no further account of the Sieur's
absence, to these foreigners, than that he was suddenly indisposed. An
idea of his danger might have had ruinous effects on the purposes of
this various correspondence.
As the time drew near for his attendance on the Empress, Louis returned
to Ignatius, to receive his further commands. This interview was brief,
but pregnant with matter; and included instructions for a conversation
with another personage, to whom the Imperial Elizabeth would see the
necessity of introducing their young negociator.
Louis had now no reason to complain of want of trust, in those who
commanded his services. The Empress was so impatient to hear his
report, that he found her awaiting him; and his communications were so
satisfactory, that she at once dismissed her worst fears for the Sieur,
and entered into a circumstantial discussion of his message, comparing
its expectations with what had passed between the Emperor and herself
on the last overtures brought by Castanos. She was not the direct
agent to her husband in these affairs; for His Majesty had not the
most distant suspicion of her interference with any of the ostensible
negociators; therefore, all that she appeared to do, was by apparently
accidental remarks; but they were so managed, as very often to decide
a fluctuating question. He had never admitted the Sieur Ignatius
to a personal audience; who, he however, respected as a Jesuit of
talents, employed by the Spanish sovereigns to compromise secretly with
Sinzendorff; the Imperial chancellor. The Emperor usually talked with
the Empress on all that passed between him and Sinzendorff: and she
made ample use of her influence in suggestion, and persuasion towards
the leading objects of the Spanish propositions. Besides the brilliancy
of her ostensible motive, to see her husband be the second Csar to
close the gates of Janus on mankind! she had two private views, in
gratifying the demands of Spain: to obtain the guarantee of so leading
a power to the pragmatic sanction, which would establish her own
descendants, male or female, on the throne of Germany; and to complete
the cession of Philip from the cause of James Stuart, by which her near
kinsman, George of Brunswick, would be more firmly seated on that of
Great Britain.
An active enemy to the first of these projects was then residing at
Vienna, in the person of the widowed Electress of Bavaria. Being
the daughter of the late Emperor Joseph, (who died without a son,)
she believed, if the female line were to inherit, that she and her
posterity had every way more right to the succession than any daughter
of the present Emperor, who was the younger brother of his predecessor,
her father. To avert these claims, the present Emperor, Charles
the Sixth, devised the act of settlement, (called the pragmatic
sanction,) on his own female posterity, in default of male issue; and
to this, he was moving every wile of policy, to obtain the guarantee of
the great European states. Fonder of artifice, than of plain dealing,
Charles made promises he never intended to perform; though he hoped by
their means to purchase the acquiescence of his brother monarchs. Spain
had been once attempted in this way; but Philip's resentments against
his former rival were not to be appeased. He joined France in thwarting
all the Emperor's plans. And as he not only withheld his assent to the
proposed act for the Austrian succession, but was actively hostile
to that of the new King of England, the Empress concluded that he
had extended his animosity to her, and was altogether jealous of the
further aggrandizement of the House of Brunswick. But when the Baron
de Ripperda, (whose brilliant wit, and diplomatic magnificence at her
father's court, had been the first object of her youthful admiration,)
when he quitted Holland for Spain, and gained the confidential ear
of its king; then the Spanish cabinet seemed to turn a colder aspect
towards the setting star of the Stuarts; and the hopes of the Empress
settled on the newly-rising minister of Spain.
The same policy which united the friends of the pragmatic sanction with
those of the reigning king of England, brought the supporters of the
Bavarian pretensions into joint interest with all the adversaries of
the house of Brunswick, and consequently into strict friendship with
the intended restorers of the line of James. To keep the negociation
between the sovereigns of Spain and the Empress, from the cognizance
of these two latter parties, now so determinately united, was
indispensible to its ultimate success; for the Emperor was too jealous
of a prince, who had once gained over him a great advantage; and too
personally attached to ancient Austrian prejudices, not to be very
accessible to the diplomatic subtilities of the adverse faction, should
they have timely notice to make the attack.
The Empress expressed herself to this effect; but there were still
some secret measures between herself and Ignatius, which she did not
think expedient to notice to their young confidant; and when she had
explained all that she deemed necessary for the present, she told him
he must go to the apartments of Count Sinzendorff, where that minister
was now expecting him. She drew from her finger a ring that the Count
knew, and which, on being presented by Louis, would be sufficient
assurance that he was visited by the right person.
"But recollect," said she, "the chancellor is ignorant that you are of
more consequence than the mere secretary of the Sieur Ignatius. I told
him your name is Phaffenberg; and take care you do not give him, or
any one else, reason to suspect you have any other."
Louis bowed; and her air of cautionary command, dilating into a smile,
she added, "to-morrow, and every day, attend me here at the same hour,
until perfect recovery restore your guardian to the full performance of
his own duty."
The Empress's description of the situation of the chancellor's
apartments in the palace, was too accurate for her ambassador to
mistake his way; and, without impediment he found himself ushered into
the presence of Count Sinzendorff. He recognized the ring, which the
young secretary respectfully put into his hand, and without preface or
circumlocution, entered at once upon the assassination of Ignatius,
and the consequences to be drawn from the attempt. To detect the
perpetrators was impossible, as the necessity for concealment in all
that related to the negociation of the Sieur, extended to his person;
and to make a stir in search of the ruffians, would only direct the
eyes of their employers, where to dare a second attack.
The chancellor then opened the communications he wished to be
conveyed to Ignatius. They principally consisted of certain demands,
besides that for the pragmatic sanction, which His Imperial Majesty
persisted in making on the King of Spain, before he would propound to
his ministers, what he styled, the very high requisitions from the
Spanish side. The chancellor followed this up, with remarks on his own
difficulty in preparing the minds of some of the most stubborn of these
ministers, whom he could hardly bring to apprehend even the possibility
of such measures being ever proposed to them.
From the plain and well-digested discourse of Count Sinzendorff,
Louis derived a clear idea of the scheme in negociation; which, if
brought fully into effect, did indeed promise universal benefit. In
the constrained confidence of the Sieur, there was always so much
mystery; and in the hurried communications of the Empress, so much
confusion; that, until now, he could only see as afar off, a mass of
anticipated events whose misty obscurity rendered some mostrous and
most indistinct. But now he comprehended, not only the magnificence
of the mutual greatness of Austria and of Spain; but the foundations
of prosperity and peace for Europe, so long threatened with the
interminable miseries of hereditary wars. His soul, devoted to noble
contemplations, was roused to all its wonted ardour by these views;
and, vibrating to the tone of his father's declared motive, which
the chancellor had incidentally quoted; he made some remarks on
the proposed measures, that did not less astonish than please that
consummate statesman.
Count Sinzendorff saw that it was no hireling secretary Ignatius had
dispatched to him. The air and language of Louis were too elevated
to belong to a man born in dependance; and the chancellor read in
the intelligence of his eye, and the peculiar attention of his
countenance, as he respectfully listened to what was said, that he was
still unapprenticed to the mechanism of politics. He felt the soul
of patriotism, but he was not yet aware of the machinery, which, in
this world of artifice must be its body! A few general sentiments of
political virtue, uttered by the Count, elicited its purest principles
from the lips of Louis. His own glowing words had given the tone he
thought he had taken from the chancellor, who, in fact, only admired
the enthusiasm he reflected, and pitied what he admired. "It is first
love, amiable youth!" thought he, "which must give place to a more
worldly bride!"
That this singularly noble young man, both in appearance and manner,
should have been introduced to him by the Empress and the Jesuit
Ignatius, as a common secretary, and by the name of Phaffenberg;
(a family, whose folly and extravagance had long ago sent it into
obscurity!) did not so surprise Sinzendorff, as it confirmed his
suspicion, that he saw the son of some great man in this interesting
novice; and his shrewd guesses did not lead him far from the mark. He
smiled inwardly, at the useless deception which the Empress thought
to put upon his penetration; and determined to allow her to believe
he was as blind as she wished. Before he and the object of his doubts
separated, it was fixed, that every night, at an hour before midnight,
the latter should attend in the Chancellor's apartments, to be the
medium of communication between him, Ignatius, and the Empress.
When Louis returned from his long and double embassy, all he had to
impart was listened to without interruption. For when he began his
recital, the Sieur apprised him, that in transactions of this nature,
it was so necessary to recapitulate every word that passed; and as
nearly as possible, describe the manner of saying it, that he would not
confuse his recollection by a single interrupting remark. When Louis
finished speaking, all his guardian said, was--"It is well." and then
bade him return to the Chateau for the remainder of the night.
He had a task to perform there before he slept; and similar ones
would henceforth lengthen his visits to a late hour every evening,
as long as his double duty lasted. He was to register all that was
said in his presence, by the Empress and the Chancellor. And he was
to make duplicates of this diary, into the cypher he had been so long
accustomed to copy; and to understand which, the Sieur now gave him a
key. Every night he was to return to the Chateau, and every morning
make his appearance at the College.
The two following days passed in the same round of duties; but there
was a difference in the third, which made it remarkable to Louis, and
gave a new character to those which succeeded it. He again beheld the
beautiful friend of Elizabeth.
Not having seen her since her first transit across his then cheerless
sky, the starry brightness of that glance only occurred to him
afterwards, like the fading image of a delightful dream. Absorbed in
the great interests which now occupied him, he was thinking of nothing
less than her, when, on entering the boudoir to await the Empress, he
was surprised to see her accustomed chair filled by another lady; and a
lovely girl sitting by her, busily employed on the table. He started,
and the lady, hastily throwing back a lace veil, which shaded her
face as she bent over her companion, discovered to him the beautiful
creature he hardly expected to see again. She apologized for having
permitted her own, and the Arch-Duchess's occupations, to make her
forget the hour in which these rooms ought to be left to his use;
and, taking the Princess's arm, had even passed into the next chamber,
before he could recollect himself so much as to feel that he stood like
an idiot, without having uttered a word of the commonest civility, in
answer to her graceful address. He then flew after her; and spoke, he
knew not what, in explanation of his remissness; all the while walking
by her side in a strange disorder of feelings, till reaching a small
door in almost the farthest apartment, she turned round, and with a
dignified bend of her neck and a dimpled smile, granted him her pardon,
and disappeared with her fair charge.
Louis paused a moment, looking at the closed door through which she had
passed; and then returned to the boudoir, with his senses all in a
maze. His heart, which had never beat before at the sight of womankind,
throbbed in his breast almost audibly. Such an eye, as its soft lustre
fell upon him, he had never met before; he felt its rays in his heart.
And then, so finely composed a figure! Such matchless grace in her
shape and snowy arms, as she led the young princess along. And the
golden tresses which mingled with the white veil upon her neck, made
him think of the peerless Helen, whose divine beauties compelled the
admiration of the very empire she destroyed.
Full of these imaginations, the more he thought, the farther did his
mind wander from the business which brought him there:--and, when
the Empress did make her appearance, it was with difficulty that he
recalled his senses to the subject of the interview. In one of her
pauses, she noticed his abstraction. She remarked it to him. A bright
crimson flashed over his face. She repeated her enquiries. Louis was
astonished at his own emotion; but without seeking other excuse, though
with deepening colour, he said, he feared he had behaved rudely to a
lady who had just left that apartment: but he was surprised, at meeting
any but Her Majesty; and he had not yet recovered from his confusion.
Elizabeth bade him describe the lady. To do that, he felt was
impossible; though, on the demand, his ready heart repeated its
pulsations; and looking down, he merely answered, "she was with the
Arch-duchess." The Empress smiled. She now knew whom he had seen;
and by his disorder, had no difficulty in guessing the cause of his
abstraction.
"The lady," returned she, "is the Countess Altheim; to whose care these
apartments are consigned, as my first lady of the key. She is also
the governess of my eldest daughter, whom you saw; and whom I wish her
to model after her own graces!"
Louis unconsciously sighed, as he bowed to this information; and
Elizabeth, thinking she understood his meaning, with a smile still
more gracious than the former, added--"she is a widow, though so
young:--and has hitherto loved me too well, to be persuaded from my
service by any one of the numerous solicitors for her hand."
Louis felt another impertinent sigh rising to his lips, but he
smothered it with a gentle effort; saying inwardly--"What is all this
to me!" and made no answer to the Empress, but a second bow. She
immediately passed to the subject of his audience.
In returning to the College, he would not suffer himself to dwell a
moment on the image of the beautiful Countess. But he was not permitted
to keep his wise resolve of dismissing it altogether from his thoughts;
for the bright original found occasions of repeating the impression day
after day.
She sometimes awaited him with preparatory messages from the Empress.
At other times he surprised her and the young Princess at their
studies. But at none of these meetings could she be prevailed on to
linger a moment. When she had to deliver a message, she hastened away
as soon as it was uttered. And when he broke on her accidentally, the
instant he had caught a glimpse of her white arms moving over the lute,
or had heard the trill of her exquisite voice warbling through the
rooms, she would rise in disorder, and hurry from his ardent entreaties
in so sweet a confusion, that it was sure to fix her idea in his mind
till their next rencounter.
Louis felt the truth of the observation, that "The secret to interest,
is to excite curiosity, and never satisfy it." He was ever asking
himself, why the charming Countess, the worshipped of so many hearts,
should be so timid to him? Or rather, why she should thus fly, as
if with aversion, one whose heart was so well prepared to admire
the graces of a mind, which, the Empress had assured him were equal
to those of her matchless person. He had never seen any thing so
beautiful as that person! And in so fair a temple, he could not
doubt, as fair a spirit must dwell. He longed to converse with it; to
understand all its loveliness; and to feel his heart sympathise, as it
was wont to do in holy Lindisfarne, with all the pure intelligence of
woman's mind. It was not of love he thought; for though he respected
the sentiment, hitherto he had never felt its touch; and, as he had
devoted his admiration to all that would take him out of himself, he
had always regarded the winning of a female heart, as but a secondary
object in the aims of his life. "Ah, never," has he often said, "would
I give my noon of manhood to a myrtle shade! Woman's love was given
to be the helpmate of man, but his folly makes her the tyrant!" In this
case, as in others, Louis was yet to learn.--How wise is speculation,
how absurd is practice!
CHAP. V.
The Countess was indeed accomplished; and most accomplished in the art
of charming. The noble Cornelia, and the tender Alice, knew nothing of
her science; and of what spirit it was, the heart of their cousin had
yet to prove.
On the day of his first appearance at the palace, she had only to
behold his singularly fine person, to think him the handsomest
young man who had ever entered there. But the fair Altheim was not
particularly attracted by the charms which most pleased in herself; and
she would never have sought a second glance of the graceful secretary,
had she not accidentally attended to a discourse between her imperial
mistress and the chancellor, wherein the latter, (being piqued by a
quotation from Ripperda, which the Empress made, to confute one of his
political arguments;) rather sarcastically gave hints that he suspected
the wounded Jesuit had got something more illustrious in his diplomatic
novice, than he chose to acknowledge. Elizabeth affected to see nothing
peculiarly distinguishing in the manners of the secretary; but when
the chancellor had withdrawn, she let some ambiguous expressions
escape her, in the triumph of having baffled his penetration. These
intimations were not lost on the Countess. And on the day following
that in which she and the Arch-Duchess had retreated from Louis in such
haste, the Empress could not forbear telling her in what an amazement
of admiration she had surprized him; adding, "He is a conquest worth
more than a haughty beauty's smile!"
Elizabeth smiled as she said this, but remarked no further. It was
enough for her fair confidant; who, if her soul possessed any passion,
did not scruple to own it was ambition. To gratify this, she had given
her blooming beauties, at the age of seventeen, to the superannuated
Count Altheim; a man of high family and great riches, but who had long
survived every faculty, but that of dotage on any pretty face that
would endure the incense of an habitual idolater of youth and beauty.
At that early age, she had been sent for by the Empress, who loved her,
from her having been the only daughter of the respectable woman who had
been her nurse; and in consequence of which the pretty Otteline had
been brought up as the favourite play-thing of the Princess; but the
gracious Elizabeth soon regarded her with the tenderness of a sister;
and on the death of the venerable mother, embraced the opportunity to
have the companion of her youth brought to Vienna. Otteline de Blaggay
was many years younger than her Imperial mistress, and far transcended
that beautiful Princess in every personal grace. But as the prejudice
in favour of high birth is so great in Austria, that a mis-alliance
is considered as indelible a disgrace, as a moral dishonour; none of
all the illustrious courtiers who contemplated, and sighed for the
possession of the lovely Otteline, ever thought of making her the
sharer of his rank. A thousand gay adventurers pressed forward, to
gratify their passion for beauty, and to excite an interest in their
behalf with the Empress, by making her favourite their wife. But
Otteline knew herself to be despised, though worshipped. And as rank
was all she wanted, to set her in every respect above the women who
envied her charms, and therefore looked with double contempt on her
untitled name, she resolved to marry for rank, and for nothing else.
Within a few months after her arrival, the old Count Altheim became
infatuated with her beauty; and, intoxicated by her smiles, dared
every obloquy to raise her to the station her lofty spirit seemed so
calculated to dignify. The Empress felt the situation of her favourite,
and, having joyfully pronounced her consent; the no less delighted
Otteline gave her hand to the Count in a splendid espousal, at which,
not merely her patroness, but all the Imperial family were present.
While the fond husband lived, his young Countess was the brightest, the
loveliest, the proudest of the court. Elizabeth exulted in the homage
the haughty Austrians were at length obliged to pay her elve and
country-woman; and to render it more complete, she determined that an
application to the Countess should be the only avenue to her Imperial
favours. But the Count died; and according to the law at Vienna, that
on the death of her husband, the wife loses whatever rank she may
have acquired by her marriage; the Countess Altheim, though a richly
endowed widow, found herself at once thrown back into all her former
insignificance. This reverse was doubly galling, since she had been
on the heights of consideration; and had trod that elevated path with
a step not much less imperial than that of the Empress herself. To be
contemned now, was mortification almost to madness. But the beautiful
mourner had lived too long in courts, to permit her rivals to perceive
the complete victory events had given them over her. Affecting a wish
for retirement after the death of so adoring a husband, she lived
secluded for a time; loftily leaving that world, she was aware, would
have scornfully excluded her: and when the assumption of inconsolable
grief was no longer feasible, Elizabeth appointed her to the high
office of presiding governess over the Arch-Duchess Maria-Theresa. This
afforded her a dignified plea for still abstaining from the assemblies
of the court; though in private parties she sometimes permitted herself
to be seen. Yet this was a rare indulgence;--that the novelty of her
unequalled charms, whenever she did appear, might continue to give her
successive triumphs over the envy of her proud rivals;--and the effect
was ever what she expected. She was then twenty-six, and though in the
meridian of her beauty, she foresaw that the time approached when she
must resign this, her sole sceptre of power, to some younger hand. What
then should she be? She could not endure to dwell upon the answer; and
again turned her views to some elevating alliance. To think of another
Austrian connection, would have been waste of time, and a hopeless
speculation. She must direct her attention to some of the numerous
noblemen from foreign countries, who visited Vienna. This plan was
hardly determined on, before the arrival of the Marquis Santa Cruz gave
the wished-for victim to her ambition in the person of his son Don
Ferdinand d'Osorio.--Young, handsome, susceptible, and of high rank!
It was an opportunity not to be neglected; and a few interviews with
him at the petits soups of the Baroness Hermanstadt, put to flight
every remembrance of the dove-eyed beauties he had so lately sighed
for in the groves of Italy. Lost in the blaze of her attractions, he
soon lived only in her presence; and drew from her a confession, that
she awaited his father's consent alone to become his bride. But she
was a Protestant, and she was of ignoble birth; two disqualifications,
which the Marquis's bigotry of faith and of ancestry could not be
brought to excuse. In anguish and hope, Ferdinand flew to the feet of
his adored Otteline, and implored her to give him her hand, in spite
of his inexorable father.--She knew the degrading consequence of such
a compliance. She saw the point to which the passions of Ferdinand
were hurrying his reason; and to throw it at once on that dreadful
extremity; and by that phrenzy of despair alarm the Marquis, and compel
him to save the senses of his son, by consenting to the marriage; to do
this, she exasperated the agonies of her lover's mind, by appearing to
regard the proposal for a clandestine union, as an insult from himself.
When she allowed herself to be convinced of the contrary, still her
indignation continued, though directed to a different object; and she
declared, that her wounded honour could never be appeased, nor would
she consent to see Don Ferdinand again, till he should bring her the
Marquis's only adequate apology for the disgrace he had presumed to
attach to her alliance.
Ferdinand departed from her, almost insane; and in that condition
threw himself upon the mercy of his father. But the good Catholic,
and Spanish Grandee, was not to be moved. And the frantic lover,
being denied admittance at the door of his proud mistress, he flew to
unburthen his distracted soul to their mutual friend, the Baroness
Hermanstadt.
The narrative that follows is of more common, than agreeable detail.
The Baroness was one of those women who are a blot on their own sex,
and a blight to all of the other on whom they fix their rapacious
eyes. Abandoned to ostentatious expence, no means were rejected, by
which she could gratify the vanity her own fortune could not supply;
and while her friend looked abroad for an ennobling alliance, to give
her rank, she laid snares for dishonourable engagements, to furnish
her with gold. Her iniquitous proceedings had hitherto been so warily
managed between herself and her dupes, that no one else suspected her
of error.--She was generally received in the first circles of Vienna,
and hence had a wider field from which to select her victims. The
thoughtless expenditure of the son of Santa Cruz, had for some time
tempted her rapacity; and the opportunity presented itself of making
it all her own. She was an elegant woman, and an animated companion;
and soon made the distracted Ferdinand forget the pretended disdain
of managing ambition, in the delusions of practised art and soothing
flattery. Intoxicated with what he believed her generous oblivion of
herself, in voluntarily sacrificing every duty to her newly-avowed
passion for him; he was-only awakened from his trance of vice, by the
information that her husband, a rough Hungarian General, was returning
from his post on the Turkish frontiers. She would gladly have exchanged
this poor and rugged hero, for the soft prodigal, she had bereft of his
better reason; and she made the proposal to him:--To fly with him,
before the Baron could arrive; and that henceforth their fates should
be one. As she clung round him, making the insiduous proffer, a gleam
from his long banished reason seemed to visit him from on high; he
shrunk with horror from an everlasting engagement with such a woman.
Though the slave of her allurements, she was not the mistress of his
soul, and he dared to deny her. Then all her assumed persuasiveness
was cast aside. She insisted on flight, with a vehemence that turned
her passionate love to threatening fury; and closed with holding a
pistol to her head, to extort his assent, or to end her existence. He
wrested the weapon from her hand; and oppressed with his own bitter
consciousness, left her in a storm of frantic upbraidings, to the care
of her confidential maid.
From this disgraceful connection, it was, that the Marquis Santa Cruz
had borne away his son. As soon as the extraordinary disorder of
Ferdinand, and consequent enquiries, had made the Marquis aware of
these circumstances, he saw the necessity of hurrying him away from the
machinations of a wicked woman, too well practised in the ruin of the
youthful mind; and too ready to make the credulous Ferdinand a lasting
prey.
Meanwhile, the disappointed Countess Altheim, foiled by her perfidious
friend and versatile lover, broke with the one, and really disdained
the other. And though she never condescended to enquire about either,
after the double desertion was known to her beyond a doubt; yet she was
not insensible to some feeling of gratified revenge, when she heard
that Ferdinand had abandoned her rival, and left the country.
The Marquis hastened with his remorseful son, to Holland and to
England. But the pangs of his repentance had not struck at the root of
his crime. He mourned the act of guilt, not the empassioned nature
which impelled it. He cursed the hour in which he had ever met with the
Baroness Hermanstadt; but he did not condemn the headlong impetuosity
with which he yielded to every impulse of self-gratification. The only
son of his parents, and heir to immense revenues in both hemispheres,
he had been indulged in every wish, till he believed he had no duty
in life but to enjoy all its blameless pleasures. But when personal
gratification is the principle of existence, the boundary between
innocence and transgression is often invisible. Ferdinand had more than
once trembled on it. He had now overleaped it.--And though racked with
self-abhorrence at what he had done; and hoping, by deeds of penance to
repass it; yet he fostered in his heart the passions which had betrayed
him: and even found a new temptation for their excesses, in the land of
his penitential pilgrimage. By a strange coincidence of fate, while he
was sowing tares in the happy fields of Lindisfarne, Countess Altheim
was preparing a similar attempt on the peace of its darling Louis.
The beautiful Otteline was as widely different from the character of
her false friend, as unsunned snow from the molten lava of Vesuvius.
She sought for nothing in her union with Ferdinand, but the rank he
would bestow on her. His riches and his love were alike indifferent
to her. And when she turned her eyes on the handsome secretary of
Ignatius, she had no other idea in her meditated attack on his heart,
but what aimed at sharing a birthright, which the Empress had assured
her, would exceed her proudest wishes. Notwithstanding her incapability
of loving, and indeed of feeling any emotion but those connected with
her ambition and its disappointments; she was so keen an observer, and
so fine an actress, that he must have had an Ithuriel eye, who could
have distinguished the counterfeit from the real, in her pretensions.
Having made her first advances on Louis, by a retreating manoeuvre,
she perceived that her personal charms had made their intended
impression; and that she had only to produce the graces of her
conversation, to complete the conquest. On subjects of general taste,
she was mistress; and in every department of human knowledge that
belongs to worldly wisdom, she was perfectly informed. If sympathy
did not give her anticipation of her lover's thoughts, self-interest
endowed her with tact to glide into his opinions; and she did this
so adroitly, as to make her echo appear the leading voice:--Her
accomplishments were likewise brought into play; and the Empress did
not disdain to partake the management. Once or twice, she detained the
Arch-dutchess and her governess in the room, to call forth some natural
or acquired charm in the beautiful instructress; and when the blushing
Countess withdrew, Her Majesty usually made some observation on the
inimitable perfections of her character, and the engaging modesty by
which they were so constantly veiled.
In one of these interviews, when Louis was gazing with his soul in
his eyes after the departing steps of the too exquisite Otteline, the
Empress, with a peculiar smile, ejaculated,--"She has lately become
enamoured of politics.--And should she negociate for herself, adieu my
right in her possession!"
Louis felt himself turn pale, but he did not reply.--Though his
Imperial Inquisitor thought his looks were sufficiently expressive,
she was determined to carry away a direct avowal; and with a little
archness, she added, "But you, perhaps, doubt her powers?"
He coloured as he replied: "I believe the Countess Altheim may command
just what she pleases." "Indeed!" cried the Empress, "then you must
not be my minister. If she negociate against me, I see where my
interest would be."
Elizabeth smiled again, and with an expression that Louis could not
resolve into any positive meaning;--but it was unpleasant to him, and
gave him an impression of being played upon. A confused recollection
of the Sieur's exordium against the power of beauty, suddenly occurred
to him; and with rather a more offended air than is often ventured to
an Empress, he said; "believing that the Countess Altheim would always
please to command what is right, I did not suppose her influence could
ever be actuated against the interests of Your Majesty."
The soft colour on Elizabeth's cheek, mounted to a proud crimson.
The words were compliment, but the manner reproof. She regarded the
audacious speaker with a look of astonishment. His eyes were now
directed to the ground. She felt she had been reproved; and by a youth!
a boy! The son of a man, who, if her confidant and coadjutor, she was
also his! and, from circumstances, so much more in her power, than
she in his; that, at any moment she could ground his chariot in the
quicksands; and give him a fall as deep, as that which had sunk for
ever the fortunes of his predecessor, the great Alberoni!--And yet the
son of this man, so perilously placed, so dependant on her will, durst
presume to be offended with an innocent freedom she had condescended
to take with his feelings!--He had dared to imply to her, that she had
trifled with him beneath her dignity; and still he stood before her
with a mien of more true respect, than any she was accustomed to meet
from the most obsequious of her vassals!
With a haughty swelling at her heart, the Imperial Elizabeth ran
through the first of these suggestions, but as she contemplated
the countenance of the speaker, so noble, so modest; she found a
more ingenuous sentiment arise. She had then, for the first time in
her life, beheld the unveiled face of simple truth! the situation
was strange to her; but there was a charm even in the novelty: and
again smiling, but with an air in which all the distance of her rank
was conveyed, she graciously said, "there was something besides
compliment in that speech of your's, de Montemar; but I forgive you."
She stretched out her hand to him, in sign of full pardon; and as he
respectfully touched it with his lip, she added, "you would make a
better counsellor than a courtier; but if you mean to be a statesman,
you must unite both."
He bowed as she turned away; and said to himself, "then I must mean to
be, what I never can be. If the world is not to be governed without the
moral degradation of its governors, my ambition to be a ruler must
follow Orlando's wits to the moon!"
Gracious as the Empress looked and spoke, he yet saw that he had
been on the verge of giving her mortal offence. His Pastor-uncle had
often told him, the atmosphere of courts was cold, in proportion to
their elevation: it was as withering to every honest demonstration
of the heart, as the icy peaks of the glaziers, to the verdure which
would flourish in the vallies! Louis did not then quite believe the
representation; but he now remembered the lesson, and sighed to find it
true.
Musing on the causes and consequences of so unnatural a state of
moral existence, he passed hastily through the galleries. The day
was unusually warm for the season, and the heat of the stoves made
the unventilated air so oppressive, that absorbed in thought, he
unconsciously complied with his bodily feeling; and, with his cap still
in his hand, he allowed his pelisse to fall open from his figure, as
he hastened down the passages. As he turned into an obscure lobby,
by which he avoided the public guard-room, he passed the bottom of a
flight of steps. Two persons were coming out of a door at the top. He
did not observe the circumstance, so profound was his reverie, till he
heard the voice of Wharton exclaiming, "'tis he, by Heaven!"
Without a moment's hesitation, Louis sprang forward; but not to meet
his friend. He disappeared from the passage, at the very instant he
heard the Duke throw himself over the rails of the stair, and call in
louder accents, "De Montemar! De Montemar! Stop, for God's sake! It is
Wharton who calls you!"
But Louis continued to fly, and Wharton to pursue, till the former
abruptly turning through a small postern into the street, darted into
his carriage; which always awaited him at this obscure entrance. It
was just wheeling into the mob of attending equipages, when he beheld
the Duke issue from the gate, and stand gazing around in search of his
faithless friend!
"Faithless, I am not, dear, insulted Wharton!" cried Louis, aloud,
though unheard by him he apostrophised. "But you have seen me desert
you! Fly you, in spite of the sacred adjuration with which you would
have recalled me! Oh, what do you now think of ungrateful de Montemar?"
At that moment he saw the Duke strike his forehead, as in the vexation
of disappointment; and in the next, the turn of the carriage snatched
him from his sight.
Louis now began to arraign his own carelessness, in having erred so
unpardonably against warning, as to permit any abstraction of mind to
divert him from the indispensible concealment of his person. Angry
with himself, and vexed to the soul that his negligent reverie had so
immediately incurred the evil most deprecated by Ignatius, the wormwood
in his heart for a moment distilled over every other object, and with
a bitterness unusual to him, he exclaimed, "Why did I forget that a
man sworn to politics, has immolated body and mind? Neither love nor
friendship, nor the reasoning faculty, are for him. She is his deity,
and must command all his thoughts! Had I properly recollected this
detested creed, coiled like Satan in his serpent-train, I might have
passed through the dust, unnoticed by the erect eyes of Duke Wharton!"
Perhaps, the consciousness that his own nature had caught some of
this abhorrent system of disguise, excited temper, as well as regret,
in this moody exclamation! His soul was naturally brave and frank;
but the mysterious language of the Sieur had touched him with a
kind of superstitious dread on certain points; and he now shrunk
from mentioning this rencontre to any one. He knew it would fill
Ignatius with alarm for their secret; and in the present state of his
slowly-closing wounds, all agitation was dangerous. To name it to the
Empress, might not only re-awaken her suspicions of the Duke, but
excite her to precautions hostile to his safety. Louis thought, and
re-thought over these circumstances; and, as his perturbed feelings
subsided, and gave him clearer judgment, he fully determined on
silence. He flattered himself that no ill could proceed from this
concealment; and while he resolved to be more circumspect in future, he
believed that Wharton was incapable of any act which could implicate
his friend, and might be justly feared. He did not hope that the Duke
could suppose that either now, or on the Danube, he had mistaken any
other person for him. He might have been persuaded to say the mistake
was probable; but Louis could not believe the possibility of his
having ever thought so. For, could any one make him think he had not
seen Wharton on the Danube; that he had not heard his voice calling on
him through the passages of the palace?
"Oh, no," cried he, "there is an identity which never can deceive the
heart! You know that it was Louis de Montemar you saw, that it was
Louis de Montemar who fled you! But a day will come, I trust, when
you may know all; or at least, when you shall see cause to grant to
me, that I could not do otherwise: and that one essential in true
friendship, is sometimes to confide, even against the evidence of our
own senses."
With that romantic faith, Louis had confided in the purity of Wharton's
attachment; and he believed that Wharton would not be less generous to
him. But Louis was enthusiastic, and judged men with that deference
to oral wisdom, which hangs on the precept of virtue, as if it were
virtue's self. He was yet practically ignorant, that a man's taste for
moral excellence might be as exquisite as that which modelled the life
of Addison; and his conduct be as foreign from his theory, as that
which debased the genius of Richard Savage. Hence, Louis formed his
opinion of his fellow-creatures, rather from the sentiments he heard
them utter, than from the actions he was told they performed. He could
not be mistaken in the one; misrepresentation, or misapprehension of
motives, might pervert the other; and thus he more often made a good
sentiment the commentary on a dubious action, than tried the principles
of the sentimentalist, by the rectitude of his conduct. Indeed, he
was not thus liberal, merely from never having supposed the absurdity
of men admiring a principle they are determined never to adopt; but
from an ingenuous pleader in his own breast, whose still small voice
continually whispered to him, "Why should I conceive the worst of
others, when my own conduct so often falls short of my best intentions!
nay, frequently turns so blindly aside, that I wonder to find myself in
the midst of errors, when I most intended to do the perfect right! But
the heart's weakness, the impatience of the will, the frowardness of
the temper! how can I feel these within me, and not judge with charity
of appearances in others?"
"And you, dear Wharton," cried he, "are now called on to judge me
charitably. To believe any thing of me, but that I could treat you
thus, from the dictates of my own will."
How Wharton did judge of the conduct of Louis de Montemar, after events
were to prove. Louis was right in believing him sure of his friend's
identity, both on the Danube and in the palace gallery. But in the
first instance, as he saw him no more, he supposed that some cause must
have hurried him from Vienna; and he did not think it worth while to
press the matter on those who denied it. But now, that he had not only
seen him again, but seen him fly his sight and his voice! Here indeed,
Wharton could hardly credit his senses. And he was still standing
in the porch, gazing after the various passing carriages, when the
companion he had broken from in his pursuit, rejoined him.
He enquired of the Duke, who the person could be, he was so eager to
overtake; and remarking on the oddity of so determined an avoidance,
exclaimed, "He must have been gone in an instant; for though I heard
your exclamation, I never saw to whom it was made."
"Then I have probably been racing after a ghost," replied Wharton,
stifling his chagrin under a gay laugh; "but if it have aught of
mother-earth about its airy sides, I will grapple with it yet."
His companion replied in the same strain, observing, that had it not
been for the over-topping figure of the Duke, he might have had a
glimpse of the nimble-footed apparition. But soon observing that the
curved brow of Wharton did not well agree with the merriment on his
lip, the gentleman looked more serious, and again asked the name of
the fugitive. Perceiving that his companion had not attended to the
words of his exclamation, whatever he had done to its sound, the Duke
carelessly answered, "It matters not; he is only a scape-goat, with
more sins on his foolish head than he thinks of!"
"But his flight vexes you?"
"Because he is so good as to bear away my sins on his pate, and I am
not in a humour to be tired of their company."
"He is your confessor then, and was flying from his duty?"
"You have it," returned the Duke, in a low whisper; "and for my
conscience's sake, without further comment, let us allow him to go to
the devil!" The gentleman shook his head incredulously; but added,
laughing, "I am too good a catholic to pry into mysteries, sacred or
profane." And Wharton, seeing he suspected some affair of gallantry,
with a glance to corroborate the idea, laughed also, and passed to
another subject.
CHAP. VI.
Whether Duke Wharton disdained to mention again the name of the friend
who had unquestionably fled him, or how it happened that no notice
transpired of this second rencontre, Louis could not determine; but
as several days passed without receiving any intimation of it at the
palace, he hoped it was buried in the mind of the Duke; and that only
between themselves it would hereafter be mentioned.
The Sieur was still a prisoner in his cell. The more eager he became to
resume his diplomatic duties, the more his recovery was retarded. Twice
in the course of a fortnight, the anxiety of his mind had inflamed his
wounds to jeopardy. Louis said every thing that cheering anticipations
could devise, to assuage this impatience. But his own perseverance
in his double, nay treble duty, at the college, the palace, and the
chateau, did most to satisfy the Sieur, by proving that he had not
employed an inefficient agent.
Couriers arrived, and were dispatched, with propositions and
acquiescences, which every time brought the grand object nearer to a
close; and Louis's encreasing labours were rewarded every day by the
sunny smiles of the bewitching Otteline. The Empress seemed to have
forgotten what had passed between herself and the young secretary,
respecting her; and the favourite herself, as if unconscious of having
been referred to, continued to him those ineffable attentions of eye
and ear, which, without a word, are the most eloquent language of the
soul. He saw her beautiful, had witnessed her accomplished; from the
Empress he heard of her endearing virtues; and under such impressions
he hourly felt the influence of her magnetic looks, of the gently
struggling sighs which were breathed near him, as she bent at his side,
to perform any little task appointed by her smiling mistress.
He had conceived a high idea of the virtuous female character, from
his sweet cousins, the companions of his youth; and loving them with
a brother's pride, whenever the image of a more exclusive attachment
would obtrude itself upon his fancy, it always arrayed itself in a
form beauteous as theirs; and united all their endearing qualities in
the visionary claimant on his heart. But amongst the daughters of peer
or commoner, who added to the winter festivities of Morewick-hall, or
welcomed bright summer on the rocks of Lindisfarne, no such miracle
of a romantic brain ever presented itself. Many of them were fair,
amiable, and engaging; but all were inferior in some indispensible
grace, to the noble Cornelia or gentle Alice: and when those charming
sisters continued to rally him on his invulnerable heart, he would
plead guilty to the charge; declaring it was all divided between
fraternal love for them, and, he trusted, some future friendship with a
brother mind of his own sex.
The month he passed in the highlands of Scotland, made him believe
that he had found this treasure in the accomplished Wharton. The
Duke courted his confidence. And from one so full of every elevated
sentiment, of every enchanting gaiety, of every demonstration of
regard, could he withhold it? No; he loved him, as he was afterwards
too well inclined to adore the resistless Otteline, with all his
imagination, all the ardour of restrainless enthusiasm.
His beau ideal of the female form was far surpassed by what he saw in
his first interview with the Countess Altheim; and the image of perfect
beauty being once impressed on his senses, it was easy to stamp belief
on every shew of its intellectual loveliness. At first, he regarded
her faultless lineaments, with little more than the same delighted
taste with which he used to gaze on the admirable forms from Italy,
which embellished the galleries of Bamborough. But when those eyes, so
beautiful in themselves, were turned on him with a glance that conveyed
her soul to his, then the ethereal fire seemed to have shot from heaven
on the fair statue, and he felt its electricity in every vein.
One morning, after the Empress had retired from the saloon, Louis
remained, by her orders, to make minutes of some particulars in
their discussion. The Countess Altheim sat near him, awaiting the
memorandum she was to convey to her mistress. He pursued his task with
a diligence, neither his employer, nor her favourite desired; but he
began to tremble on meeting the eyes which now so kindly beamed on
him; and, inexplicably, (as were the feelings with which he enjoyed
and dreaded their powerful appeals to his sensibility,) he shrunk with
alarm at the most distant whisper of his heart, that now he loved!
While he still sat, busily writing, with his eyes rivetted to the
paper; and the fair Otteline's on him, with a look that was almost
indignant at his perverse industry; the door opened, and a lady, in
deep mourning, and half fainting, was supported into the room by an
attendant of the same sex. The Countess was transfixed to her seat.
But at sight of a woman in such a state, Louis forgot at once the
Imperial boudoir and his own secret visits there, and hastened to her
assistance. The Countess recovered her presence of mind in the same
instant, and approached the invalid; but she had glanced her eyes on
Louis as he drew near, and had already accepted the use of his arm.
Between him and the other lady she was conducted to a sofa. In a voice
of profound respect, but with evident vexation, the Countess enquired
how her Imperial Highness had been affected, and how those apartments
were so fortunate as to be honoured by her presence? The attendant lady
answered for her mistress, who still leaned her head on the shoulder of
Louis, that she was returning from a visit to the Arch-duchess Maria
Theresa, when becoming suddenly faint, she turned into the Altheim
gallery, in hopes of meeting the Countess, and obtaining some eau de
Cologne.
The anticipated restorative was immediately produced; and the Princess,
having taken some, soon after re-opened her eyes; and relinquished her
hold on her respectful supporter. Her lady-attendant and the Countess
vied with each other in felicitations on her recovery; and while the
latter was pressing the use of several pungent essences, Louis, who
hoped his assistance had passed unnoticed, was gliding out of the room:
but the still languid invalid caught a glimpse of his retreating
figure, and abruptly interrupting the Countess, requested her to call
her friend back, as she wished to thank him for his services.
Otteline obeyed; though he saw by her altered countenance, it was
with reluctance; however, he turned to the soft summons of her voice,
and approached the sofa with a modest bow. The Princess directed her
large dark eyes upon the figure and face of Louis; both of which
surprised her, as they were strange to the court, and yet possessed
un air distingu too pre-eminent, she was sure, to belong to any man
attending there in a dependant quality.
"Sir," said she, "your politeness has been very useful to me; and I
desire to know to whom I am obliged."
He bowed, but it was in confusion.--He felt that his tongue would
blister, in uttering the first falsehood, he had even implied, in his
life. Supposing that this disordered silence arose from a flattering
awe of herself, Her Highness turned with a smile to the Countess, and
demanded of her, the name of her friend.
"The Chevalier de Phaffenberg," replied the favourite with a rising
colour.
"Phaffenberg!" repeated the Princess, "I thought that noble family was
extinct.--Of which of the brothers, Ernest or Rudolph, is he the son?"
Her eyes addressed the question to Louis; but his confusion encreased,
and he did not look up to meet them. He even made a step towards the
door; so incapable was he of supporting the representation of the
Countess, by any direct deception from his own lips. She did not
observe his changing complexion in vain; and bending to the illustrious
questioner, whispered something in her ear. Her Highness more than
smiled as she listened; she laughed, and nodded her head in sign that
she understood her; then turning to Louis, again addressed him.
"Chevalier, I will not detain you longer. Your politeness would
honour the best blood in Germany; and I shall be happy in having an
opportunity of proving that I think so. You know where to find me, and
may any day call upon my best power to do you service."
Grateful for being released from farther enquiries, Louis bowed again
respectfully to the Princess, but still in silence, and hastened from
the apartment.
On his return to the Sieur, he refrained from chafing his present
anxious state, by setting him on the rack to guess who this lady might
be, who had so unluckily surprised his secretary in the Empress's
boudoir; and whether the accident would be productive of vexation to
their proceedings, or die away, a mere indifferent circumstance. On
the illustrious invalid herself, Louis would not have cast a second
thought, after he had rendered the assistance due to her sex and her
indisposition: but his gratitude towards the prompt attention, or
rather intuitive knowledge of his feelings, evinced by the Countess,
kept the whole scene in his mind during the night; and filled him with
impatience for the morning, when he might, silently at least, intimate
to her some perception of the gratefulness which possessed him.
He went earlier than usual to the palace, on the succeeding day, both
to make his apology to the Empress for having left her memorandum
unfinished; and in hopes of having a few minutes, in which to imply
to the amiable favourite, the sentiment with which her goodness had
inspired him. But it could only be implied generally; to particularize
the obligation, would be to betray that he was other than the Chevalier
Phaffenberg: then why did he wish to find her alone? He had no
distinct apprehension, why this hope speeded him forward; only, he
certainly felt a warmth in his bosom, while meditating on the past
scene, more congenial to his nature, than all the raptures her various
graces had before awakened. The promptitude with which she gave his
supposed name, and the delicacy with which she had perceived his
repugnance to answer the Princess, and had screened him from further
interrogation; appeared to him a testimony of quick interest in his
feelings, a reading of his mind, a sympathy with its thoughts, that
demanded his utmost gratitude:--but it had obtained something more. He
sighed as he approached the palace, and said to himself, "Such kindness
speaks to me of home; of dear, distant Lindisfarne,
"Where heart met heart, reciprocally soft,
Each other's pillow, to repose divine!"
As he wished, he found. The lovely Otteline was alone, but in a mood
of unusual pensiveness.--She was leaning her head upon her arm, when
he entered; and there was a flush about her beautiful eyes, as if she
had been weeping. She started on seeing him, and rising hastily, as if
to disguise the chagrin which hung on her brow, said two or three gay
words of welcome.
The discordant expressions in her face did not escape the watchful eye
of growing passion. He ventured to utter a fear, that she was not well;
or that something had happened to disturb her tranquillity.
"Nothing," replied she.
He looked incredulous; and she added with a smile, and a sigh,
"Chevalier, if you would preserve your quiet, never enquire into the
caprices of a woman."
"Then it is the caprice of some woman, which now disturbs yours?"
exclaimed he, "Is it possible that the Empress can have given pain to
one she so entirely loves?" "Not the Empress," replied the Countess
eagerly, as if in haste to exonerate her benefactress; "she is all
graciousness. But the Electress of Bavaria! She you so unfortunately
assisted yesterday in this room; it is from her, that I have met with
insult."
"Insult!" re-echoed Louis, "Impossible to you!"
"I wish it were so," replied the Countess; "but many causes make me an
object of envy to that malicious Princess; and now she has triumphed."
"Again, I must say, impossible!" cried he, "for how can she, or any
woman, triumph over the Countess Altheim?--Your virtues----"
"They are my own," interrupted she, casting down her eyes; "but my
reputation is not; and yesterday put that into her power."
Some apprehension of what the Countess would not add, gleamed upon her
auditor. "How?--Why?" cried he.
She looked up in graceful disorder, and evidently assuming vivacity,
said with a sportive smile, "Chevalier, you are alarmed! But, indeed,
it is without reason.--Believe it, my caprice, if you like; and let us
dismiss the subject! It is doubling vexation to impart it."
This generous sentiment excited him the more to persevere in knowing
the cause of her ill-disguised distress; and with encreased earnestness
he conjured her, only to satisfy him on what she meant by saying, that
yesterday had put her reputation in the power of the Electress of
Bavaria?
With mingled seriousness and badinage, the Countess attempted to put
him from his question; but it was done in a way rather to stimulate,
than to allay his suspicion that he was concerned in her vexation; and
therefore, he thought himself bound in honour, as he was impelled by
his heart, to press an explanation.
"I was a weak creature," returned she, "to drop any thing of all this
folly to you; for, indeed, you will think it nonsense when you hear
it!--Only a woman's delicacy is so very sensitive."
"Try me," replied Louis, forcing an answering smile.
"Then be the consequence on your own obstinate head!" said she, with a
glance of tender archness; but immediately casting down her eyes, as if
she feared they had told too much; in the same gay tone she continued.
"On my mentioning to my Imperial mistress, the mal-a-propos
indisposition of the Electress of Bavaria, Her Majesty commanded me
to go the same night, and make the Electress a visit of enquiries. I
found Her Highness without trace of illness, in her customary violent
spirits, and eager to seize on any new subject for mirth. I had hardly
delivered my message, before she began to rally me on your account;
and asked so many questions respecting the object of your presence in
my apartments; and, indeed, about your family and views in life, that I
absolutely was lost in confusion."
The Countess paused for Louis's reply; but he was incapable of making
one; and only answered her kindled cheeks, with a crimson deeper than
her own. She had glanced on his countenance, and in softer accents
resumed.
"I might have extricated myself from the volatile Electress, had not my
embarrassment been instantly observed by that mischievous Duke Wharton;
who stood by laughing all the time, and prompting his only too well
inclined mistress."
A new apprehension shot into the mind of Louis; and instinctively
keeping his eyes directed to the floor, he said, with a half smile,
"and what did Duke Wharton prompt?"
Had he ventured one glance upward, he would have seen the eyes of
the Countess rivetted upon every feature of his face, with a steady
investigation of what they might betray; while the managed tones of her
voice spoke only the accents of half discovered tenderness; or, more
often, the apparent assumption of a gay contempt of the raillery she
described.
"He was alone with the Electress, when I was announced;" replied
she, "and that gave Her Highness a hint to begin my persecution, by
affecting to whisper him, that my intrusion would tell no tales, as she
had surprised me that very morning tte a tte with----I will not
repeat the silly names of gallantry she called you; but they excited
the curiosity of the Duke: and then she described your person as
accurately as if she had been a sculptor. As her Highness proceeded in
her details, I thought Wharton had lost his wits; and when she summed
up her account, with naming you as the Chevalier de Phaffenberg, he
fell into a convulsion of laughter that amazed her as well as myself.
"Then began such cross questionings and remarks; such banter from the
Duke; such broad surmise from the Electress; that, as I would not
betray the secret of my Imperial mistress, by acknowledging your visits
are to her, (for visits, Duke Wharton has discovered them to be!) I was
obliged to assent to Her Highness's jeering insinuations in another
quarter.
"At first I combated her charge," added the Countess, perceiving
something in the countenance of Louis, that partook more of rising
displeasure, than of gratified emotion; "I attempted to speak of your
presence having been merely accidental; but Duke Wharton, with a sly
laugh exclaimed, I am a star-gazer, Lady; and know that fate, not
chance, guides this son of Latona, by noon-tide, and the glimpse of the
moon, to a certain palace!--But what his errand is, I am too discreet
to whisper."
Convinced that Wharton had, indeed, recognised him in the Electress's
description; and, indignant that the friend, from whom he expected
nothing but generosity, should thus play with a situation he must see
was meant to be concealed; Louis replied with resentful scorn. "But you
treated such light impertinence, with the disdain it merited?"
"I tried to do so," returned she, seeming to relapse into painful
seriousness; "but the raillery of the Duke, and the knowledge he shewed
of your movements, alarmed me for the secret of the Empress; and then
the cruel alternative! the Electress casting all those visits to my
account, with insinuations----I cannot speak them."
Her eye had caught the flashing light of her auditor's, and abruptly
stopping, she covered her face with her hands. He stood motionless
with indignation. At last forcing words from his quivering lip, he
exclaimed; "Madam, I conjure you, tell me how the Electress, how Duke
Wharton, could dare to couple your reputation and my presence with
slander! and at all hazards I will disprove it."
"Oh, no;" returned she, "you must not disprove, what duty to my
Imperial mistress would not allow me to deny."
Louis did not believe he had heard her distinctly,--he told her so. But
she repeated what she had said; assuring him, with encreased agitation,
that where she so entirely loved, as she did the Empress, her life was
the least sacrifice she would make to preserve her interests. He gazed
on her with doubtful admiration.
"But to be silent at an aspersion on your fair name! that, Madam,"
cried he, "can never be a duty in your sex. A man may redeem himself
from obloquy, a woman never can! and, if I am implicated in sullying
your honour, I repeat again, I will disprove the slander at the peril
of my life."
"That can only be done between man and man;" said the Countess, in a
collected voice; though inwardly alarmed for the consequence of a duel
between her lover and the Duke. "And here the provocation came from the
opposite sex. Duke Wharton merely amused himself with my confusion,
after the Electress had presumed to make her charge. But were it
otherwise, a violent assertion of my honour is beyond your power. Your
life, Chevalier," added she, raising her eyes to his face, "is your own
to give! but not the safety of the Sieur Ignatius; not the honour of
the Baron de Ripperda; not the future happiness, public and private, of
the Empress Elizabeth! These, and the other momentous interests you are
so well aware of, all depend upon keeping secret from the Electress
of Bavaria and her counsellors, the purport of your visits to these
apartments. You could be admitted but for one of two reasons: to me,
or to the Empress. And when hardly pressed by Her Highness last night;
to avoid the treason of betraying my mistress, I was obliged,----" she
turned away her blushing face as she added, "not merely, not to deny,
but to sanction the suspicion, which caused the tears in which you
surprised me."
Louis stood paralyzed at this last disclosure. But when he saw that
tears flowed afresh from her eyes, and streamed down her flushed
cheeks, as she moved from him to leave the room; he flew towards her,
and catching her by the gown, implored her, in an agitated voice, to
stop and hear him. She turned on him with a look of gentle reproach, of
dissolving tenderness, that bereft him at once of all consideration;
and what he said, what he avowed, he knew not, till he found her hand
clasped to his lips, and heard her say--"After this, I need not blush
to turn my eyes on the only way that can now redeem my name!" She spoke
with an enchanting smile, and added, "It will disprove the slanderous
part of our adversary's accusation, without betraying our cause; or
risking a life, perhaps too precious to me!"
Before he could reply, she heard the steps of Elizabeth in the
adjoining chamber; and sliding her hand from his impassioned grasp,
disappeared through the conservatory. He was in so much agitation when
the Empress entered, that she perceived it; and guessing the cause, did
not notice it; but, wishing her favourite full success in this her own
peculiar affair, she dismissed that of politics in a very few words;
and graciously received Louis's excuse for the unfinished minutes
of the day before. As he proceeded to the Chateau, where he was to
complete some transcripts before he returned to the College he tried
to think on what had passed, but all within him was in tumult. The
hours of his labour, and of his meditation, were the same; he could not
tranquillize the strange whirlwind of emotions which raged in his mind.
He recalled, again and again, before the tribunal of his judgment, the
particulars of the scene which had just passed; but they appeared in
such broken apparitions, that he could reduce nothing to certainty,
nothing on which he could lay his hand, and say, "It is so."
At one moment, indignation fired him against the part Duke Wharton had
taken in it; and, in the next, he arraigned the wayward fate, which had
compelled him to merit all the Duke's resentment, by his own apparently
insulting conduct in the palace gallery.--Then his imagination, all
in a blaze, ran over the celestial charms of the exquisite creature,
whose unreceding hand he had pressed to his lips--to his heart! He felt
her eye-beams still agitating its inmost recesses; but he did not feel
that heart quite consent to his often-repeated exclamation--"She loves
me--and I am happy!" He did not feel that instant union of spirits;
that ineffable communion of heart with heart, and soul with soul, which
he had ever believed the pledge of mutual love:--That mystery of the
soul, which, even in earth, asserts its immortal nature! The beautiful
Otteline was still a beautiful surface to him; an idol to be adored.
But he found not that sense of perfect sympathy, shooting from her dear
presence through all his being, which would make him cry aloud, "I love
her, and her alone!"
Dissatisfied with himself for this fastidiousness, when he ought to
have been all transport, he turned to the hour of meeting the Sieur,
with the feelings of a man in a dream, from which he was doubtful that
he would not be glad to awake.
CHAPTER VII.
When Louis entered the cloister which led to the Sieur's apartment, he
met Martini hurrying towards him.
"Well arrived, Signor!" cried he, "I was coming to the Chateau in quest
of you. There is a noble bustle in my master's chamber."
"By your countenance, no ill news?" said Louis, though not
unapprehensive that some mischievous consequence had transpired from
his unfortunate surprisal by the Electress of Bavaria.
"Not that I know of," cried Martini; "but a little motion more than
ordinary always makes me merry. I love stirring, gloriously! And my
master and a booted-and-spurred have been at high words these two
hours." With nothing so much in his mind, as some anticipated exposure
from the malice of the Electress, Louis proceeded to the chamber with
a more eager step than inclination. He found the Sieur on his couch,
with the table before him spread with opened packets, and a person
standing beside him in the dress of a courier. At some distance stood
two other travellers. The courier was talking in Italian with great
earnestness. Ignatius listened with his usual lofty attention: but when
his vigilant eye caught the figure of Louis advancing from behind a
dark curtain which divided the apartment, he put up his hand with an
air of authority to the speaker, who instantly became silent.
"Louis," said the Sieur, addressing his pupil in German, "here is news
from Madrid, to raise me from the tomb; had the poniards of my enemies
been keen enough to have laid me there!--France, whose bonds were so
ruinously dear to the heart of the King of Spain, has cut the cord
herself; and, by a stroke of insult, for which even his partiality
cannot find an excuse."
Louis's heart was lightened of the apprehensions with which he had
entered; and, with glad congratulations, reflected the unusual
animation which shone in the eyes of Ignatius. The Sieur then ordered
the courier to retire with Martini, who would take care of him, until
he could see him again. The other two travellers also obeyed the
beckon of his hand; and in Spanish, he directed them likewise, to put
themselves under the protection of the Italian valet.
The room being left to the statesman and his secretary, the Sieur,
with a less reserved air, motioned Louis to approach him; and when
they were seated, the former opened a circumstantial detail of what
had occasioned this abrupt rupture between the courts of Versailles
and Saint Ildefonso. During the late regency of the Duke of Orleans,
a treaty of marriage had been entered into between the young King of
France, Louis XV. and Philip's daughter the Infanta Maria-Anna, then
a mere child. According to the custom of the times, she was sent to
Paris, to receive an education befitting the future bride of a French
Monarch; and, at a certain age she was to be solemnly affianced. On the
death of the Duke of Orleans, and the promotion of the Duke of Bourbon
to the functions of prime-minister, the cabinet of France seemed to
change its measures with regard to Spain; at least encroachments
were made, which aroused the suspicions of Philip's Queen; and she
tried to awaken the jealousy of her husband against the new minister.
Attached to the house from whence he sprung, and inclined to put the
best construction on all its actions, it was no easy task to make the
royal grandson of Louis the Fourteenth comprehend that the Duke of
Bourbon never considered the interest of Spain in his policy. Some
transactions, more than dubious in their principle and tendency, at
last made King Philip allow a possibility that he might confide too
implicitly in his French relations; and, after much argument from the
Baron Ripperda, and more entreaty from his Queen, he was at length
persuaded to counterpoise the self-aggrandising spirit they had
detected, by commencing a secret negociation with Austria. Still,
however, habitual partiality to his native country hung about the heart
of Philip, and caused great uneasiness in the minds of the Queen and
the Baron, under whose auspices the mysterious embassy set forth. As
the negociation rapidly proceeded, the King often dropped hints on the
consequences of precipitancy; and frequently filled them with alarm,
lest he should at last refuse his royal sanction to the completion of
their labours, and so involve themselves and their cause in utter
infamy.
The Duke of Bourbon was indeed actuated by different principles, both
political and personal, from those which had impelled the Duke of
Orleans to propose new bonds of alliance between the royal families
of France and Spain. He disliked the Spanish marriage altogether;
and, besides so many years must elapse before the Infanta could be of
age for the espousals; and the health of the anticipated bridegroom
was so precarious, it seemed no improbability that his death, in
the mean-while, might transfer the royal succession to the house of
Orleans. This was an aggrandisement of that ambitious family, which,
the no less ambitious Duke of Bourbon could not contemplate with
patience; and at this juncture Duke Wharton appeared at his elbow, as
if conjured there on purpose to set the two great heads of the House of
Bourbon at lasting enmity. He suspected that something clandestine was
going on between the courts of Spain and Austria; and he left Vienna
for Paris, a few days after his rencontre with Louis de Montemar on the
Danube. He revealed to the Duke of Bourbon all that he had discovered;
and urged him to save his branch of the royal stock, from being
over-topped by that of Orleans or of Spain; by immediately adopting an
entire new policy from that of his predecessor. As a first movement,
he proposed a marriage for the young King with some Princess of
maturer years than the Spanish Infanta. Bourbon readily embraced this
suggestion, which had been some time floating in his own mind. And,
on the two Dukes consulting who this Princess should be, (each having
his own particular reasons), their choice fell on Maria, the daughter
of Stanislaus Letzinsky, the ex-king of Poland. Wharton undertook to
prepare the mind of His Majesty to accept the alternative; and in the
interview, he found that the docile Louis was easily prevailed on to
exchange a bride still in the school-room, for a blooming young woman,
full of accomplishments and graces.
The views of Wharton in this manoeuvre, were still directed to his
favourite project of reinstating the Stuarts. At present, France, and
Spain, and Austria, were all equally estranged from their cause. By
creating a rupture between the two former powers, he divided their
interests; implicated their allies; and necessarily threw France
again into the scale of the Stuart and Bavarian claims. Philip had
declared himself openly for George of Brunswick; and was on the point
of signing the pragmatic sanction; this Wharton knew: and by mixing
the adversaries of the latter scheme of succession, with the political
rivals of England, he returned to Vienna with a promised accession to
his party, that made him omnipotent in the Bavarian councils.
To prevent any opposition to the proposed alliance, from the
remonstrances of Spain, as soon as the Duke of Wharton had left Paris,
(which he did with the negligent air of a mere visitor to the widowed
Queen at St. Germain's;) the Duke of Bourbon pursued the advantage that
nobleman had gained for him, and persuaded the King to send the Infanta
back to Madrid without any previous notice to her royal parents. She
was accompanied by a lady of honour, and an ecclesiastic of high
dignity, to be her protectors on the way; and to deliver a suitable
apology on the urgency of the case, to the King and Queen of Spain.
When the abbot and his young charge were so unexpectedly announced to
the presence of the royal pair, the good priest was too much agitated,
to fulfil his instructions with the diplomatic dignity he was enjoined.
He fell at once on his knees, and declared his errand in confusion and
anguish of spirit. The astonishment and grief of Philip shewed itself
in silence and tears; but the mortification of his Queen burst into
rage and invective. When the abbot offered the letters of explanation,
she dashed them out of his hand; and tearing the picture of Louis the
Fifteenth from her bracelet, trampled it under her feet. All now was
uproar. The French ambassador, and every French consul were ordered to
depart the Spanish territories without delay; and when Philip did find
words to express his sense of the injury he had received from the hand
he most trusted, he declared he never would be reconciled to France,
till the Duke of Bourbon should repair to Madrid and ask his pardon on
his knees. "Hah!" cried the Queen, "It shall not be long, before that
French cyclops finds the arrows of more than one King in his eye!" And,
to make good her threat, she immediately dispatched a trusty messenger
to Ignatius; giving him full powers to relinquish all the contested
points which had retarded the negociation; and at any sacrifice to
conclude a marriage between her son Don Carlos, and the Arch-duchess
Maria-Theresa, the presumptive heiress to the Imperial Crown. Some
other instructions, dear to the policy of Ripperda, were added; which,
if brought to bear, would give the preponderance of power, still more
to Spain and Austria; and place the French, where she had dashed the
portrait of their Monarch, at her feet.
Louis de Montemar passed several hours in close conference with the
Sieur Ignatius on these events; on the circumstances which led to them,
(though the share Wharton had in the leading movement was not then
known;) on the consequent instructions from the Spanish sovereigns; and
in settling how much of the whole, Louis was to declare to the Empress
and her minister, in making the commanded concessions, so as to appear
rather to give than to concede.
"You must manage the preliminaries to-night with Sinzendorf," said
the Sieur, "But to-morrow, whether it be to return on my litter or in
my hearse, I will see the Empress myself.--When the triumphal arch is
ready," added he, with one of those smiles, which visited his dark
countenance like the shooting of a star; "the wounded hero is unworthy
its honours, that will not venture his life to pass through!"
Louis bowed his assent to the Sieur's observation, with a smile bright
as his own; and, soon after, the College bell reminded him that the
time of his audience with the Chancellor drew near. On his rising
to obey its summons, Ignatius looked up from some letters he was
writing, and told him to rejoin him in that chamber the next morning
by day-break. "To-morrow," added he, "will epitomise the history
of Europe for many a future year; and be the deciding epoch of your
destiny."
The usual time of Louis's visit to the Chancellor Sinzendorf was an
hour before midnight; immediately after His Excellency had left the
card-table of the Emperor. And, as from the intricacy of his new
communications with the minister, Louis's present conference was much
longer than ordinary, it was an hour beyond midnight before he left the
Chancellor's apartments.
Hurrying along, to get out of the interior galleries of the palace at
so unseasonable an hour, at an abrupt turning into the large lighted
rotunda where most of the passages terminated, he ran violently against
a person wrapped in a splendid pelisse. He looked up, to apologize,
and beheld Duke Wharton. Louis sprang from the side of the Duke, as
if struck back by electricity: but Wharton grasped his arm. With
an averted face, and a heart yearning to embrace the friend, whose
presence, and whose touch, obliterated all remembrance of resentment,
Louis made another ineffectual struggle to break away; but the Duke, in
a gaily affectionate voice, exclaimed,--"I have clutched you, Chevalier
Phaffenberg! and if you were Chevalier Proteus himself, you should not
elude these ten fingers!" As he spoke, he threw his other arm round the
waist of his friend, and seized his opposite arm also.
"Release me, Duke Wharton!" cried Louis, fully remembering his
double promise to Ignatius and to the Empress, and striving to
recall the circumstances at the Electress's, which had excited his
indignation:--"This is a liberty----"
"That is nothing between friends," interrupted the Duke, in the same
happy tone; "but if we are enemies, I am too old a soldier to release
the prisoner, who may only want to cut my throat!"
"Duke Wharton!" returned Louis, fearful of being subdued by accents
so eloquent of former confidence; "when you see I would avoid you,
this detention is at least ungenerous. By the friendship you claim,
and you have; no longer withhold me! one day I will thank you for your
forbearance."
"You would thank me for that, to which I make no pretensions! In this
life of hard knocks, neither broken heads nor broken hearts can be
healed by the promise of an unction. And therefore excuse me, if I do
not forbear seizing the present sweetener of the wormwood you cast at
me a week or two ago in these passages!"
Louis struggled with his subdued heart, and sighed convulsively, as he
unconsciously rested in the arms that held him prisoner.
"You have my creed of defence, in this selfish world!" resumed the
Duke, "and so, my dear de Montemar, come with me, and whatever may be
your secret services here, they shall be as safe in my breast as in
your own."
With a gasping breath, Louis declared he must not remain with him
another moment.
"What then, your Pastor-Uncle fears me, even here. He fears the lion,
when his lamb is among wolves! I tell you what Louis,--there is more
in my heart towards you, than you will believe, or may deserve! But, I
repeat, come with me, and you shall have that heart on the table!"
Happy to exonerate his venerable uncle, Louis impetuously declared
that his interdict was withdrawn; but that other motives, not then to
be explained, rendered a temporary estrangement as compulsory as ever.
Wharton exulted in this amnesty from Mr. Athelstone; and urged it, with
every argument and device in his magic circlet. He was prevailing,
vehement, and gaily reproachful; but, as he persevered in all beyond
the usual measure of patience, Louis could not but at last feel such
constancy very like persecution; and very unlike what he should have
anticipated from the free spirit of the Duke. "But," whispered a
monitor within him, "was the Duke's wanton sport with your concealment,
when he recognised you, even under a false name, in the discourse at
the Electress's; was it consistent with belief in his candour? With his
present professions of attachment?"
As Louis stood in his trammelling arms, and with a downward face
thought of these things, he became displeased; and, with a firm air,
repeated his request to be released. The Duke persisted to hold him
fast, with some gay badinage on the coil of the crested dragon; but
Louis, determined to be no longer put from his duty, said, even
sternly,--"Duke Wharton, let me go? This compulsion is insufferable, I
will not be detained."
"De Montemar," returned the Duke, in a solemn voice, immediately
releasing one arm, while he still held the other; "I have wrestled
thus long with your caprice, to shew you that I had forbearance; but I
now read your changeful heart: go where it leads you. I once thought
it was devoted to friendship, and to noble sacrifice! But," added he,
after a short pause, and with a disdainful smile, "you are not what
you were--you cling to the foot of the ladder, I believed you even too
proud to mount,--and so I bid you farewell!"
As he spoke, he relaxed his hand from the grasp he held of Louis's arm,
and with a smothered sigh, which he sought to hide under a cough, he
turned hastily across the corridor. Louis's heart smote him.
"I have been selfish and arrogant! I have been accessible to ill
impressions; and, even now, to suspicions of the motives of him, I once
so devoutly honoured.--Alas!" said he, to himself, "I have not acted
like a friend! I might have broken from him, since duty required it,
but I need not thus have wounded him!"
As at one instant of time all these thoughts flashed over his mind,
he stood, without attempting to follow his friend; but he could not
help exclaiming,--"Wharton!" Wharton still passed on. "He quits me
in deserved resentment!" said Louis, his heart overflowing with
contrition; and extricating his feet from the spot, where they had
seemed rooted, he made two or three swift steps towards him.
"Wharton!" repeated he, when he drew near, "that farewell must not be
for ever!"
Wharton turned round with a lofty and serious air;--"and, why should
you wish it otherwise?"
"Because," returned Louis, catching his hand, "I value your friendship
as my life, but not beyond my honour." Wharton gazed a moment on his
agitated countenance. In a softened voice, though yet maintaining his
unusual gravity, he replied, "you could not suppose I should ask you to
betray that in yourself, which is my own impugnable estate!"
Louis did not speak; but, with bent eyes, to conceal the tears which
filled them, pressed the Duke's hand. Wharton returned the cordial
re-assurance; and with a smile playing through his seriousness, he
added, "and least of all, when one of the dear sex, I have so long
adored to my cost, holds your honour in the charming fetters you have
just been hugging to your heart!"
Louis dropped the hand he was so affectionately clasping; and exclaimed
with energy, "by that honour, I swear that no amorous passion brought
me hither to-night!"
"Nor any night? nor any morning?" replied Wharton, with more of his
wonted gaiety! "I will believe just what you please; only make me a
vow that she shall not absorb you entirely; and, though I admire the
lady and love the sex, I will promise never to wish a reversion in my
favour!"
Louis was vexed at this wild speech. He saw, that so far from Wharton
having a suspicion that political objects employed him at Vienna, he
really believed that his friend's visits to the palace were actuated by
a passion for the Countess Altheim. Louis could not shut his eyes on
another conviction; that the Duke dishonoured the nature of the passion
he supposed, by regarding it rather as an affair pour passer le tems,
than as a serious attachment for life. But, in spite of his admiration
of the Countess, and of what had passed between them, he felt an
insurmountable repugnance to say in solemn, considered language, that
his visits to her were to terminate in an indissoluble union; and,
with a sudden bitterness of spirit towards Wharton himself, and the
entanglements of his situation, he exclaimed, with a severe look at his
friend, "you distract me, by this determination to believe that I am
engaged in the sort of connection that my soul abhors."
"And what, dear de Montemar, does your soul abhor?" returned the
Duke, drawing his friend's arm within his, and walking with him down
the passage; "the connection mine abhors is matrimony; for a young
Xantippe, under its privilege, even now clips my sides with her
everlasting bonds, like the spikes of a penance-girdle, piercing into
my heart."
"By the current of your wild attack," said Louis, with a crimsoned
cheek, "I could not have guessed that you meant an attachment which
pointed to so serious an end."
"Serious enough, at the best!" replied the Duke, laughing; "and, in
my case, I should say it was at the worst; could I not suppose a
quality or two even less to my liking, in your fair lady! She is too
much of a female Machiavel for my easy nature, and would have me in the
state-dungeons before our honeymoon had shot her horns."
Louis was silent, and his heart beat, even audibly, with its contending
emotions. Should he speak a word more, he might betray the secret of
the Empress,--of the Sieur,--of his father,--of the Sovereign of the
country, to which that father had devoted him!
Wharton and he were now at the outward gate of the palace. Louis
attempted to withdraw his arm, but the Duke held it fast. "Nay, nay, my
eager Lover! you will not find her in the street! you must sup with me
to-night."
"Not for the world."
"How?"
"We must part here, dear Wharton, and part friends,--eternal friends!
But ask no questions."
"I will be hanged," cried the Duke, "if you are not in such awful
mystery that, if you do not go home with me, and let me see that occult
soul of thine through the chrystaline of generous Burgundy, I shall
believe (added he in a whisper) that you are too well with the Empress
herself."
"Wharton!" cried Louis, dashing the Duke from him, "you will make me
hate you."
"You dare not for your life and honours, dear petulant boy!" cried the
Duke, with a frank-hearted laugh; "and, till we meet in feast or fray,
give me thy gauntlet!" He stretched out his hand. Louis regretted the
violence with which he had spoken; but feeling the precipice on which
he stood, and dreading further detention, he gave his hand with evident
hesitation. Wharton shook it with gay cordiality, and said in his
kindest accents, "thou faithless one! dost thou suspect I am going to
realize the frog and the raven, and tear thee between my beak and claw!"
He then pressed the hand he held, with the warmth of a full heart; and
as he felt Louis's shake in the grasp, he added with strong emphasis;
"well, haste away! but I would snatch you from the snares which misled
my youthful feet, in the paths you have now entered. I would lead
you, where you may plant honour, and reap renown. Oh, de Montemar, I
would put a royal heart in that breast, whose pulses are fed by the
blood of kings!--Start not!--But thou must not grovel, and creep, and
follow--where you may rise and lead!--De Montemar, thou art enslaved
and mocked.--Come with me, and you are again free."
"Not for the best blood in my heart!" exclaimed Louis, now exulting in
his knowledge of the great cause to which he had devoted himself. "You
are mistaken Wharton; and again, I must say, farewell!"
"Be it so," returned the Duke, relinquishing his hand; "but you
will remember Philip Wharton, when it is out of the power of his
irrepressible friendship to extricate the son of the rich, the great,
Baron de Ripperda, from the bonds and bondage of a too fair Semiramis
and her subtiler confidant!"
Louis now understood that the Duke could not have meant to have
referred at all to a political slavery, which his former speech seemed
to imply; but that still he intended only to warn him against the
vassalage of the heart. Wharton certainly said enough to open the
mind of his friend to some suspicion of the perfection of his fair
mistress's character; but before he could rally himself to compose some
safe answer, the Duke had disappeared into the universal darkness of
the outer court.
CHAP. VIII.
The Sieur Ignatius did as he had determined. He went, and alone, to the
Empress the following morning. What he had to propose, soon made her
call the chancellor to the conference; and during the discussion, the
Sieur so ably adapted the mutual pretensions of the rival monarchs,
to the eagerness of their consorts to conclude a treaty, that nothing
remained to be done, when he left the apartment, but to obtain the
Imperial sign manual, to what the Empress and her minister so heartily
approved.
As Ignatius put a large casket of golden arguments, for certain members
of the council, into the hands of Sinzendorff, Elizabeth promised that
the Emperor's decision should be sent to Vienna, as soon as he could
collect his counsellors around him at the Luxemburg; to which palace
he meant to go next morning, for a few days. Meanwhile she recommended
to the Sieur, and through him, to his secretary, that they should keep
in strict seclusion; for she apprehended the indiscreet stir which the
Queen of Spain had made on the affront put upon her daughter, would
excite an immediate attention in the ambassadors at Madrid, to some
anticipation of her meditated revenge. All know that the political
train laid by these honourable spies of nations, is as subtle as it is
long, devious, and invisible; and where suspicion once points, it is
but the word of a moment to set the whole in a blaze. To avert such a
catastrophe to Isabella's too open threats against France, Ignatius
adopted this advice, as it coincided with his own judgment; and,
accordingly, he seemed to immure himself as during his wounds; but he
was amply occupied in arrangements, which only awaited the fiat of the
Emperor, to be brought into immediate action.
During this suspense, Ignatius received accounts from Sinzendorff,
which proved the wisdom of their caution. He informed him, that
visits at unseasonable hours had been repeatedly exchanged between
the French and other foreign ambassadors resident at Vienna; and that
he knew, from indisputable authority, that a messenger had arrived
from Paris, who was closeted with the French minister for many hours;
and that the same night His Excellency was seen, without any of his
accustomed attendants, gliding into the palace of the Electress of
Bavaria. In another letter, Sinzendorff communicated to the Sieur,
that he had certain intelligence of a private supper which had been
given the preceding evening in the Electress's boudoir; and no women
were present but herself and her Lady of the Key; while the men were
the French ambassador, the Dutch Minister, a French philosopher from
Berlin, the fierce ex-chancellor Count Stahlberg, and the Duke of
Wharton. What was the subject of their deliberations, Sinzendorff could
give no information; but he did not doubt that it brooded mischief to
the present crisis between Austria and Spain.
In Louis's nocturnal visits to the College, he gladly saw that little
inconvenience remained to the Sieur from his dangerous attack,
excepting incidental head-aches, and the scar on his forehead, which
being recently cicatrised, he still covered with a black fillet.
The cadaverous hue of his complexion was hardly deepened by his
confinement; but Louis occasionally saw a more than common fire flash
from his over-shadowed eye, as he accidentally looked up from the
papers he scrutinized. During the investigation, he never spoke more
than to ask a question, or to give a direction respecting the business
on which he was engaged; and generally answered his pupil's respectful
adieu for the night, with a silent, though gracious nod.
Louis's long hours of solitude, (for the whole of the Imperial family
had accompanied the Emperor to his spring palace;) were passed at the
Chateau. And after he had performed his, now brief vocation for the
day, he generally read German authors from the Jesuits' library; or
walked in the weedy wilderness, which had once been a garden. He now,
neither regarded the swift-flowing Danube, nor the gay groups, which
on foot or in carriages, appeared in the distance on its margin. His
meditations were all self centered; on the past, the present, and the
future. Often, during his deep reverie, he wondered at himself, that
his mind should wander, and at such a crisis, from the great affair in
which he was a sharer. A year ago, had he speculated on what would
have occupied his thoughts in so important a political era of his life,
he should have said,--"Exultation in the grand results of my father's
patriotic genius; and satisfaction that my noviciate talents had been
employed in the glorious atchievement!"
But on the reverse, while he sat at the feet of statesmen, and was
the agent between negociating sovereigns, he found himself dwelling,
hour after hour, on the private feelings of his heart. He was ready
to quarrel with himself for this wretched perversity. In the quiet
vales of Northumberland, he had lived in the full enjoyment of these
feelings; but then his vagrant thoughts refused to dwell on tranquil
happiness. He panted for distant realms, fields of toil, of perils, and
renown. He was now in the midst of some of these invoked stations for
action; and yet his inconsistent spirit would not abide in the scenes
it had chosen! His meditations would extricate themselves from their
patriotic objects, and with obstinate tenacity fasten themselves on the
most selfish considerations:--on the friend he had loved, and had fled
from! on the woman, he believed he loved, and yet was glad to fly!
He recalled the several warnings he had received, at home and abroad,
against the Duke; but the recollection of the natural and acquired
advantages he possessed over all other men he had known, presented
themselves of their own accord to Louis; and his spell-bound eyes, not
seeing where the scale turned, he dismissed the subject. The image of
the fair Otteline glided before his mind's eye, like the descent of
Iris from the rainbow: all brilliancy and ambrosial beauty. He had only
to articulate her name, to make the pulse pause in his heart, and a
dissolving sensibility steal over all his senses.
"And yet," he murmured to himself, "fair as thou art, I feel a chill
on my soul, whenever I think of pledging it to thee for ever. Oh,
wherefore?" cried he, "she is lovely, she is tender; but she has not
that elevated look in those beautiful eyes, which used to mingle my
highest thoughts with the soul of Cornelia! She has not that ineffable
glance of exclusive affection, which shoots direct to the heart, and
kindles a faith there, no doubts can extinguish!"
There was something in the parting words of the Duke, respecting the
Empress and her subtle confidant, which had adhered to the memory
of Louis, and continued to harass him with conjectures. By that
confidant, the Sieur Ignatius, or the Countess Altheim, might have
been understood; but it could not be the Sieur; as Wharton appeared so
unsuspicious of a political errand taking his friend to the palace,
that he avowed his belief at once, it was an amatory attraction.
"And was she subtle?" Louis's heart revolted at the question; though
he could not disguise from his clearer judgment, that she had herself
suggested to him the only incontrovertible mode of silencing the
scandal, she had thought herself obliged by duty to sanction as a truth.
"It was not what I like," said Louis, trying to excuse her to himself.
But had he uttered his own principles upon the subject, he would
have said,--"It is what I not merely blame, but shrink from, as an
unpardonable dereliction from female modesty!"
But in this case, he thought her zeal for the Empress, and her
prepossession in his favour, had obliterated from her mind all
consideration of what was due to herself; and the impelling motives
made him find an apology and a pardon for the amiable delinquent.
"Yes," cried he, "she sacrificed her native delicacy, in a double
respect to the disinterestedness of her attachment. Did I not see the
soft lustre of her eyes kindle with the blushes on her cheeks, and
look downwards, to conceal the graceful shame, as she insinuated the
delightful alternative!"
Louis was now far advanced in persuading himself that all was
delightful, which, he believed he was now bound in honour to make his
own, whether it were to his wishes or not. "Her conduct could not be
subtility," continued he, "for she is ignorant that I am the son
of the rich, the great Ripperda. Oh, Wharton, you wrong her! there
is nothing in my apparent present station to make a union with me, an
object of interest with the favourite of the Empress of Germany. She
must prefer me, for myself alone; and I am a wretch of ingratitude
ever to have found it necessary to convince myself by these doubting
arguments!"
In the midst of such musings, he was surprised one evening, by Gerard
putting into his hand a letter addressed to, "The Chevalier de
Phaffenberg." The hand-writing was unknown to him; indeed, evidently
a feigned one. He enquired whence it came. Gerard replied, he did not
know: but the letter was brought by a man in the dark, who left it
without saying a word. Louis broke the seal, and read as follows:--
"The carriage which conveys you to the Jesuits' College will be beset
to-night in your usual route through the deserted street of Saint
Xavier. The papers, of which you are to be the bearer, will be taken
from you. Resistance would be vain, for the assailants are numerous.
To avoid the loss of your trust, and perhaps of your life, should your
temerity contest the matter, take a different path to-night. But to no
one, excepting your friend the Jesuit, mention this warning. Were it
suspected, he that writes it, would soon be put beyond the power of
repeating the service."
"Tuesday Evening." Louis thought of the attempted assassination of
Ignatius. The letter he held in his hand was a second confirmation
that, notwithstanding the Sieur's severe precautions, the mysterious
business of himself and his secretary was so little a secret to its
enemies, that they knew exactly where to point even the most iniquitous
means, when they thought such expedient to obtain information, or to
create preventions. Who the anonymous friend was, who ran the risque
implied at the close of the letter, Louis had no hesitation to believe
must be the Duke of Wharton; for the Sieur had hinted to him, only
the night before, that he knew the Duke was one of a secret committee
who sat nightly at the Bavarian apartments. Wharton must then have
discovered that his friend's visits to the palace had a higher aim than
gallantry; and Louis felt something like a proud satisfaction in the
conviction. The letter, he trusted, would be a sufficient pledge to
Ignatius of Wharton's fidelity to his friend; and that whatever might
be his bonds to a party, they could not tie his faith to connivance
with a dishonourable act. This head of the subject being settled in his
own mind; and being enabled, by the warning, to avoid the threatened
violence; he would have given up his thoughts to the delicious
enjoyment of gratefulness to so dear a friend, had he not trembled to
think how far the Duke of Wharton's repulsed recognition of him, might
have led to so full a discovery respecting the secret movements of the
Sieur and himself.
He saw that he must apprise Ignatius of the knowledge his enemies had
acquired of his proceedings; and, in doing so, shew the letter he had
just received; and, while he declared his belief that Duke Wharton
was the friendly writer, be obliged to narrate what he had hitherto
concealed:--his meeting, and at last enforced discourse with the Duke.
As Louis reflected on the real harmlessness of that discourse; and on
the necessity, at the present momentous juncture, to make his guardian
master of every circumstance that might bear at all towards it; he
felt the folly of his reserve: and though at the time he had persuaded
himself that his silence arose from reluctance to agitate needlessly
a wounded man, his conscience now accused him of mental cowardice, in
shrinking from the pain he anticipated to himself in the torturing
discussion.
"In flying one stroke," said he, "I have incurred twenty. Had I
spoken at the time, I should only have had to narrate an event which
happened without my seeking; and the worst could only have been the
Sieur's suspicions of the Duke wishing to draw me to the Bavarian
interest. But now, he may see something clandestine in my silence; and
at best consider me imprudent and mean, if not absolutely insincere
and worthless." Though harrassed by these reflections, he was not
negligent of his trust. When he got into the carriage that was to
convey him as usual to the College, it was himself only he committed
to the casualties of the evening. He did not take one of the papers
with him; thinking it possible that the assailants, missing their prey
in the old deserted street, would way-lay him (as their emissaries had
probably done Ignatius,) in the college porch. The warning-letter,
(which he held in his hand, to tear piece-meal should he be attacked;)
he thought would fully account to the Sieur for this precaution.
Having placed his pistols in his waistcoat, he ordered the coachman to
drive to the College by a circuit in an opposite direction from Saint
Xavier's; and being obeyed; without any sign of molestation he reached
the Jesuit's cell at the accustomed hour.
The result of this dreaded interview with the stern friend of his
father, was very different from what Louis had expected. On his
entrance, he presented the anonymous warning, as his apology for not
having risqued the usual evening quota of state-papers through the
threatened danger. Ignatius examined the hand writing and the seal. The
former was a cramped text; the latter, a common diapered stamp.
"Who in Vienna can know you, to be thus interested in you, even as the
Chevalier de Phaffenberg? You have been seen by none out of the routine
of our business; excepting, indeed, that one accidental meeting with
the Electress of Bavaria and her attendant! Surely a five minutes'
glimpse of your handsome person, Louis," added the Sieur with a half
smile, "could not have wrought so potently on the latter lady, as to
excite her to such perilous intervention!"
"I am not quite the coxcomb to suppose it," returned Louis with an
answering smile, but a flushed cheek, from the consciousness of what
he had to confess. Without circumlocution, or reserve, but with eyes
cast down, and a varying complexion, he began and continued the whole
narration of Duke Wharton's seeing him twice in the galleries of the
palace; his escape from him the first time, and the Duke's consequent
remarks to the Countess Altheim: but that on their second recontre
he had found it impossible to break away, without suffering the
conversation, which he now circumstantially repeated.
Ignatius spoke not a word during the agitated recital of his pupil.
While making his confession, Louis did not venture to look up under
this awful silence; but when he concluded, and his eyes were still
riveted to the ground, the Sieur put his hand on his, and said in an
emphatic voice--"This honest narrative has established your character
with me. I see by your looks, that it is not left to another to lecture
you on the danger of your late concealments: I leave you, therefore,
in that respect to your own admonitions. But I will not withhold my
entire approbation of the dexterity with which you parried every
question of that serpent Englishman. Do not frown at the severity of
the epithet. Did you know him, as well as he is known at Paris and in
this capital, you would not doubt that he has many properties of that
wreathing reptile besides his glassy surface!"
"And yet, Sir," cried Louis, "I believe it is he who has ventured his
safety to give me this warning!"
"It may be," returned the Sieur, "and he no less a serpent still. But
for your escape, and that of the papers, I am obliged to him, and we
will dismiss the subject. There is another, on which I must give you a
necessary hint; the Countess Altheim."
At that name, the conscious blood rushed into the before-blanched cheek
of Louis, and his heart beat with an alarm to which he could assign
no cause. The Sieur paused a moment or two, regarding his pupil with a
steady look before he went on.
"You have too much of the woman in your face, young man;" said he,
"to keep your own secret, however faithful you may be of another's.
I see the pretty favourite has gained her point with your heart; but
do not allow your lips to commit your honour, till this public affair
is finished, and you may consult your father's opinion of such an
alliance. A rash step here would offend him for ever."
Louis bowed his acquiescence to this command, but it was not with a
constrained air. The Sieur saw that he was grateful for the gentleness
with which his confession had been treated, and respectfully obedient
to the injunction which concluded the discourse.
Louis returned to the Chateau by the same track he had left it, and
therefore reached his home in safety. The next day passed as the
former; and having just finished his hermit stroll under the silver
light of a bright March moon, he was slowly retracing his steps to the
house, when he met Gerard approaching him with information that the
Sieur Ignatius awaited him in the saloon. This unexpected visit alarmed
Louis. He instantly feared that some fatal turn had taken place with
regard to the completion of their labours, and that the Sieur had come
to announce it. He hastened however to his summons.
Wrapped as before in his large dark mantle, Ignatius was standing in
the middle of the room. The black fillet which pressed down his heavy
eye-brows, and the hearse-like plumes that pended over them, cast such
flickering shadows over his grey visage, that he seemed to Louis, as he
stood in the moon-light, more like the awful spectre of his guardian,
than his living self.
Louis thought he saw his fears confirmed. He approached, he drew very
near to him, and still the Sieur did not speak. Louis could not bear
the suspense, and exclaimed, "Sir, you have ill news to tell me?"
"Look on my face," replied Ignatius, in a tone of voice from which
neither good nor evil could be gathered, "and try to read what sort of
news the disciplined blood of a tried politician will declare."
Louis fixed his eyes as he was commanded, but it was with apprehension;
for he thought this beginning was to prepare him for the ruin of their
cause. His eyes shrunk from the proud fire which shone in the steady
gaze of the Sieur. It might arise from the pride of triumph, or be
the bright emanation of determined fortitude! But the latter idea
possessed his pupil. The extent of the misfortune he dreaded to hear;
as, again and again he had been warned that his father's honour was
involved in the fate of this treaty.
"Speak, dear Sir!" cried he, "I cannot guess what has happened, from
your countenance."
"Yet," said Ignatius, "it is easy to interpret what you believe ought
to be legible there, from yours! But, Louis de Montemar, if you are
to follow your father's career, to this moveless complexion you must
come at last. Else, vain will it be to discipline your tongue, if your
unmanageable blood betray the story. Know then, that our labours have
been successful. The Emperor has given his full consent to every demand
of Spain."
"Thank God!" exclaimed Louis, clasping his hands, and dropping into a
chair. The Sieur seated himself beside him, and without noticing his
emotion, (for all the son was then in Louis's heart) he entered into
the details of the business. The Imperial family had returned that
morning to Vienna. The Empress immediately summoned Ignatius to attend
her. He obeyed; and received from Her Majesty those particulars of the
Emperor's assent, which were now recounted to the attentive secretary.
The Sieur then added, that after he quitted the palace, he referred for
further instructions to a packet which the last dispatch from Spain had
brought in the Queen's letter-case; and which being superscribed to
himself, with the additional words, "only to be opened in the event of
the Emperor acceding to our proposals;" he had laid it aside until the
present, which was the appointed moment.
"As the conditions were fulfilled," continued the Sieur, "I broke the
seal; and the contents are these. A letter from the King, commanding
me to announce to their Csarean Majesties the entrance of his
ambassador into Vienna, in the course of eight-and-forty hours after
the information should be communicated to them. And that ambassador,
Louis de Montemar," added Ignatius, "is your father."
Louis sprang from his seat. The Sieur rose also, and continued; "in
reward of his high services, the King makes him his representative
here, with the restitution of his father's title and honours, and an
establishment answerable to all these dignities."
This part of the information, Ignatius addressed to ears that heard him
not. The word father! that sacred idea, which had so long filled the
heart and the hopes of Louis, which had seemed the goal whither all
his ambitions and his duties pointed; this holy image had sealed up
his sense, only to dwell upon the idea of his expected presence. With
the announcement of his near approach, Louis thought of nothing else;
and covering his face with his hands, the tears of filial love,--of
filial triumph,--of gratitude to heaven, that he should at last behold
that honoured countenance, poured from his eyes, and bathed his hands.
Ignatius gazed on him,--gazed on his heaving,--his sobbing breast. A
tear of sympathy, started into even his Stoic eye, as he turned away,
and walked in silence down the room.
It was some minutes before Louis could recall himself from the inward
temple of his soul, where his grateful heart had prostrated him
before the Giver of all Good. When he looked up, he saw the Sieur at
a distance, with his back to him, and leaning near the window which
looked towards the Danube. Louis approached him;--"your goodness," said
he, "has pardoned a son, shewing some natural emotion at so sudden
an intimation of soon seeing the most honoured, the most beloved of
parents?"
"Such sins are easily forgiven," returned Ignatius, with downward
eyelids. "To-morrow, at this hour, your father will be at the Palais
d'Espagne; the residence, under the late dynasty, of the Spanish
ambassador at Vienna. You must be there to greet him."
Louis's eyes answered in the affirmative, for his lips denied their
office; and the Sieur proceeded in his further orders. He said, that
circumstances rendered it necessary that he should meet the Duke;
therefore, as time pressed, his pupil must perform all that was to be
done at the palace; and go that night at ten o'clock to the Chancellor
Sinzendorff, and deliver to him those three packets. Ignatius had
laid several on the table before the entrance of Louis; which he only
just now observed: there were other packets to be presented the same
night to the Empress; "of whom," continued the Sieur, "Sinzendorff
will see the propriety of requesting an immediate audience, to give
you the opportunity of announcing the instant approach of the Duke de
Ripperda, as the Spanish ambassador; and, when you do it, Louis, you
must intimate that the nomination of the Duke is meant as a peculiar
mark of the Spanish King's friendship for their Csarean Majesties, in
thus parting with a man to do them honour, whose presence is as dear to
his heart, as invaluable to his interests."
"This will be a hard trial of my diplomatic skill," rejoined Louis,
with a happy smile; "to speak of him only as an ambassador."
"You will not, however, shew yourself his son," replied the Sieur, "if
you do not put that restraint upon your feelings. Whatever may be his
years, he is yet but a puling boy, who is not master of his face, and
the veins which color it. Remember, it is a man, I have engaged to
present in you to the Duke of Ripperda; and that it is he, who exacts
of you to name him this night in the Empress's boudoir, with as cool
an aspect as if you were announcing the arrival of a perfect stranger."
"Ah, Sir!" exclaimed Louis, "who can name the Duke de Ripperda, with
the cool utterance which they might give to almost any other man? Is
he not loved every where, where known? And where he is only heard
of, is he not universally honoured? And can a son name such a father
without emotion? Oh, Sir, send some other messenger, if I am to act an
impossibility!"
"Well," replied Ignatius, throwing back his lofty plumes, and drawing
his hand over his brow, "do your best in this commission, as you have
done in other circumstances of management, and I do not doubt that the
father you are so proud of, will be satisfied with his son." "I will
do my best," cried Louis, seeing that the Sieur was moving to depart,
"and, oh, dearest Sir, tell my revered father how impatient I am to
meet him--to kneel at his feet--to be clasped in his arms!"--The last
words were hardly articulated, from his encreasing emotion, and as the
crowding tears again started to his eyes, he dashed them off:--ere he
drew his hand from before them, the Sieur had left the apartment,--and
he saw him no more!
When the happy Louis found himself alone, he threw himself into a chair
to indulge the luxury of his feelings, to bless the time-honoured
name of his father; to weep with mingled recollections over the
long interval which had passed since his widowed arms had resigned
him, a babe, to the tears of his grandfather, now numbered with the
dust. He thought of that good old man's tender care. Of the paternal
guardianship of his uncle of Lindisfarne, of his benediction when they
parted, and the sacred letter which he put into his hand, as the last
legacy of his dying mother. In that, she spoke to her only son, as from
her seat in Heaven, exhorting him to love and honour his father, as the
object in his heart nearest to his God! The letter, Louis soon drew
from the case in which he preserved it; and pressing it to his lips,
on his knees, as he would have done her sacred hand, he there uttered
the fullness of his heart in vows to obey her behest; and to love that
father, on whom his conscious eyes had never rested, with, indeed, a
double portion of his spirit, for the sake of that father's own noble
nature; and for her's, who had resigned her life, in giving him to
existence.
These reflections diffused a holy stillness over the happiness which
now occupied the heart of Louis. And as the time approached for the
fulfilment of his duty at the palace, he collected the royal packets;
and putting them in his bosom, wrapped himself in his cloak; and, as
the clock struck ten, he entered the carriage with a blissful serenity
over his mind, that seemed to breathe of paradise.
CHAP. IX.
Louis delivered the letters of Ignatius to the Chancellor; and in as
few words, and with as much composure as he could command, he announced
the near approach of the Spanish ambassador. Sinzendorff fixed his
observing glance on the fluttering lip that proclaimed the honoured
name, and his doubts were confirmed. He read the letters, and then
remarked, that his Imperial master would be particularly gratified by
the promptitude of this arrival. The intended ambassador must have been
sent forward, to be in readiness, for the proper moment of his official
appearance; and this preparation fully proved the King of Spain's
honourable dependence on the fair dealing of the cabinet of Austria.
Again he fixed his eyes on the face of his self-restrained auditor; and
after expressing himself in terms of high respect with regard to the
Duke de Ripperda, and applauding the decisive step he had taken, in
accepting the embassy, he became fully satisfied that it was the son
of the Duke he saw before him. The Chancellor smiled within himself at
his own discovery, and at the attempted concealment by the Empress; but
without observing on either, he addressed Louis still as the secretary
de Phaffenberg, and proposed their going immediately to the Altheim
apartments.
"We shall certainly find Her Majesty there;" said he, "for the Emperor
passes some hours to-night with his confessor, and the Empress told me
she meant to enjoy the time in confidential discourse with Countess
Otteline."
Louis followed the statesman to the Imperial boudoir; and, as he
expected, there he found the gracious Elizabeth and her beautiful
favourite in close conference. He announced that the Chevalier was in
the anti-room, with a commission from the Sieur Ignatius.
"Something extraordinary, by the hour!" cried the Empress, "but I trust
no evil report. I am ready to see him."
Louis entered. He did not look on the side where the Countess stood,
but approaching his father's illustrious friends with a steadiness
of step that surprized himself; and with less visible emotion than
he could have hoped, he delivered to her the message from Ignatius;
adding, that the Sieur would have had the honour of declaring it
in person, had he not been obliged to pass the night in necessary
preliminaries to joining the Embassador, in the morning, at St. Polten.
In the evening, he would enter with him into Vienna.
The Empress's bright eyes shot a radiant glance on the modest bend of
the young secretary's head, as he concluded; and suddenly clasping
the Countess in her arms, she exclaimed,--"Ave Maria! This is the
crown of the Incas!" The Countess did not comprehend the fulness of her
meaning; neither did Louis quite understand it. Sinzendorff thought,
that if disappointment had rendered Isabella rash in her threats,
success seemed to have a similar effect on Elizabeth, by inflating her
with hopes not less alarming. He believed he read in this extraordinary
exclamation, that she anticipated a no small share in the wealth of the
new world, by her influence over the promised Embassador; and that she
would make the marriage settlement for her daughter, an abundant dowry
for herself. Whatever were her thoughts, her face was refulgent with
animation; and receiving the packets of Ignatius from the hand of Louis
with one of her most gracious smiles, she commanded him to take what
entertainment the Countess Altheim would afford him, while she should
retire with the Chancellor, to examine the papers in her hand.
Louis bowed in obedience, and the Empress and her counsellor withdrew:
she smiled to herself, as she closed the door on this auspicious hour
for the lovers; for such, she determined it should be. She had herself
fanned the admiration of the young secretary into the flame which she
now saw kindling on his cheek, as with downward eyes, he saw himself
on the point of being left alone with its object! From the first hour
of his beholding her, until this present moment, the Empress had
condescended to be the adviser and the confident of her beautiful
friend. She loved her too sincerely, not to assist in effecting so
illustrious a means, as a marriage with the son of Ripperda, of
reinstating her in the rank she had lost by her widowhood. But with
all this zeal in her cause, the Imperial Elizabeth did not betray the
secret of Ripperda; she merely hinted to the ambitious Otteline, that
the Chevalier de Phaffenberg was other than he seemed, and, did she
marry him, would place her at the height of her desires. "But," added
she, "there may exist powers to counteract the wishes only, of the
truest lover: you must therefore, lose no opportunity of binding his
honour."
With these views, she regretted the week at the Luxemburg, which had
necessarily separated the favourite from the object of her present aim.
But when he appeared at the palace with his important tidings, the
Empress gave way to every glad anticipation; and hoping all things from
his unsuspecting and ardent nature, she seized the first opportunity of
leaving him with the Countess; hardly doubting, that under the present
heart-opening circumstances, he would reveal every secret of his rank,
his name, and future plans, to make her his for ever.
Louis no sooner found himself alone with the resistless Otteline, than
his throbbing pulse reminded him that his guardian's exhortation was
in danger. In spite of himself, his eyes had stolen a glance towards
her, as the Empress withdrew; and her personal charms seemed to break
upon him, that night, in fuller lustre, even than before, when he
thought that nothing could have encreased the perfection of her beauty.
Their former meetings were always in a morning, when the dress is more
enveloped, and consequently less of the figure is displayed. This was
the first time he had seen her at a later hour, and she was habited as
she had left the Imperial drawing-room. Her dress was white, and her
fair arms and snowy bosom, decorated with jewels, drew the eye to forms
that might drive the sculptors of Greece to despair. Her golden tresses
were coiled with the same gorgeous bands; while one glittering ringlet,
escaped from its confinement, waved over her spotless neck, as if it
were the wing of love fluttering towards the guarded regions of her
heart. She caught the glance, and the almost smothered sigh, with which
Louis affected to turn his attention towards a cage of birds which
stood near him.
She did not appear to observe his embarrassment, but gently echoing
the sigh, remained leaning against the pedestal of a vase of flowers,
with her eyes fixed on the profile of his face. She guessed, that he
saw nothing in the gilded cage, but her image in his mind. Again she
sighed; and with such an expression, that Louis felt it thrill through
his frame. He turned his head, and their eyes met. Her's were full of
entrancing softness; his, of a grateful passion, which he would fain
have rendered less distinct. She smiled tenderly, and stretched her
arm towards him. In that moment he remembered how they had separated:
he was again in the same position, at her side, her hand in his, and
clasped to his lips! The brilliant roses on her cheeks did not lose
their brightness, in this speechless, but eloquent avowal of his love.
But the Empress had told her to require words!
Her fair fingers trembled in his, when she falteringly
articulated--"Chevalier! you have been so long absent--I thought--" She
paused, and looked down.
"Not," exclaimed he, "that I had forgotten to be grateful?"
She slowly raised her eyes towards his; and while the softest
tears swam over her own, and gemmed a dimpled smile; she half
whispered,--"the heart is a coward!"
"Never your's!" cried he, forgetting his determined self-restraint,
in the bewitching mazes of her thousand beauties, in the resistless
fascination of her words and looks. With a burning blush, she sunk
into a chair, but still yielding her hand to his fervent pressure, she
suffered him to drop upon one knee by her side.
"Never can you doubt," cried he, "where you have once confided."
She averted her head, and shook it mournfully. A tear fell on his hand.
Louis's soul was on his lips, as he kissed away that tear. The Countess
covered her face, and almost sobbed. He had now no remembrance of any
thing but herself. She was agitated, even distressed; and he was the
cause! He attempted to speak, but emotion prevented his utterance;
he trembled, and grasped her hand; she felt the strong pulsation of
his heart against her knee, and softly murmured,--"This Embassador
arrives--and you will go!" She interrupted herself, and attempting to
rise, exclaimed in disorder, "Oh, that I had never listened to our last
conference!"
Louis detained her on her seat. He must have been dull as the iron
rock, and hard as its material, had he hesitated to understand and to
reply to this agitation, this language. But words were inadequate to
express the sympathy which seemed to dissolve all his faculties in the
one feeling of unutterable love. He could only kneel at her feet, and
clasp the hand he had detained, to his throbbing eyes.
Her exulting heart believed itself now near the gaol of all its winding
movements: a positive declaration of his love, and an unequivocal
solicitation of her hand, in veritable words! Another step, and this
bond of honour would be her's. But she did not permit the triumph of
her thoughts to rise upon the managed scene of her countenance; all
there was retreating softness: yet, allowing her arm to drop, as if
unconsciously on his shoulder, with the sweet familiarity of perfect
confidence, she gently said, "and may I believe that you love me well
enough, to make me your's, in spite of the world's harsh prejudice
against a birth that was not noble? Can you be determined to bear me
up against that world? For she who is the favourite of the Empress has
many enemies; and when she is known to be beloved by you, she will have
many more.--Ah, Chevalier, against all this, may I believe that you
will be true?"
This demand, though put with all the force of exquisite tenderness,
giving itself without reserve to the fidelity of implied attachment,
contained words that recalled Louis from the delirium of passion,
and made him ask himself, how true he had kept his engagement
with Ignatius? How true he had maintained his determination to
preserve his duty to his father? since he was even now on the point of
dishonouring both, by uttering the very vow against which he had been
so solemnly enjoined!
Shocked at the oblivion in which all memory of his duty had lain for
the last half-hour, and indignant with himself, that his consequent
discovery of a more than reciprocal passion, had betrayed the Countess
to the last decisive question, he started from his knees, and said in a
hurried voice, "I dare not answer you as my heart would dictate, most
lovely, most beloved of women!--I am not my own.--In pity then--in
honour--allow my lips to be silent for a time."
She hastily rose from her chair.--"I do not understand you, Chevalier!"
He thought he had wounded her delicacy and her love, and with encreased
agitation, he exclaimed, "Despise my weakness, my apparent indecision,
but do not doubt my heart! do not doubt the honour, that would sooner
immolate that heart's dearest wishes, than make them all its own by a
breach of positive duty."
What was now passing in her mind, he could only guess, by the quick
heaving of her bosom; for she covered her face with one hand, while
she attempted to shake off the fond grasp with which he clung to the
other.
"You do doubt me?" cried he.
"You are mysterious; and I have no alternative."
"Oh," repeated he, "does the friend of the Empress Elizabeth, the
confident of statesmen! does she doubt the honour of mystery?"
The Countess smiled, and no longer struggling to release her hand,
turned on him a look of perfect re-assurance. But what she would have
said, the enchanted heart of Louis could only translate by its own
vivid imaginations; for the door of the interior apartment opened, and
the Empress and her counsellor reappeared.
The Countess, in a beautiful disorder of smiles and blushes, moved
forward to meet Her Majesty; and Louis, bowing to her advancing step,
remained where his Circe had left him. The Empress entered, as she
had departed, full of animation; and without appearing to observe that
any thing particular had passed between her favourite and the young
secretary, she proceeded to speak of the letters she had just been
reading; one from the Queen of Spain, and the other from Ripperda
himself. She turned to Louis with a peculiar smile; "Chevalier," said
she, "I must be your patroness with this great man. If you have any
suit to proffer, trust it with me."
Louis coloured deeper than the scarlet on her robe; but did not trust
his eyes towards the Countess. The Empress resumed the discourse to
Sinzendorff; narrating her first acquaintance with Ripperda, when he
came a widower to her father's court, on a mission from the States
General. She expatiated on the amplitude of his character; adding, that
it was a sure proof of the King of Spain's own talents, that he knew so
well how to distinguish, and to appropriate the genius of such a man
as the Duke de Ripperda.
For the first time in his life, Louis heard the praises of his father,
as the whirring of an indistinct sound. Absorbed by the new emotions
which laboured in his heart, he had no eyes but for the tremulous form,
no ears but for the low quick sighs of his enrapturing Otteline. He had
no thoughts but of wonder, how he could ever have paused for a moment
in believing her, all perfect in mind, as well as in body; in feeling
her, all sweet devoted love, as she was all resistless loveliness.
"Ah," said he to himself, "Ignatius might see her unmoved; but my
father, who has loved excellence in woman's form, has only to see her,
to bless the happy destiny of his son!"
The Empress, by a side glance, read his soul in his eyes, and stealing
a pressure of congratulation on the arm of the Countess; with apparent
unconcern, turned to Sinzendorff, and exclaimed: "but, Chancellor,
before we part for the night, I must not forget to mention what might
have been a notable discovery, had not this happy promptitude in
Ripperda's arrival put all beyond the power of manoeuvre. Otteline,
shew the Chancellor the letter."
The Countess took an open letter from a locked casket on the table, and
put it into his hand.
"Read it aloud, for general benefit," said the Empress, "there is
nothing more improving to politicians, than the faux pas of a rival."
The Chancellor looked towards the door.
"Shoot the bolt, Chevalier de Phaffenberg," cried the Empress, "His
Excellency seems to suspect treachery in the vestibule."
Louis obeyed, and returning to the side of Sinzendorff, as the pointing
hand of Her Majesty commanded, His Excellency began to read. The
superscription was to Madame la Comtesse Altenstein, and the contents
as follows:--
"Apprise the fair head of so many faithful members, that the power
which threatens our existence is now so gorged with its various prey,
as to have fallen asleep. It dreams of empire; and talks its secrets
to a darkness full of eyes, and in a solitude of more observation than
the ear of Dionysius. To night, I will bring a good account of one at
least, of its mining emissaries; while a sure train is laid under the
feet of the rest."
When the Chancellor ceased reading, and was examining the hand-writing,
Louis thought of the caution he had received the preceding evening.
Dreading a similar attack might way-lay Ignatius next morning in his
journey to meet the ambassador, (when the faithful Jesuit would be
attended by no stronger guard than the unweaponed arm of Martini,) his
anxious pupil, full of alarm, abruptly asked the date of the letter.
"Yesterday morning," replied Sinzendorff, folding up the paper, "and
since we cannot count the loss of any of our members, we must conclude
this doughty champion, whoever he may be, has failed in his pledge to
the lady to whom he has devoted his sword."
"Or rather his dagger!" replied the Empress, "we have found they do
not challenge with fairer weapons. But now, let us vote thanks to the
vigilant hand that intercepted this bungling piece of treason; and pass
to a pleasanter subject. My Otteline found the fairy favour!"
"And by what kind dispensation?" enquired the Chancellor, as with a bow
of acquiescence to the Empress, he returned the letter to her friend.
"While I was at the Luxemburg, a whole bundle of letters collected
themselves in this drawer," replied the Countess, putting her hand upon
a part of the table, in which was an aperture to receive and to hold in
safety all that might arrive during her absence; "and only returning
to-day, I had not time to examine my correspondence till about an hour
or two ago, while I was waiting for the Empress. In turning them over,
I saw this directed, as you see, to the Electress's Lady of the Key.
I know that she is the repository of her mistress's secrets; and it
was possible this letter might contain some of them. I thought the
hand-writing was that of the envious Count Stalhberg. Accident had
conducted it to me," added the beautiful Otteline with an exulting
smile; "and I would not throw away my fortune:--I broke the seal."
At the last sentence, Louis sprang back from the spot on which he
stood, as if he had trod on a serpent. The resounding of the floor
under his recoiling feet, turned all eyes upon him.
"Monsieur Phaffenberg!" cried the Chancellor, in a voice of reproof;
"you forget in whose presence you are?"
Louis put his hand to his forehead, as he strove to recover his
appalled senses. He turned to the Empress: "I have no words in which to
beg Your Majesty's forgiveness for this! But such irritability shall
never offend again!"
"You are ill then?" enquired Elizabeth, with more graciousness than
accorded with the brow of the Chancellor.
"I was," replied Louis, smiling ghastily, "but I am perfectly well
now. And if His Excellency can pardon the interruption, I beg he will
proceed."
The statesman's frowns had not been those of displeasure at the young
secretary's revulsionary indecorum. He had seen enough between the
Empress and her favourite, to convince him that, whoever that young
man was, they intended he should be the duped successor of the late
infatuated Count Altheim. All knew that the Countess's object was to
intrude herself again into the society, which had rejected her as an
usurper, because she had conducted herself like a tyrant; and that her
only means were by another illustrious marriage. Sinzendorff cherished
an Austrian's pride against the pretensions of the ignoble Otteline;
whom he knew to be as little elevated in mind, as in birth; though
she had ambition enough to overtop the crown of her mistress. He felt
resentment against the Empress, for such pertinacity in thrusting her
haughty favourite into the ranks of Austrian nobility; he despised the
favourite herself; and fully comprehending the recent extraordinary
action and words of her meditated victim, he determined to let him
see a little deeper into the character of his scheming mistress. When
Louis hastily uttered his apology, Sinzendorff bowed; and receiving
a nod from the Empress, to proceed in his remarks, he turned to the
Countess; whose investigating eyes were fixed on the suddenly pale and
averted face of her lover.
"And so Madam," resumed the Chancellor, with a slight smile and bend of
his head; "you made the Lady of the Key relinquish her trust, vi et
armis?"
"I did," replied the favourite, recalling herself with an air of
dignity; "and, finding what you have just read, I saw that mischief
had been intended, and might be again devised against some of the
Empress's agents; and when Her Majesty honoured me with her presence
this evening, I ventured to suggest to her the expediency of shewing
the paper to you."
"You have done warily, Madam!" replied Sinzendorff.
"Admirably!" exclaimed the Empress. "It is always wisdom to learn
what have been the intentions of an enemy, even after he has lost the
battle."
Elizabeth concluded with an observation on the promptitude of
affection; "It acts, while mere prudence only decides."
"I am happy to meet Your Majesty's, and His Excellency's approbation;"
returned the Countess, glancing by a sidelong look at the abstracted
countenance of her lover.--"They add an incontrovertible sanction to my
principle, that real love is a dictating sentiment, whence there is no
appeal. It is omnipotent, or it is nothing. My Sovereign and my husband
(the last word was uttered tremulously) should be alike the arbiters of
my actions, and of my life!"
"And of your honour, too, Madam!" said the Chancellor, with a biting
smile.
Astonished at the manner of this question, and jealous of any implied
censure before the man to whom all her attractions were then directed;
for a moment she suffered the blaze of anger to escape her eyes: Louis
caught the flash in its passage to the statesman, and, like a blighting
lightning, it shot into his soul. Drawing herself up with an air of
proud resentment:--"My honour, Sir," said she, "is consecrated to my
friends; and ill would it serve them, could it be made the slave of
their enemies. Besides," added she, with a scornful smile; "stratagems
are as notoriously fair in the cabinet as in the field!"
"Were we not, all, sooner or later, of your creed, Madam;" returned
the Chancellor, with a bow, "we should make sorry figures in either
contest! and therefore you will pardon an old practitioner, putting a
young disciple a little on the defensive? But while we approve this
dexterous act of diplomacy; to prevent awkward consequences from
enquiries about detention, &c. we must consider how to dispose of the
letter!"
"Give it me, my honest Chancellor," said the Empress, taking it from
his hand, and not very well pleased with his manner to her favourite;
"dead men tell no tales!" and with the words, she lighted the letter at
a candle, and threw the flaming embers into the fender of an incense
stove that stood near.
Louis listened, and gazed, and wondered. Listened and gazed on the
woman so lately transcendantly lovely in his eyes; wondered, that her
voice had ever sounded sweetly in his ear; that her face could ever
have appeared otherwise than harsh and repelling!--Appalled at what he
now witnessed from her, and from them all three; and at the idea of how
he might, a few minutes before, have pledged his faith, beyond recall,
to one of such abhorrent principles; he inwardly blessed the caution
of Ignatius:--and, as he continued for some time to stand more like an
automaton than a living being; he heard no more of the conversation,
till the Empress dismissed the council; and whispered to him at
parting--"To-morrow, your rank will be declared; so, for the last time,
adieu Chevalier de Phaffenberg!"
Louis put her hand mechanically to his lips, and withdrew, without
casting another glance at his so lately worshipped Otteline.
Sinzendorff was satisfied with what he had done towards opening the
eyes of this ingenuous young man; and, without committing himself by
making a remark on what had passed, he wished him a good night at the
door of the gallery.
Louis ran through the other passages; as if, by the swiftness of
motion, he could fly the thoughts which clung like harpies to his
heart. The palace clock struck one; and the extinguishers of the lights
which illumined the avenues to the various apartments, were appearing
in every direction, and rapidly involving the whole in the sombre hue
that suits the hour of rest. He passed through the grand quadrangle to
the portal, at which he had ordered his carriage to be in waiting. At
the moment he put out his hand to open its door, he was seized in the
strong grasp of some person. He could not see by what sort of a man,
the night being profoundly dark, and the lamps over the great gates
too distant to cast more than a gleam, sufficient to shew where the
carriage stood. Before he could make even an attempt for extrication,
the person whispered in his ear,--"On your life, do not return to the
Chateau to-night. It's porch is filled with your father's enemies."
Ere Louis could reply, his arms were released, and he was alone. But
it was the faithful heart of Wharton which had beat against his; it
was his well-known accents which had announced this second warning!
Louis looked around, and listened.--He could see nothing but his dingy
vehicle; hear nothing, but the champing of his horses' bits, as they
impatiently awaited his arrival.
"Coachman," said he, as he threw himself into the carriage; "drive to
the Vien, and there I will give you further orders."
The fatal letter, that dissolved the bright vision of love which a
few hours before revelled in his breast, had proved the stability
of friendship; for it corroborated the timely caution of Wharton's
warning epistle: and therefore Louis could not doubt, (had it been
possible for him to doubt any thing from Wharton,) the veracity of
his present information. Before he cast a second thought on the use
he ought to make of it, he could not refrain from comparing the
steady disinterestedness of his much calumniated friend, with what
they who disesteemed him would have foretold of his conduct in such
circumstances.
"Yes," cried he, "generous Wharton! in spite of all, thou wilt fasten
my soul to thee; for all thy links are honourable! Oh, what had I to
do with love? with women's smiles and sorceries? Why should I give up
my soul to lie in the lap of effeminate sensibilities, when I had such
a friend as this, to occupy my whole heart with noble sympathies? with
manly aspirations? with devotion to virtue alone? I detest myself for
my weakness; for my entrapped vanity! For though I saw her beautiful,
and thought her charming; though I was astonished at such marvellous
beauty, yet it never touched my heart, till she smiled upon me,--and
looked.--I will not think how she looked," cried he, striking his
forehead, "else the devil that she conjured within me, will undo me
again! Oh, woman! syren woman! from the first thou wert a tempter--a
creature to try the virtue of man--to make him feel his bonds to
earth!--while friendship, divine union of soul to soul, asserts to his
immortal spirit, its derivation from heaven!"
Louis was wrapped in these reflections when the coachman stopped, and
demanded further orders.
"I will get out here," replied he, "and you may go to the College
stables."
When the man obeyed, and Louis found himself alone in the street, he
knew it was not far from one of the gates which led to the suburbs.
Notwithstanding the danger which menaced his approaching the Chateau,
not to return to it to-night, was what he could not reconcile to
his sense of the trust reposed in him. It would be abandoning its
repository of state secrets to the depredators; should they, on
missing him this second time, resolve on entering the house itself.
Its situation was perfectly lonesome; and he could not suppose that
persons, so well informed of his movements, could be ignorant that
it contained no other domestics than Gerard, and, lately, his wife.
To leave it to these unwary guardians, when danger was so near, he
believed would be as distinct a desertion of his duty, as to deliver
every paper it contained, into the hands of his father's enemies.
On these grounds, he thought it right to proceed immediately to the
Chateau; but not by a path likely to be invested by the persons planted
to way-lay him. When through the gate, he considered a minute which
would be the securest circuit; and then determined on a sweep by the
river, to the back of the mansion. By this means, he thought he should
unite all that prudence could demand, with his resolution not to allow
the assailants any advantage from an undue care of himself. The way
through the hinder premises of the desolate street of St. Xavier,
was intricate and bewildering. The place having been destroyed by a
ravaging fire, was totally deserted; and Louis trod the devious alleys
without meeting a living soul of whom he could ask a direction to the
water-side. The absolute silence assured him of safety so far; and he
continued to grope his way over the mouldering piles.
When he emerged into the open part of the suburbs, the feeble light
of the stars, being no longer traversed by the deep shadows of close
buildings, afforded him sufficient guidance. The waters of the Danube
glimmered at some distance on his right; while the murky line which
clouded his view to the left, informed him he was within sight of the
avenue which led direct to the ambush he must avoid. He kept on towards
the river; and, having reached its banks, turned along the margin to
the path that led to the Chateau. After half an hour's walk, he entered
on the woodland, which declined from the garden-wall to the Danube; and
when he arrived at the wall itself, he found it a rampart of stupendous
height, and quite perpendicular. But he who had climbed the beetling
rocks of Northumberland, and gazed around from their eagle summits with
the careless eye of security, had no difficulty in surmounting a few
feet more or less of any structure raised by man. The old crumbling
stones made a breach wherever he placed his ascending foot; but he soon
gained the top; and jumping down into the garden, (for on that side the
wall was merely a parapet), ran swiftly through the grass-grown walks
to the terrace before the house.
He found the door open. He entered; but closing it after him, pushed
the strong bolts into their guard; and then felt his way through the
midnight darkness of the passages to the kitchen, where he expected
to find Gerard on the watch for his return. The honest German was
asleep in a huge wooden chair, by the side of a large half-burnt log,
now extinguished; and a lamp, almost reduced to its last drop of oil,
flickered on the table, near an unlighted candle and a flambeau.
Louis lighted the candle; and hesitated a moment, whether he should
awaken Gerard to accompany him to the examination it was proper to
make, or leave him quiet, till he had seen whether the ambuscade were
still in the porch. Thinking it most prudent to go alone, he took
the candle and proceeded to the hall, where he left his light in an
obscure corner, and then without noise opened the great door. With
his pistol in his hand, he crossed the court-yard, and drew near the
gates; but the wood of which they were constructed being very deep and
studded with iron, he listened in vain for a sound from the other side.
Judging that it was their thickness which prevented his hearing some
sign of the intended assailants, and wishing to assure Ignatius that he
had obtained sensible proof of the veracity of this second warning, he
determined to seek further.
He felt his way up the rough stonework of the piers of the arch, and
clambering over it, planted himself behind the great stone scutcheon
of the Phaffenberg arms, which crested its architrave. He strained his
eyes downwards, but could perceive nothing through the double night of
a moonless sky, and the obscuring umbrage of the trees. He thought
he heard a low murmur, as of whispering voices beneath; but he could
not be sure that it was not the wind in the branches. He leaned over
to make closer observation, and had nearly been precipitated into the
midst of his enemies; for a part of the ancient stonework gave way, and
fell with a clattering noise upon the pavement in front of the porch.
Louis had caught by the iron supports of what remained, and so was
saved from too well informing himself of who were below.
The effects of the accident gave him immediate notice of what he
had escaped. Some of the heavy fragments had fallen upon one of the
eves-droppers, whose consequent curses were instant and loud. Other
voices of like import, with wonder how it had happened, were mingled
with commands from one person for caution and silence. Louis wanted
no more to satisfy him, that but for the generous zeal of Wharton, he
might now himself have been lying a wounded wretch under the daggers
of these men. The ruffian who had been knocked down by the fall of the
escutcheon, seemed to be much hurt; for as his companions attempted
to raise him, Louis could distinctly hear him utter the most direful
imprecations against the Sieur Ignatius and the devils in league with
him. The former commanding voice replied in a more conciliatory tone,
"Come, come Spitzberg, this is only a little artillery from the owls!
Don't mind a graze, man; you shall pinion the gallant, in revenge for
these bruises; for I will wait here till sun-rise, rather than again be
baffled by his lucky star."
"I'll pinion him with a witness;" grumbled the fellow, "and make him
confess his heart's blood!"
"Silence, then," reiterated his commander. The order was almost
instantly obeyed; and Louis thinking, after this injunction, he could
learn no more, with a similar caution to that he had observed in
advancing, retreated over the gateway, and descended safely into the
court.
Though he saw no symptoms of an attack on the house, he did not neglect
to make the hall-door perfectly secure, before he took up his candle
to return to the kitchen, and dismiss his vigilant attendant to rest.
He found the lamp burnt out, and Gerard still fast asleep. A rousing
shake of the shoulder, however soon made him start from his seat; and
when his half-opened eyes perceived the object of his watchfulness
standing by his side, he could hardly believe he was not dreaming yet.
Louis bid him go to bed, and he would tell him in the morning how he
had let himself in. Gerard gaped, and stretched his arms, glared at his
young master, and said it was very odd! He had double-locked and bolted
the gates. But his Honour was a scholar of the Sieur Ignatius; and so
he would rather hear no more about it. "Well then, good night!" said
Louis, with a smile; "and since you can explain the matter to your own
satisfaction, it is sufficient for me. Only keep true to your professed
practice, and be sure that all the doors and windows are locked and
barred before you go to rest."
"I saw that before I fell asleep, Sir."
"Then who drew the bolts of the door on the terrace?"
"Nobody comes into the house that way," replied Gerard, pouring oil
into his lamp.
"I did," returned Louis.
The worthy German looked more astonished at this information, than he
had seemed to be when he suspected the learned secretary had passed
through the key-hole, by some of the occult arts of Ignatius; who his
wife had long persuaded her credulous husband to believe, was nothing
short of a wicked necromancer.
Louis followed the sluggish steps of his attendant to every door that
opened from the house; and being satisfied that all were safe, he bade
Gerard good-night, who mumbled out the same, without casting a thought
on the unusual caution of his master. Louis proceeded to the room which
contained all the state-manuscripts that were yet under his care; and
feeling no sleep in his eyes, or in his wishes, he laid his pistols on
the table, and prepared to watch and to meditate until morning.
CHAP. X.
When morning broke, it found the wearied spirit of Louis fast reposing
under his closed eye-lids. He had arraigned himself and his fair
mistress before the bar of his reason, again and again. He fatigued
memory in recalling every word he had ever heard her utter, to judge
how her former sentiments agreed with her late unqualified declaration
on the side of expediency; and, to his consternation he found that he
could recollect no one generous thought from her lips, which had not
been the echo of some opinion from his own. She had never led the way
in noble sentiment. How different was the case in his conversations
with his now far distant Cornelia and Alice! Sympathy reigned
throughout their circle, and it was only to speak first to have the
good fortune to promulgate the thought of every breast.
What then, had the woman he regarded as Perfection's self, had she
met only one compulsive occasion of declaring her unbiassed opinion
on a subject of principle; and had she proved herself divested of
any? Devoted alone to the dominancy of passion, whether it point to
the right or to the wrong? To him, who had been brought up at the
feet of the christian instructor of Lindisfarne, it was no excuse
that devotedness to love, or zeal in friendship, were her motives for
abandoning the rule of human conduct. They were the hills of paradise,
on which man might repose his grateful heart, but there was a heaven
above them; and when its flaming sword passed between him and his
earthly Eden, Louis believed there should be obedience without appeal.
"Oh!" cried he, writhing under the recollections of the last scene
at the palace, "had I known too late, that such thou art, how should
I have withered in those arms?" Louis felt that he would rather be
clasped at once in the icy embrace of death, than take to his bosom the
most beautiful form in nature that was cold to the soul of his soul,
an immortalizing aspiration after virtue and the approbation of his
creator.
"Oh, Otteline," exclaimed he, "a gulph that is impassable, now divides
us!"
As these reflections gradually subsided into sleep, her image kept
its station in his dreams; but it was not as heretofore, when his
visionary fancy used to pourtray her smiling in groves of perpetual
spring:--She now appeared in rugged scenes of affright, accusing him of
faithlessness; and with menacing gestures stimulating unseen personages
to revenge.
He did not awake till the sun had risen far above the horizon; and
then he found himself stretched on the floor, with his head pillowed
on his arm. The cheerfulness of the busy morning hour shone on all
without; while within, the desolation of loneliness and of discomfort,
sat, like a troubled spirit, on every gloomy piece of furniture.
"But this is the day, the blissful day," cried he, "when the
bewildering spell which has so long enwrapped me, will be broken! I
shall again mingle in the social meetings of my fellow-creatures;
and find myself amongst a variety of persons, to whom I can speak,
and rationally companion my mind and my enjoyments.--Hitherto, for
these three months past, I have gone gliding about, fearful of human
glance, or friendly cognizance, till my crazed faculties fancied a
guardian-angel in a beauteous vapour! But now, the mists disperse.
Propitious morning, bright and transparent, I greet your opening!--You
will unfold to me my father! you will release me from the wild and
feverish dream in which my life has wasted, ever since this dreary
mansion became the confidant of my thoughts!"
In contemplating such a happy consummation of his most sacred wishes,
he passed to his own apartment; where, redressing himself with all his
wonted elasticity of spirits, he prepared for the coming events of the
day. On entering the saloon, he found Gerard placing the breakfast
tray. The man told him that Martini was below, with a message from the
Sieur.
"Send him to me," returned Louis, anxious to hear of Ignatius's safe
arrival at Saint Polten's; and eager to be told any thing that might
relate to his father's approach.
Martini obeyed the summons with alacrity. His appearance was full of
gaiety, and his dress, (which he took pains to display, under a large
Hungarian great coat,) was of a splendor that instantly attracted
the notice of Louis, as much from its novelty as its costliness.
The Italian's former habit, was a russet grey, without ornament or
smartness; but this was scarlet, and gorgeously laced with gold.
"Why Martini!" cried Louis, "That is a gala dress!--and to honour the
ambassador, I suppose!--you have left him well; and conducted your
noble master safe?"
Martini was at that moment viewing his own figure, with peculiar
complacency in one of the large mirrors of the apartment. Louis could
have laughed, as he repeated his question to the happy coxcomb.
"I am impatient as yourself, Signor," replied he, "to see the entrance
of the Ambassador. You will then know that I do not wear this livery
without a right!"
"I did not suspect it, my good Martini," returned Louis, "but you
do not tell me when His Excellency is to arrive?" "By five in the
evening, at the Palais d'Espagne; and thither I am to conduct you to
await him."
"In a habit as splendid as your own?" asked Louis, with a smiling
nod to his laced vest. Martini coloured, and throwing a proud glance
over his embroidery, exclaimed--"Signor, I have been some years with
my master; and seniority of services, with some great men, has more
consequence than short duties in higher posts."
"I wish it were the rule with all great men!" replied Louis, "And be
assured Martini, I shall always have too much respect for your tried
fidelity to your master, ever to wish to rival you in his good graces.
But come, answer my twice-demanded question; how did you leave him at
Saint Polten?"
"I did not leave him there at all," replied Martini; "he left me last
night; and at parting, gave me a commission to execute a million of
orders, e're he should return."
"Then he went alone?" asked Louis, with an alarm he would not shew; "or
what were his attendants?"
"He might, or he might not have some of the Ambassador's people to meet
him on the road; but on receiving a letter at midnight by Castanos, he
called me to his chamber; and, after giving me his commands, went away,
telling me I should see him no more till we met this evening in the
Palais d'Espagne."
"And have you heard nothing of him?"
"Nothing."
"But Castanos accompanied him?"
"I do not know. The surly old Spaniard went out before my master; and
would not answer me when I spoke to him."
Louis was disturbed at this vague information. The threatening language
he had heard last night, and the unseasonable hour of Ignatius's
journey, filled him with apprehensions for the event. But, unobservant
of the troubled countenance which only appeared to listen to him, the
volatile Italian continued the conversation in rapturous descriptions
of the Palais d'Espagne; its costly furniture; the splendid retinue
which were placed there to welcome its future lord; and the magnificent
entertainment that was preparing for his reception. "Ah," cried the
transported valet, "who will see us there, and believe we could ever
have endured, for so many months, the hard vigils of that horrid
College!"
"And yet," said Louis, striving to recall his attention from his
growing fears respecting the safety of Ignatius; "it seems to me that
College seclusion, and even its austerities, are better calculated to
please the taste of your master; than the public bustle, and scenes of
luxury, you have just described."
"That may be, Signor!" replied Martini, "but times change men, as men
change the times; so, I make no more manifestoes for my master, than
for myself."
"But I wish you had taken more care of him!" returned Louis, rising
from his seat; "Indeed Martini, after his having been once assailed,
you ought not to have allowed him to set out alone."
"Allowed him!" retorted the Italian, "allowed my master! He has never
been allowed in his life! He has always done just as his will impells
him: and, I know not the man on earth, who dare to say to him, I
withhold, or I allow!"
"You mistake me. I did not mean to invest you with a lord's controul
over the Sieur; but ought you not to have asked his permission to
attend him? Ought you not to have entreated him, when you knew, by so
recent an experience, that the assassin's poniard lies in wait for his
life?"
"My master commands, and I obey, Signor!" replied Martini, "that is
the duty he requires of me, and he would banish me for presumption,
should I proffer any other."
"He ought to be a god," returned Louis, "to live in such proud
loneliness! But I am too much of a mortal, not to be anxious about his
safety, and I request you to let me have the earliest intelligence
respecting him."
Martini answered carelessly, "that as things were, it was impossible
to learn any thing until the suite should arrive;" "but," added he,
"I shall then have the happiness of conducting you to the Palais
d'Espagne, where you will see him."
"Be punctual to your hour;" replied Louis, "for I shall impatiently
await you."
Martini crossed himself, in ratification of his word, and with a step,
light as his spirits, danced out of the apartment.
"Joy, the joy of the heart!" ejaculated Louis, as he looked after
the jocund Italian, "is not gay; it is soul-centered; and calls for
meditation on its own perfection!"
Louis's imagination, kindled by the ardent affection he had ever
cherished in his bosom for his father, was again called forth to set
that image of his idolatry in a halo of the purest lustre. The name of
parent seemed to consecrate the adoration of his heart. There could be
no excess, he thought, in loving him from whom his being and his honour
were derived; and, in the ardour of his enthusiasm, he beseeched the
Almighty to bless him with a virtue worthy of such a father; and, that
in every contest with his passions, he might conduct himself as became
his ancestry on earth, and his nobler origin in heaven!
In hours like these, Louis learnt the full value of the pious offices
to which the instructions of the Pastor of Lindisfarne had habituated
his mind. The heavenly serenity which presided over the heart of the
venerable man, was the best proof of his precepts. "My son," he used
to say, "whether you are agitated with joy, or with grief, let your
first counsellor be the dispenser of both. His gracious spirit is ready
to assuage the burning glances of the one, by the dewy incense of a
grateful heart; and he will illuminate the shadows of the other, by the
starry light of faith and hope."
Louis did not permit the contemplation of future high duties, to dull
the recollection of present ones, however lowly, that were yet to be
performed. He gathered the papers in his writing-room, and confided
them to an obscure closet in a remote part of the Chateau; where, he
believed, they would be secure from either curiosity or depredation,
till he should be commissioned to transfer them to some other custody.
As the time drew nigh for the promised summons to the Palais
d'Espagne, his watch was drawn out again and again. But when minutes
only intervened between his wishes and the eventful hour, he held it in
his hand, and paced the room with a beating heart. He heard a step in
the gallery. He flew to the door. It was Martini.
"Is he arrived?" cried Louis, rushing towards him.
"No," replied the Italian. "But haste. I expect the cavalcade every
moment, and your carriage is at the gate."
Louis seemed to have made but one step from the hall to the carriage.
He was seated in it, and leaning breathless against the back, with his
hand over his face, when Martini jumped in by his side. The lively
valet discoursed with his usual fluency, but what he said, his auditor
did not know: he had no outward perception, all was absorbed within.
The vehicle stopped; he thought the horses must have flown, when
Martini exclaimed, "we are at the Palais d'Espagne. Signor you must
alight."
Louis aroused himself, and looked around. He was in the court-yard of
a superb mansion, thronged with a crowd of liveried attendants walking
to and fro under the colonades and portico. The spacious doors of the
house stood open. Louis sprang from the carriage, and, without noticing
the men who bowed as he passed, hurried through the great vestibule
after Martini. The valet preceded him up the lofty stair-case to a
range of gorgeous apartments. The first and second were full of Spanish
merchants, resident at Vienna; eagerly awaiting the entrance of an
Embassador, who had obtained the restitution of all the privileges,
which had been wrested from them when the Austrian family lost the
crown of Spain. The next chamber was a saloon of Imperial magnificence.
"Here, Signor," said the Italian, "you must attend the commands of the
Duke de Ripperda." And without another word, he bowed slightly, and
hastened away.
Louis's feelings were wound up almost to torture, during the short
interval between that moment, and the one in which his expecting ear
caught the trampling of horses, and the buz of an approaching crowd.
He rushed to the window, and beheld a train of travelling carriages
filled with the suite of the embassy, sweeping by the great gates
of the mansion, while the court-yard was filled by populace, and an
immense cavalcade in splendid Spanish uniforms. Immediately following
the latter, appeared six horses, richly caparisoned, and drawing a
carriage surmounted with the ducal coronet. Louis saw no more. That
carriage contained his father! He started from the window. The air
resounded with shouts. He pressed his clasped hands on his bursting
heart. A few minutes more, and Martini darted into the outer-room that
contained the merchants. The door was open; and Louis heard him say,
"The Ambassador!" The next instant he beheld a man of such resplendent
aspect--a step, a form, an air; a bowing dignity, as he bent his
gracious head, waving with white plumes to the grateful Spaniards who
thronged around him--that Louis felt at once, it was his Father! His
feet were rivetted to the spot on which he stood; his eyes on that
august figure; but it was with the dazzled gaze of eager, expecting joy.
The crowd separated from before their benefactor, and he entered the
saloon. As he advanced into the room, the door was closed behind
him, and while the unshorn star of prosperity seemed fixed in his
magnificent countenance, he made a hasty step forward, and extended his
arms to his son.
With a cry of joy, in which nothing was articulate but--"My Father!"
Louis precipitated himself towards him, and fell upon his breast. The
Duke strained him to his bosom; but that over-wrought heart had ceased
to beat; and, with a moistened cheek, he pressed the insensible lips of
his too happy son.
CHAP. XI.
Louis re-opened his eyes on a superb couch, in a magnificent
bed-chamber, and surrounded by the physicians who had accompanied the
suite of his father from Madrid. A few minutes more restored him the
possession of all his faculties; and looking around, he did not seek
in vain for the noble form, whose parental embrace was yet warm on his
heart. Seeing that his son was recovered, the Duke made a sign for
every person to leave the room. Louis was going to rise, but his father
checked him by a motion of his hand; and drawing near him, sat down by
his side.
They were now alone. The Duke had taken his hand.--Louis kissed it
reverentially. "Ah, my father!" cried he, "if words could utter all
that is in my soul, towards your honoured self! Revered for your own
sake,--sacred for that of my angelic mother!" Tears bathed the hand,
which he sealed again with a son's devoted lips.
"Louis," said the Duke. Louis started, and looked around, and then
turned to his father. Ripperda silently regarded the enquiring
movements of his son.
"Sir," said Louis, "did I not hear the Sieur Ignatius speak to me?"
"You heard the voice of your father," returned the Duke, and he smiled.
It was the smile which Louis had never beheld on other mouth but one!
He gazed on his father's face with searching amazement. Ripperda
still wore his plumed hat. He took it off, to submit himself the more
completely to the inspection of his son. Louis felt that the voice and
smile were those of the dark-visaged and reserved Ignatius; but the
face, on which he now looked, was refulgent with manly beauty, and the
undisguised consciousness of high desert. Though the resemblance was
so extraordinary in two respects, yet, as in every other point the
dissimilarity was as striking, Louis had no suspicion of the truth; and
concluding that the Jesuit was some illustrious Spanish branch of the
Ripperda family, he earnestly replied,--"but where is the Sieur? Your
voice, my father, is so exactly his, I guess I must revere him as a
near relation, as well as your steadfast friend! But where is he? For
many reasons, I am anxious to know that he is safe."
"He is safe," returned the Duke, "and it gives me no small satisfaction
that you have been obliged to ask that question of me."
"Oh, Sir," replied his son, "though I might not always conduct myself
in the manner the Sieur Ignatius would approve; yet, I had hoped you
could not doubt that I would eventually give him all my reverence."
"I did not refer to that," resumed the Duke, "but, as you had
suspicions respecting the real situation and authority of that man;
and did not misconceive the character of your father; when, through
all the long months in which you obeyed commands that would not suffer
an appeal; and you so often doubted that the Baron de Ripperda could
really submit his son to such uncontrolable delegated power; how did
it happen, that you never suspected the mysterious Ignatius, and your
father to be one and the same person?"
"How?" exclaimed Louis, hardly conscious that he had spoken, while, in
hesitating astonishment his eye hastily scanned the august form before
him. It was indeed like that of Ignatius, majestic in every proportion,
but with more meridian vigour, with a more gracious air of command. No
trace of age discomposed the lofty symmetry of his figure; no mark of
time was visible on his capacious brow; cleared from the darkening dye
with which he had stained his complexion and his hair, his eyes shone
bright as the heavens, which their hue resembled. On the side of his
forehead, under the hair, Louis could discern the scar which had been
inflicted under the portico of the Jesuits' College. He shuddered at
what might have been the issue of that stroke; and thought what would
have been his agony, had he known that it was his father's hand which
closed so deathfully upon his, in the dark chamber of murder. He could
not speak, but his eyes and quivering lip, told all that was passing in
his mind.
"It was necessary," resumed the Duke, "that the negotiation with
Austria should be managed with dispatch and secrecy. The Queen proposed
that I should undertake it in disguise. I left Madrid under an
ostensible rumour, that I was gone to Russia on an affair connected
with the Baltic trade. At the place of usual embarkation, I dismissed
all my attendants, excepting Castanos and Martini. They were essential
to my proceedings. In the same day, I assumed the habit of a Jesuit;
and with my credentials disposed about my person, made my way to
Vienna. Besides the persons I have named, the Empress Elizabeth alone
was privy to my disguise. Her confidence in me inspired the idea of the
negociation; and her own interest in some of its articles warranted my
faith in her secrecy;--our success, you know. But while I was effecting
these great objects for my country, I chose the opportunity to give my
son his first lesson in the science to which fate has destined him.
Louis, I am fully satisfied with all you then performed. But you have
yet much to learn, and more to practise. You are now to be plunged
into the world, to stem the eddies of two contending vortices, duty and
pleasure! Mark me, and write on the tablets of your heart what I am
going to say. Use the one, to serve the other! But let me see that your
choice will be that of Hercules. You will meet many to persuade you to
the contrary; but remember, you may have a prompt guide in him who has
most interest in your welfare; therefore, Louis, I ask your fearless
confidence?"
While Ripperda continued to speak, his son thought within himself; if
my father were disguised in the sombre vestments of the Jesuit, his
spirit was even under a darker mask; I cannot recognise the harsh and
despotic Ignatius, in the mild exhortations of this gracious parent!
"Oh, my father!" exclaimed he, throwing himself on the Duke's bosom,
"you have your son's heart!--and in that, where is the thought that
can be hidden from you!"
Ripperda smiled, "Louis," said he, "these impassioned emotions may be
convincing witnesses of your southern origin!--but you must imitate
your father; and temper your Spanish blood with some of the phlegm
of the country in which you received your education. With one half
of mankind, this sort of feeling would be ridiculed, because not
understood, while those who could comprehend it, would watch it as the
betrayer of your secrets, and manage it to the establishment of their
own. The heart is man's citadel, it is only open country with feeble
woman! And perhaps, there is too much of her nature in all vehement
expressions of sensibility!"
Louis coloured, as checked in heart, he raised himself from his
father's arms. "Sir," said he, "I dared to shew these sensibilities to
my father, because I trusted he knew I was not wanting in the mental
strength to prove myself a man."
"True, Louis; but that is a character which ought not to require
occasional proofs. It should be manifest in the unvarying equability of
your conduct."
Louis looked on his father.
"One of my books is the human countenance;" resumed the Duke, "and
your's is very legible at present. I do not require you to change your
constitution, but to control its impulses. Endearments are rejected
between man and man, because they admit hypocrisy. All can affect to
caress; but the sober aspect of real fidelity is not easily assumed. In
temperate discourse you look into your companion's eyes, and read his
soul. But when the heart is shewn, by the agitation of the nerves, and
the head is thrown on the bosom; how can you then find an avenue to the
mind? Man, therefore, demands of man, the open, unreserved countenance;
and leaves to woman, that caressing enthusiasm, which may either
express tenderness, veil modesty, or mask a deceptious heart. Hence,
my son, we are oftener deceived in love than friendship; but you must
beware of both."
Louis was agitated by the concluding remark. It recalled the image of
the Countess, and the last scene wherein he beheld her, which made
him wish to forget the rest: quelling, however, every appearance of
disturbance, and only returning the kind pressure of his father's hand;
with more emphasis than he intended, he exclaimed, "in all things,
honoured Sir, I will strive to be obedient to your counsels. But do not
despise the expressions of an affection, which would not know a dearer
object than yourself!"
"I do not despise, but I restrain them; for you must be habituated
to self-command. Cherish the confidence that you now possess. Let me
be, indeed, the repository of all your thoughts; and though, in some
cases, I may disapprove, you shall never have cause to remember the
Sieur Ignatius in your father."
The smile which had so often lightened from the dark lip of the
Sieur, now beamed in sun-like radiance over the bright countenance of
Ripperda. Louis could have thrown himself again into his arms, and
pressed to his grateful bosom, the gracious heart of his father; but he
remembered the lesson he had received, and merely clasped his hand to
his lips.
Ripperda passed the remainder of the time in which he sat with his
son, in giving him instructions relative to their present situation
at Vienna. He told him, that in right of his restored rank, he was
now Marquis de Montemar; and to honour his father's services in this
momentous embassy Their Majesties of Spain had appointed him Secretary
of Legation.
"You are young for so responsible an office," continued he; "but the
Queen knows how ably you fulfilled my duties, during my wounds; and
herself suggested to the King, rewarding your zeal by so answerable an
appointment. The courts of both countries are ignorant of this reason;
therefore, you must make up in dignity of deportment, what you want in
years; and, to common eyes, in previous service. The world is governed
by appearance."
Ripperda then spoke on the causes and terms of his re-union with Spain.
And with some astonishment, and more regret, Louis comprehended that
his father had also been received into the pale of its established
church. Louis ventured to express his sentiments on this communication.
"It was my original religion," returned the Duke, "the free-thinking
spirit of independence had betrayed me in youth to the cavils of
Reformation, but time and study reconciled me to the faith of my
ancestors. Two learned Jesuits at Madrid completed the work, and I
am now as good a Catholic as any in the Spanish dominions. The same
masters may convert my son; and then, Louis, I shall have no wish
ungratified."
"I was born a protestant, Sir;" replied Louis, "and I believe I shall
die one."
"Be what your conscience dictates," returned the Duke, "only remember
that your father and your king are Catholics; and you will not fail in
honour to their church."
Louis bowed his head in respectful acquiescence. The Duke soon after
withdrew to his chamber of audience. Many of the old Spanish settlers
in Austria, who had been oppressed there since the changed succession
in Spain, were in waiting, to petition the ambassador of their ancient
country, to interfere with the Imperial court in their behalf.
Titles were never points in the ambition of Louis but as they were
symbols of pre-eminence in nobler respects; he, therefore, was not
insensible to the satisfaction of having the alienated honours of
his race restored to him by the virtues of his father. Such were his
thoughts, when the subject occurred to him; but when the Duke de
Ripperda first left the room, the mind of his son was wholly absorbed
in the happiness of having at last seen, and conversed with, and been
received to the heart of such a parent. That the stern Ignatius, from
whom he had shrunk, while he revered him, and this benignant parent
were one, amazed, while it called forth all his gratitude to heaven for
the preservation of that parent through the perils of his disguise.
As he meditated on the complete change which had taken place in his
father, since he had dismissed the garb of the Jesuit; and recollected
the lessons he had received from him in both characters;--from the one,
on the policy of assuming the thing that is not; and from the other,
the recent injunction to conceal his real feelings;--he conceived a
hope that the Duke de Ripperda might not be so averse to the Duke of
Wharton, as the Sieur Ignatius had thought it expedient to represent.
In his next discourse with his father, he determined to name the Duke;
for in spite of the late reproof to his indulged sensibility, his heart
yearned to utter all its affection and gratitude to the friend, who had
rewarded his repeated apparent insulting avoidance, by twice having
been his preserver.
After the Duke de Ripperda dismissed his Spanish suppliants, he
repaired to a private council of the Austrian ministers, to discuss the
preliminaries to his public reception by Their Csarean Majesties.
Louis did not leave his apartments, till he heard the wheels of his
father's carriage in the court-yard. It was then near ten o'clock at
night, and the colonades and palace were lit up in every direction with
lamps and chandeliers.
He hastened towards the great saloon, and met the Duke in the
anti-room.--They entered together. Several persons were present,
who greeted Ripperda with an equal air of deference, though with
different degrees of ceremonial obeisance. Their personal ranks were
distinctly marked in each individual demeanour; and when the Duke
introduced Louis as his son, they paid him compliments, which the young
Marquis answered with little more than respectful bows. His father
immediately led the way to the supper-room; and he, with the rest of
the company, followed through a suite of superb chambers lined with
attendants. The entertainment was served in a style to which the Duke
was accustomed, but which was novel to his son. The simple elegance of
his Pastor-Uncle's table possessed every comfort; the hospitable board
at Athelstone and Bamborough groaned with the weight of the feast;
and the feudal state he had seen at the banquets of the chiefs of
Scotland, was that of plenty with barbarous festivity;--but here, all
that was elegant and hospitable, stately and grand, were united in one
assemblage of courtly magnificence.
The manners of Ripperda to his company were like his
entertainment.--None could forget that he was the first man at table;
but the condescending graces of his conversation, and a peculiar
address, to which only the individual to whom it was pointed could be
conscious, charmed all that were present, with a conviction that each
one in particular was his especial favourite. Louis's spirits were so
absorbed in attention to his father's eloquent discourse on a variety
of subjects, addressed to himself and others, that he spoke very
little; and thought the time had flown, when the Duke rose from his
chair, and the party, obeying the signal, bade him adieu for the night.
When Louis was preparing to follow, his father stopped him.
"I am pleased with your general deportment this evening," said he. "The
dignified respect with which you treated those persons, (who, though
holding subordinate situations to yourself in the embassy, are your
seniors in years, and all of them men of family;) while it maintains
your own superiority, will conciliate their good-will; and propitiate
the envy that might busy itself in search of your faults."
"Sir," said Louis, blushing at the implied arrogance, "I had no idea
of shewing any thing to those gentlemen, but simple respect. And I am
sorry that what I had no thought of should have appeared in my manner,
to lessen the expression of that sentiment."
Ripperda shook his head, but not with gravity.
"I know you are a man of nice distinctions; and, that on the meaning of
some terms, you and I have yet to agree. But I will trust your humility
in some respects, to your haughtiness in others."
"My father?" exclaimed Louis. The Duke smiled.
"Ignatius might help us on this subject!" said he; "but I wish to
speak with you about another order of persons. To-morrow you will be
introduced to young men of the highest rank in Spain, the sons of
Spanish Grandees of the first order. Wishing to see Vienna, they are
nominally attached to this embassy; and though residing where they
please, have places every day at my table. These you must treat with
the suavity of equality and confidence; but beware of really giving
them your friendship, or your trust. They are your future rivals with
your sovereign. At present, their pursuit is pleasure. And, while
you steadily keep your eye upon the one aim of your life--honourable
distinction! to these young men you must appear as inclined to folly as
themselves."
Louis's bright eye turned on his father.
"It is even so!" continued the Duke, "you must lull the circumventing
watchfulness of their ambitious fathers, by seeming to share the
dissipation of their sons. Me, they know, they dare not touch. But
were you to appear all that I trust you are or will be, their roused
jealousy would seize the accessible point; and through you, they would
seek to undermine the new superstructure I am raising to the glory of
the house of Ripperda. Seem, therefore, careless of advancement, and
eager for pleasure; and they may quietly submit to the growth of your
early honours, when they are made to believe that your encreasing folly
will render them the last. Use this caution now, and a time is not far
distant, when you may shew yourself in these respects, according to the
sentiments which direct your present questioning looks; if, indeed,
such sentiments will then be yours. They are going through an ordeal.
You must prepare yourself for trials of a different nature from those
you found so galling at the Chateau de Phaffenberg. There, you had
only to endure; here, you are called upon to endure and to resist:--to
endure, nay to court temptation; and to resist, and overcome it. You
must be in the midst of every pleasure that can seduce or intoxicate
the senses of man; and you must see, and taste all, without allowing
yourself to feel it enjoyment. To derive enjoyment, is to yield
independence; and you must be independent of all, but the resources
within yourself."
Ripperda's voice sounded to his son like that of a trumpet. He loved to
feel his strength; to struggle, and to conquer; though the war might
only be in his own bosom. He listened, and longed for an opportunity of
proving to his father, that whatever might be his sensibilities, he had
no effeminacy in his soul. The Duke continued.--
"Your father does all that to which he exhorts you. He draws every
one to his purpose, without permitting any thing to fix a link on
him. From the age of twenty-one, I have been master of myself; and,
from that circumstance, master of every human being, on whom I turned
my eye, to do me service. From being the son of a banished man; and
alienated from the land and honours of my race; I became a soldier, a
statesman, a counsellor of nations! The country which had exiled my
father, solicited the return of his son! And now, the progress of my
undeviating career, has brought me to the restoration of all the rights
of my name; and raised it to a reputation, that is only bounded by the
limits of the civilized world! Louis what I am, you must be."
During this speech, Louis, more than once saw the proud and lightning
glance of the Sieur Ignatius. He felt an answering triumph; for
the throes of an eager emulation were busy in his youthful heart.
Unconsciously, his countenance reflected all his father's; for then,
perhaps, there was not a sentiment within him, that was not absorbed
in the single blaze of ambition. The Duke rose, speaking his last
sentence; and with so undefinable an air of even fearful grandeur,
that, for a moment, he seemed transformed a third time before his son.
But the next instant, turning from the door to which he had advanced,
the awful splendours of his countenance were softened into the
agreeable light of general complacency; and, in his usual tone, he bade
Louis retire to his chamber; and be ready, at a certain hour on the
morrow, to accompany his official presentation to the Emperor.
CHAP. XII.
The suite of apartments in the Palais d'Espagne, which were allotted
to Louis, were spacious in themselves, and superb in their furniture;
and the train of attendants and equipages assigned to his service, were
as sumptuously appointed as those of the Ambassador himself. The Duke
had informed him, that all these were as absolutely at his command,
as if he inhabited a separate dwelling. He was to consider himself at
perfect liberty; to appear at the Ambassador's table, only when his
inclination suited; to form what acquaintance he pleased; to go where
he liked: in short, his father resigned all controul over his time or
his actions, excepting the hours which must be dedicated to diplomatic
duties, and any proceedings which might eventually impede the grand
objects of his life.
In the course of conversation, Louis had petitioned his father to take
off the interdict which prohibited his correspondence with his friends
in England. The cause for silence existing no longer, the favour was
readily granted, but guarded with one condition; that he must not write
of Ignatius in any other character than that of a Jesuit. That he was
Ripperda's self must ever be preserved a profound secret. The Emperor
was jealous of female interference, besides being suspicious of the
affections of his wife; and the most vexatious consequences might be
expected, should he discover that the Empress had been an agent in
the late negociation. This, he would more than suspect, were he to be
told that Ripperda had been incognito at Vienna. For the Imperial
Charles was not ignorant of the influence that accomplished Statesman
had gained over the youthful mind of Elizabeth, at her father's
court; and that he had even exercised it to persuade her to accept
the distinction offered her, as consort to the Emperor of Germany.
Early influences are generally lasting ones; and though Charles had
not sufficient sensibility, ever to have felt this in his own person;
he had sagacity enough to have guessed it in that of his wife, had
he received a single hint of but one clandestine meeting between her
and Ripperda, before that statesman made his public appearance at the
Austrian Court.
Louis readily engaged for circumspection; aware that his correspondence
with the friends of his youth, would be on subjects of absorbing
interest to them; purely egotistical:--while his own anxiety was to
know the success of his application to Don Ferdinand; and how far the
general comfort of the family was restored by Alice's released vows.
Before he could lay his head, (which was all awake with life and
happiness,) upon his pillow; he sat down to pour out his full heart
to the venerable confidant of his earliest wishes, to the unerring
guardian of his impassioned soul. As he wrote, the fierce flames of
the wild ambition, which, an hour before, had rushed through his veins
with a proud disdain of every obstacle, gradually subsided under the
gentle ascendancy of the meek spirit with which he now conversed. The
mild precepts of his benign instructor seemed again to whisper in his
ear:--"Fly temptation. But when it pursues, or meets you, arm against
it in the panoply of faith and virtue, and be not overcome. If you sink
in a contest you did not seek; you may be pitied, and forgiven. If you
fall in a conflict you provoked, men will deride, and God condemn you!"
Louis shuddered at his late presumptuous impulse; and blessing the
pious cares, which could influence his mind, even at so wide a distance
of place and time, he continued to write. With what a reposing,
smiling rapture at his heart, did he bend over the sheet on which he
was now permitted to transmit all the feelings of that heart to the
most indulgent, as well as wisest of friends!
A few words at the beginning, had explained his silence, by
acknowledging, (without particularizing circumstances,) the mysterious
nature of the affairs in which he had been engaged:--and then followed
all the affection of a son; all the frank communications, where secrecy
did not bind him, that would be grateful to the venerable man. But
there was one subject he did not dare to touch on:--whenever it rose
before him, he turned away, as from a lovely but a condemned spirit.
His heart thrilled and trembled; and pressing it, he exclaimed--"I need
not seek a contest!"
When he had closed this long epistle, with entreaties for frequent
communications from the dear inhabitants of the Pastorage, whether
they were at Morewick or in Lindisfarne; he addressed a letter to Sir
Anthony, as full of duty, as of descriptions and remarks calculated for
his entertainment: and then, retiring to his pillow, found, what he did
not expect, an immediate and sound sleep.
The morning brought Martini into his apartment. He came with a note
from Ripperda, informing his son, that the Emperor would receive the
Embassy at noon; he must therefore be in the saloon, habited in the
Spanish mode, and according to his rank, half an hour before the time
of going to the Imperial Palace. Louis was finishing his packet for
England, when the confidential valet presented his message. He read
the letter, and wrote his reply of obedience. Martini took the answer,
with a bow of profound respect; but it had nothing of the obsequious
homage, which degrades the person who pays it, without honouring him
on whom it is bestowed. "Your Excellency will pardon, I trust," said
he, "my former omissions of due reverence to the son of my master!
I was ignorant, until now, that I attended other than the Chevalier
de Phaffenberg; and according to the commands of the Duke, I was to
consider him, as no more than his secretary, and the poor cadet of a
ruined house. But it was a noble one: and I trust, my Lord, that though
I might fail in honour to the Duke de Ripperda's son, you will not
accuse me of insolence to the Chevalier de Phaffenberg?"
"Worthy Martini!" cried Louis, rising from his seat, and shaking
the hand of the valet, with true English warmth; "I have nothing to
complain of from you. I honour your fidelity to your master, and your
regard for the fallen in fortune. I am proud to claim equality with
such sentiments! From this hour consider me as your friend."
Martini, with the ardour of his country, threw himself on his knees,
and fervently kissed the hand that pressed his; then hastily rising,
with glistening eyes, and his hands clasped on his breast, he bowed and
hastened from the apartment.
This little incident particularly pleased Louis. He had found a simple
and a generous feeling in the confidential servant of a statesman;
while all else, above, around, in that transforming sphere, seemed
devoted to selfishness, or to artifice, of however refined a fabrick.
Musing on this, he submitted himself, without discussion, to be habited
according to the fashion of his new country.
For Ripperda himself, when his son met him in the saloon, he was
one bright effulgence of princely honours. His sword, his belt, his
gartered knees; and all the jewelled insignia of Spanish chivalry,
glittered on his person. The diamond coronet of his ancestors encircled
his cap, surmounted by the crest of his family, a golden eagle, under
a plume of snow white feathers.--They waved before the bird of Jove,
like fleecy clouds in the face of the sun. But gorgeous as were these
ornaments, they were not so brilliant as the countenance they were
placed to adorn; the brightness of a high soul was there, that seemed
rather to suffer the decorations of rank, than to require them.
The Duke was surrounded by the young Spanish Grandees, in the habits of
their quality; but varied in colour and decoration, according to the
caprice of the wearer. The real officers of the embassy were arrayed in
one sumptuous uniform, and all distinguished with the golden cross of
Montesa.
Ripperda presented his son to the nobles. Most of them, though young
men, were Louis's seniors; but they saluted him with that respect
which is usual in despotic governments, to persons holding powerful
stations under the Sovereign. The intimation his father had given him
of their general pursuits, did not incline him in their favour; and,
with, perhaps, too lofty an air of cold politeness, he met their first
advances to social acquaintance. Some of them mistook this dignity
of principle, (which acted without intention,) for the insolence of
inflated vanity, at being placed above his compeers; and they who
thought so, eyed him with resentment. Others conceived it to be mere
reserve of disposition:--for none could derive it, from awkward shyness
in a new situation. Every thing that Louis said or did was with a grace
peculiar to himself; an ease, that spoke the high-born man; and a mind,
conscious that no adventitious circumstance can really add to the
consequence of him who builds his character on virtue.
The King and Queen of Spain had issued orders, that no expence should
be spared to give their Embassador every dignity in the eyes of the
Imperial Court; and the equipages and retinue which composed the
suite of Ripperda, struck the inhabitants of Vienna with amazement; as
nothing had equalled the pomp of this, his public entrance, since the
coronation of the Emperor.
The audience chamber was crowded, and the foreign ambassadors were
there, to mark the reception of the Spanish plenipotentiary. Charles
received him with testimonies of respect he had never bestowed on any
other Embassador; and which filled those present with apprehensions of
what those secret articles might be, which thus humbled the Emperor
of Germany before the minister of his former rival. Louis, and the
Spanish noblemen, were presented by Ripperda. Charles said a few words
of ceremony to the young grandees, but signalized the son of the
Embassador by his particular notice; and, in a lowered voice, that none
else might hear, complimented him on the talents he had shewn for
negotiation, during the illness of the Sieur Ignatius.
At the meeting of the council the preceding evening, Ripperda had
intimated to the Chancellor Sinzendorff, that the Chevalier de
Phaffenberg (whom the Chancellor had taken occasion to praise,) was
his son; and in the morning Sinzendorff had explained the circumstance
to the Emperor, with his remarks on the genius and strait forward
integrity of the young politician.
When His Majesty turned to withdraw, he told the Spanish Embassador,
that the Chancellor would conduct him to the Empress, who was in
readiness to receive the letter and picture he brought from the Prince
of Spain, to the Arch-Duchess, her daughter.
As soon as the Emperor had quitted the chamber, Ripperda and his
suite followed Sinzendorff towards the grand saloon. As Louis turned
to obey, his heart anticipated the emotions he should feel in again
seeing Otteline; in again meeting the persuading looks of her gracious
mistress and confidant. But how different did the Imperial Elizabeth
appear in her court, to the benignant Princess, who was all ease and
smiles in the boudoir of her beautiful favourite! She sat coldly
regal, with the Austrian ladies of rank, standing behind, and on each
side of her.
When the Duke de Ripperda approached the Imperial chair, Louis
observed the reserved majesty of Elizabeth's countenance dilate into
an expression of proud exultation: it haughtily swept the circle,
while she stretched out her hand to the Spanish Embassador, as bending
on his knee, he presented the royal packet. She half rose to receive
it, and then her lips and eyes beamed all the graciousness upon his
father, which Louis had so often felt shining on himself. But there
was a glowing flush on her cheek, and a something softer in her eye,
when the Duke pressed the hand to his lips, which she had given for
the salute of ceremony. Louis then saw, it was the friend, and not
the minister, that Elizabeth of Brunswick welcomed from her Imperial
throne; and, at the same time, he could not but notice, that the
position of his father, rather spoke the air of a Prince at the feet of
beauty, than the prostration of a subject to exalted power.
"It is the mind alone," thought Louis, "that debases actions, or
ennobles them! One man would crouch and cringe like a slave, while this
bends his knee, like Alexander before a sister princess!"
Had Louis pursued his observation, he would have understood that it was
the dignity and peculiarity of this homage, which made it so estimable
in the eyes, even of an Empress.
When the Duke presented his son and the Spanish Nobles, Louis cast
down his eyes; which, indeed, had never wandered from his father
and herself: so fearful was he of encountering that face, whose
resistless charms were only too apparent to his imagination. What
the condescending Elizabeth said to him, he knew not, neither was he
conscious how he had gone through the ceremony of presentation, till he
felt her ivory fingers gently press his hand, in silent congratulation
of what she supposed was then busy in his heart. He dreaded the purport
of this worldless language; and with a tremor pervading his whole body,
he rose from his knee, and falling back into the Spanish group, tried
to recover self-possession.
Elizabeth continued for some time in conversation with Ripperda; and
then giving her hand, according to usage, to the Chancellor to lead her
out; as she passed near where Louis stood, she descried him, and spoke
to her conductor. He immediately called to the Marquis de Montemar, to
attend Her Majesty's commands. Louis obeyed, in renewed disorder; and
with a gracious smile, she gently whispered. "You attend the Duke de
Ripperda this evening to the Favorita. It is the Dowager Empress's
name-day; and you will see friends and foes. The Duke has received my
permission to bring the young Spaniards to be presented to my daughter."
Louis bowed, and Her Majesty, with her own fair hand, gathering her
robe from the pages who held it, disappeared by a small door into the
private apartments.
When he looked round, to rejoin his father, he saw him discoursing
with the circle of ladies who stood nearest the throne. Ripperda had
already introduced his young grandees to the group; but on some of the
ladies naming his son, he beckoned Louis, who immediately approached,
and was presented also. His rapid glance soon convinced him the looks
he feared were not present; and relieved by this certainty, the effect
was instantly apparent. The anxiety which so lately had embarrassed
his words and actions, disappeared; and restored to ease, he replied
with his usual ingenuous politeness, to the courtesy of the ladies who
welcomed him to the court of Vienna. The Duke soon after took his leave
of the fair assembly, and followed by the young Spaniards and his son,
returned to the Palais d'Espagne.
It was the vernal month of May, and nature appeared in her robes of
youth and laughing beauty. The tender azure of the sky was tinged
with blushing radiance, while the soft green earth lay in enamelled
smoothness, under the umbrageous canopy of trees and shrubs, diffusing
odours from blossoms, flowers, and balmy zephyrs, laden with the warm
breathing of the reposing sun.
As the carriage which contained Louis drove along the thronged Prato,
towards the palace of la Favorita, he descried the distant turrets
of the Chateau de Phaffenberg. They stood gloomy and desolate, and he
passed them by, like one awakened from the dead, looking aside on what
had been his tomb. The Danube was now rolling its majestic flood, broad
as a lake around the island of the palace. The company crossed to it in
gay boats, borne along with silken sails, or rowed by silver oars, and
when they stepped on shore, they found the whole a scene in fairy land.
On a raised platform, in the midst of a verdant lawn, round which
the beauty and fragrance of all the seasons were collected, sat the
Dowager Empress. Most of the Imperial family, excepting the Emperor
and the Empress, were seated near her. Many of the court were also
there; and in the brilliant circle Louis recognised the Duke of Wharton
standing behind the chair of the Electress of Bavaria. The eye of
Wharton seemed to wander carelessly over the advancing party, without
distinguishing any particular object. But the buz that announced the
Duke de Ripperda attracted the notice of the Electress. Her curiosity
was excited to see this formidable minister, whose influence had
induced his royal master to overthrow her dearest schemes, by affixing
the guarantee of Spain to the pragmatic sanction. She looked at
his commanding figure, with lightning in her eyes; and as Ripperda
approached to pay his respects to the Dowager Empress, she whispered in
the bending ear of Wharton. The next instant her rapid glance caught
the face of Louis, and fixed there. Again she whispered Wharton. What
she said, and what the answer, was completely between themselves;
all passed in so low a voice; but Louis heard the Duke laugh in his
reply, as, without looking up from his folded arms, he leaned on Her
Highness's chair. Had Louis distinguished what was said, he would
have learnt that the Electress recognised him immediately; and with
astonishment, pointed him out to her companion, when she heard him
presented to her illustrious grandmother as the son of Ripperda.
"Could Your Highness believe it possible," replied Wharton, "that the
fair Altheim would cast her tendrils round a fallen pillar?"
The Electress did not withdraw her persevering gaze, though she ceased
her whispers, for the Emperor and Empress approached from the house.
The Duke de Ripperda was instantly engaged with the Imperial pair; and
soon after Charles, putting his arm through his, turned with him to
the opposite side of the lawn. As Elizabeth was passing Louis, to give
her hand to the Dowager Empress, who wished to view the scene from
the palace windows, she desired him to offer his arm to the venerable
Princess. He hastened to bear his share in supporting the infirm
footsteps of old age; a duty, which, to all ranks, was sacred with him;
and during the walk, as the aged Empress was deaf, Elizabeth informed
him, that the Arch-Duchess Maria Theresa being suddenly indisposed, the
Countess Altheim attended her. "But," added the gracious speaker, "hope
is the lover's comforter!"
She thought it was the ruby light of love that passed over the cheek of
Louis, as she spoke; and she smiled as she placed the Empress in her
chair, and dismissed him to the lawn. Trying to shake from his burning
complexion, the evidence of his weakness, with a swift step he returned
towards the platform. Wharton stood there, though the Electress had
moved into the more general circle of the company. The Duke was talking
with two or three persons, amongst whom was the Count Leopold Koninseg,
a colonel in the Austrian service, and the nephew of the Princess de
Waradin, a Hungarian lady, to whom Ripperda had presented his son in
the morning at the drawing-room. As Louis was hastening to the group
that contained his friend, and his new acquaintance, the Princess de
Waradin, leading a blooming girl of fifteen by the hand, interrupted
him. The noble matron asked him if he had yet engaged himself for the
dance. On his answering in the negative, she presented him to her
daughter, with the compliment, "that there was no person with whom
she should be so satisfied to see her Amelia make her first public
appearance at court, as the son of the Duke de Ripperda."
Louis made a suitable answer to this politeness, and the pretty
Hungarian received his bow with a smile. Other ladies, to whom also
his father had introduced him in the morning, now drew around the
graceful de Montemar. Invitations to various assemblies, were given
to him by a multitude of rosy lips; and for half an hour before the
dancing began, he was enchained in the fair circle; not ungrateful for
the flattering distinction, but longing for the moment of release,
when he might at least, give one heart-felt pressure of the hand, to
the friend who had twice saved him from a personal encounter with his
father's enemies. He often turned his face from the smiling dames, with
whom he was conversing, to seek a glance from his kind preserver; but,
though Wharton looked hither and thither, in talking with the passing
groupes, a perverse fatality seemed to prevent his eyes ever falling
where Louis stood. Impatience encreased with disappointment, and almost
ready to break from the throng that detained him, he gladly heard the
music sound from an orchestra, near the arcades of the palace; and,
immediately a chamberlain approached, to summon the dancers to the soft
green before the imperial windows. The fair Amelia extended her hand
to her partner, who took it with redoubled pleasure on seeing, by the
direction in which the company turned to the rural ball-room, that he
must pass close to the spot where Wharton stood.
As the gay procession moved on, the Duke turned carelessly on his heel,
which withdrew him a little from the path, but not so far off, but that
Louis heard Leopold Koninseg ask him whether he knew the Marquis de
Montemar.
"Who is he?" negligently replied the Duke.
"The Spanish ambassador's son," replied Koninseg, "shall I introduce
him?"
"No," returned Wharton, "he seems very well engaged; and I am not
ambitious of the acquaintance."
Louis was startled at these words; but recollecting the Duke's
situation with the Bavarian faction; and the risks he had already run,
between its revenge and his friend's safety; he soon comprehended that
prudence had suggested this apparent indifference.
The dance began; and in its exhilarating maze, of motion, music, and
sparkling beauty, Louis found all that bouyancy of spirits return, with
which he used to animate the smaller, but not less festive circles
of his native land. The ethereal grace of his movements attracted
admiration in a country where the graces of dancing are a science; and
the Electress, again turning to Wharton, who had accompanied her to the
flowery lists of the waltzers, desired him to observe the extraordinary
elegance of the Anglo-Spaniard. Wharton saw that several of the young
grandees were standing near, and observed one of them cast a disdainful
glance on the Electress, when she made the remark. Princess de Waradin
was also a spectatress; and while her eye complacently followed the
airy flight of her daughter on the sustaining arm of Louis, she took
up the Electress's observation, and replied, "there is not so fine a
dancer in the circle, as the Marquis de Montemar?"
"Because he happens to have the best figure in the circle," returned
Wharton, "and a well-made man cannot be awkward if he would."
The Electress smiled, and whispered the Duke; "you must get him amongst
us!"
"Crown me for Acton, when I do!"
Wharton did not require an interpreter to the thickening clouds on the
brow of the young Spaniard, who, muttering something to his companions,
their looks suddenly reflected his, and they all turned abruptly and
haughtily from the ring. The Electress drew close to the garlands,
which composed it; and ordering a chair to be placed there, sat down,
and conversed at her ease with the groupe around. Louis's eyes often
glanced towards the animated Duke. But his favour with Her Highness
was too visible, to allow surprise that he did not give attention to
any one else. Indeed, he appeared as careless of remark, as he seemed
pleased with his situation, and hovered near her with the familiarity
of perfect confidence. Her circle of ladies courted his smiles, as
the guarantee of her's; and he trifled, and talked with them all, as
his humour dictated. But in the midst of this gallant badinage, the
men regarded him as something more than the gay Cicisbeo, who had
followed the illustrious mourner from her widowed pilgrimage through
Italy. They were aware of his political genius; that the lap of beauty
could not lull it to repose; and with less surprise than wonder, they
contemplated certain changes in the mutual relations of states, which
they knew must have arisen from him; but when or how his manoeuvres
were devised and executed, they could not guess by observation on
himself. For in all situations he seemed equally open and disengaged.
Ripperda passed behind the Bavarian party, surrounded by the foreign
ambassadors. The Electress was mortified at the sight:--"Behold the
flatterers!" cried she, to her gay companion.
"Dogs will worship the moon!" answered the Duke, carelessly: "and their
hymn is desperate howling."
Without farther thought of what covered the polished brow of his
mistress with heavy frowns, he turned to rally one of the young ladies
of honour, for having refused to dance. The Bavarian almoner stood
near. He was the only person, excepting the Electress, who knew that
the late rupture between France and Spain was the work of Wharton.
Marvelling within himself at the volatility of the man, who had so
circumvented the gravest heads; and at the jocund indifference with
which he beheld the triumph of his political adversary; the worthy
ecclesiastic, with a half-reproaching smile, touched his arm.--"I
believe, Duke," said he, "it is all one to you, whether you fire your
own, or another's territories; from very gaiet de coeur, as either
burn, you play!"
"Weeping at calamities is to double them," replied Wharton; "and I
never had any passion for sackcloth."
"No," replied the Electress, "I believe your perversity, enjoys the
wreck that has been made of your own plans!"
"When the wind blows, he is but a fool who sits down to cry in the
blast! common-sense, my sweet Electress, draws his cloak about, and
walks merrily through the storm."
"But he does not scoff at the destructive elements!" replied the
ecclesiastic; "may not the Duke de Ripperda think disparagingly of so
smiling a rival?"
"My good Lord Almoner," returned Wharton, "I care not what Duke de
Ripperda thinks. There is a season for all things! And when I am with
the fair, I forget the follies of other men, and content myself with my
own."
Whatever were his motives with regard to Louis, no act of recognition
passed, either from his voice, or his looks, towards him, during
the whole evening; and Louis, taking the tone from a judgment his
enthusiasm made him deem infallible, behaved towards him with the same
reserve. They often approached each other in the change of amusements;
they sometimes passed close; and then the heart of Louis beat, and his
cheek glowed, as he felt the dear attraction. As he was handing the
daughter of the Princess de Waradin to the supper-room, he saw Wharton
at a distance in one of the vestibules, conversing with the Count de
Patinos; a young man of the highest rank amongst the Spaniards who had
joined the embassy of their country.
The Electress and her party did not stay supper. It was in a style
answerable to the august jour de fte; and at a late hour, the
Emperor and Empress rose. Before Louis could pass from the table at
which he had sat, to join his father, who had been the distinguished
personage at the Imperial board, he was intercepted by a moving and
involving throng. In short, he soon learnt, that from Ripperda's
unexampled favour with the reconciled sovereigns, his son was become an
object of calculating and universal attention. Some of the Spaniards
had even drawn off from the proud side of de Patinos, and glided
towards Louis; to gain, by his means, a freer passage into the circles,
which seemed so eager to make him their center.
De Patinos was young, handsome, and ambitious. He was the son of
the Marquis de Castallor, and the near kinsman of the venerable
Grimaldo, the present ostensible minister in the cabinet of Spain:--and
therefore, to see the almost regal honours paid to the Duke de
Ripperda, whom he affected to consider as only the agent of that
minister, excited jealousy for his own consequence, reflected from
Grimaldo. But, that himself should be overlooked and disregarded in the
presence of what he called the upstart Marquis de Montemar, because he
was the son of this arrogant Ripperda, inflamed him with a hatred, that
only waited opportunity to shew its malignant nature.
As wealth and rank are considered the corner stones of happiness in
this world of selfish enjoyment, it was not to be wondered at, that
a marriage with such a foreigner as Louis de Montemar, should be
considered an advantageous object, by many of the most illustrious
families at the German court. The restoration of Ripperda to his
Spanish rights had given him rank with the first nobles in any land.
His blood was superior to most of them, as it flowed from the mingled
current of three lines of princes. And his riches, from his restituted
property in Spain and the Indies; from his former fortune, transported
from the Netherlands; and daily redoubling, by the exhaustless
resources of commerce; were beyond the powers of calculation. It was
not, then, a subject of surprise, though it might be of envy, that the
heir of all this wealth and honours should be a point of ambition to
the proudest mothers in Vienna; and as the expectant was also handsome
and accomplished, it was not a wonder that many of the daughters smiled
upon the young de Montemar. He saw many fair, and more elegant; but
none so fair, none so conspicuously elegant, as the graceful Otteline,
whose absent form floated in fond regrets at the bottom of his heart.
He sighed to think, that the spirit was not so fair as its temple; and
then he sighed again, as he checked himself for the repining pang which
accompanied the remembrance.
CHAP. XIII.
The two following days were passed in official arrangements, previous
to the execution of certain articles in the treaty, which the Spanish
sovereigns were impatient to have performed. Ripperda spent the
evenings with the Austrian ministers, and Louis at the Princess de
Waradin's. But on the morning of the third day, when he was sitting at
his post, and making minutes of some preliminaries, which the Emperor
demanded, before the actual betrothment of his eldest daughter to
Prince Carlos of Spain; the Empress, who was in her husband's private
cabinet at this discussion, stood over Louis as he wrote; and when he
had finished his memorandums, she said in a low voice,--"My daughter is
now well enough to bear company. You will see her and Otteline in my
drawing-room to-night? and you must impress her as favourably of your
Prince, as you have fixed her governess in behalf of yourself."
Elizabeth turned away; and Louis saw neither the paper that was before
him, nor the royal presence leaving the room. He was lost in the tumult
of his thoughts, till his father, touching his arm, told him the
council was broke up.
When Ripperda received the invitation for the evening, for himself and
his son, he asked permission to include the Count de Patinos in the
proposed honour; as it would gratify King Philip to have the imperial
notice extended in succession to the young grandees in the suite.
"But never to the exclusion of de Montemar," replied the Empress; "I
regard him as my own elve. Do with the rest as you please, Duke; for
you know the pleasure I have in promoting your interest." Ripperda
knew all the avenues to the noble heart of Elizabeth; and he made her a
reply, that lit up her gracious countenance with an emotion direct from
the soul.
Louis walked as in a dream, from the hour in which he was told he
should meet Otteline, to the moment of his going to the palace. The
imperial saloon was full, though not crowded. Having paid his homage
to the Empress, he turned round, as she directed him, while certain
well-known sounds were vibrating on the harp. The object he expected
met his eyes. The instruments of music were in an adjoining apartment,
opened to the saloon by a canopied arch; and Otteline stood there, just
risen from the harp, and attending to something that was addressed to
her by the Archduchess Theresa, who was seated at a harpsichord. She
wore the portrait of her future husband, Prince Carlos, suspended at
her neck; and the timid bride was evidently preparing to sing to the
Emperor her father, who stood near her. Lovely as she was, in the first
morning of her youth; her soft blue eyes turned upwards, with a gaze of
almost infantine attention upon the face of her beautiful instructress;
yet the eye of the beholder could not rest upon the blooming girl. That
beautiful instructress seemed nothing less than a being of a superior
order. She leaned over her like some bright creature of the air,
hovering near her sweet but earthly charge. Louis felt a mist pass over
his memory. The abhorrent words of her lips, which he thought must burn
before him, in accusing characters, for ever, flew at once from their
station; and his heart rose in his bosom, with an impulsive violence
to throw himself at her feet, and forget all the world and himself, in
the rapturous moment of swearing that he loved her. But, if celestial
spirits do indeed surround the path of those who would contend for
heaven; the guardian seraph of Louis, at that moment breathed upon his
dissolving soul, and strengthened it to virtue. With a bitter contempt
of his weakness, he tore his eyes from the dangerous contemplation;
and followed his father and the Empress, to pay his respects to her
Imperial husband.
While the Emperor discoursed with Ripperda, Elizabeth addressed her
favourite.
"Otteline," said she, with a smile, "I hope you will grant as
honourable notice to the Marquis de Montemar, as that with which you
graced the Chevalier de Phaffenberg!"
The Countess looked up, with a blush bright as the tints of Aurora; and
while she sought to meet the eyes of Louis, which were covered with
their "veiled lids;" she softly answered,--"The Marquis de Montemar
is too well convinced of the esteem in which I held the Chevalier de
Phaffenberg, to require that I should encrease my consideration of
him, under any other name."
He bowed in silence. But Her Majesty, seeing the Emperor and Ripperda
walk together into the adjoining room, as she turned to follow them,
added--"De Montemar, I leave you to assist the Countess in selecting a
duet for my daughter to sing."
This command Louis could not disobey; and though a quivering fire shot
through all his veins, he was not the less determined to persevere in
the assumption of a coldness which his reason dictated; and which, he
trusted, would so pique the sexual dignity of Otteline, that he should
never be demanded to a second interview. With obedient haste, and
to occupy himself, he began to turn over the music books. The young
Princess took hold of the Countess's arm, and artlessly whispered.--
"Do ask the Marquis de Montemar, whether Prince Carlos is really like
this ugly picture!" Otteline whispered in return:--"I am sure the
Marquis de Montemar will be honoured in replying to Your Highness; and
he will tell you that Prince Carlos is very handsome."
None of this was spoken so low, but that Louis heard it all; and the
Arch-duchess, holding up the jeweled portrait, said to him in a timid
voice:--"Do tell me, if he is so very disagreeable?--I could never
endure to leave my beautiful mamma, and charming governess, to look
always upon so frightful a face as this!"
Louis glanced at the picture; which was, indeed, the portrait of a
plain, but it was a sensible countenance. The ingenuous eyes of the
Princess, turned from it, to those of Louis, with anxious enquiry.
"I never saw the Prince," replied he, "But Your Highness must pardon
me, if I do not think this portrait disagreeable? It expresses a noble
mind; and without such an expression, the finest features in the world
would want the soul of beauty."
Maria Theresa looked earnestly in the face of Louis. She had never done
so before; and then turning her eyes again on the picture, she drew a
deep sigh.
"Come will not Your Highness sing?" asked the Countess, presenting a
duet.
"No," replied she, "I shall go, and beg mamma, to permit you to sing
alone;" then whispering her, as she was leaving her seat, she put her
arm round her neck, and softly said--"Oh, my happy Otteline! He that
you are to marry, has both a handsome and a noble countenance!"
Louis could not escape hearing this; nor seeing the quick pressure with
which the Countess strained her young charge to her breast; who in some
apprehension that she had been overheard, broke away, with a slight
blush tinging her lilly complexion.
He was now alone in the music-room, with her, whose presence he
felt in every nerve. The parting whisper of the Princess; and the
responsive action of the Countess, followed by a fluttering sigh, which
now vibrated in his heart, made him tremble for himself. He knew not
how to fly, and he felt it was perilous to remain. Hastily closing
a music-book, he said with a forced smile, "Since the Arch-duchess
declines singing, my duty here terminates!" and with a hurrying bow, he
started from the instrument.
Otteline was, now, in a no less agitated state than himself. She read
in his averted looks, and haste to leave her, that she was no longer to
consider him as her lover; and, not suspecting the real cause, her own
ambitious views suggested to her, that his father's higher prospects
were the origin of this changed demeanour. Aware that carrying matters
with too lofty a hand had lost her the son of the Marquis Santa Cruz,
she determined on a different mode with that of Ripperda; and while
a large drapery of the curtained arch was yet between him, and the
observation of the company in the saloon, she ventured in rapid but
suppressed accents, to murmur out--"Oh, Marquis, why are you not the
obscure De Phaffenberg?--Then, we should not have met:--or never parted
thus!"
Her voice had arrested him. Her words transfixed his heart. He stood,
but he did not speak. She resumed.--
"It is as I foresaw. My enemies have prevailed!--Your father objects
to my humble birth; and you turn from me, to seek a more illustrious
bride?"
"No Madam," returned Louis, believing himself now called upon to pass
the final sentence upon his relapsing passions; "my father has not yet
spoken to me on the subject. Neither do I seek, or wish, for any other
bride:--For--Oh, Otteline," cried he, turning on her a look, in which
all the contention of his soul was declared; "Where should I find one
so lovely?--One, to whom I could more intensely devote this adoring
heart? But yourself has separated us for ever!"
She turned pale as the pearls which bound her forehead.
"Then it is my enemies!" cried she, "But if they have coupled my name
with Don Ferdinand d'Osorio's, in any tale of slander; believe it as
false as that, which the Electress of Bavaria has published to the ruin
of my fame. You know how I am the victim there! And this is invented,
to put you from making the only restitution that can redeem me to the
envious world!"
The vehemence with which she spoke, and the mention of Don Ferdinand's
name, connected with her own, cast a new and an appalling light upon
the apprehension of her lover. He recollected that Don Ferdinand had
left Vienna, to rid himself from, what his father called, a disgraceful
entanglement of his affections; and to find it possible that Otteline
might have been its object, confounded all his faculties. The broad
appeal to his honour, in the last sentence of her remonstrance, did not
the less convince him, that all was not right, in the tenacity with
which she urged bonds on him, he had shewn himself determined to break.
Braced, therefore, in his resolution, in a collected voice, he briefly
answered.
"No, Madam; I have heard no slanderous tales against you. Until this
moment, I was not aware that Don Ferdinand d'Osorio was even known to
you; and had it been told to me, by any but yourself I should have
spurned the information. My heart alone is your accuser."
The renewed emotion, with which the latter words were uttered, and
even their import, revived the colour of hope upon the cheek of the
Countess. She thought, if his heart alone were her accuser, she had
also an advocate there, that would be too powerful for so unassisted
an adversary. She smiled bewitchingly, for it was through rushing
tears; and laying her hand on his arm, said in a tender and trusting
voice,--"And what does it allege against me?"
Louis did not look towards her. Her touch ran like wild-fire through
his veins; but the sensations which shook him, only rendered him more
desperate to fulfil his resolution; and he exclaimed, "that I did love
you--that I adored you!--that I was grateful, for the regard with which
you honoured me,--I believe I shall carry the scars on my heart, to my
grave:--but, with me, there is a power beyond love--that of virtue!
I would sooner have this heart torn from my body, or all it delights
in, buried from my sight; than purchase their enjoyment, by admitting
one stain on my conscience. When I last saw you, in the conference
with the Chancellor and the Empress, you declared, and proved yourself
of an opposite opinion! You violated the sacredness of a seal; and
you defended that breach of honour, on principles which destroy me to
remember!"
Louis stopped, and covered his bloodless face with his hand.--The
Countess, though paralyzed to the heart, by so unexpected a disclosure,
gathered hope from the pale statue that uttered it. "His frozen virtue,
will relent!" thought she; and clasping his arm, with the warm pressure
of doubting agitation, she tremblingly said, "Oh, de Montemar, is such
the reward of my self-sacrifice. What am I to expect from this exacting
virtue?"
"That I may die,"--replied Louis, with a strong effort; "but that we
meet no more."
This was the axe to the ambitious Otteline; and with a shriek, she
could not restrain, she staggered, and fell prostrate on the floor.
The convulsive cry, and the confused noise of her fall, were heard in
the same moment, in the adjoining saloon. Elizabeth, whose thoughts
were on what was passing between her favourite and the son of her
friend, sprang from her seat, behind the Emperor's chair. Charles
was at quadrille with Ripperda, the Princess de Waradin, and another
lady. Every body started from their respective positions: but no one,
except the young Arch-duchess, durst follow Her Majesty, as she had not
commanded the attendance of any.
The Emperor laid down his cards, and asked what had happened. Ripperda
was not aware that his son was engaged in it, and with perfect
indifference followed the example of the Sovereign, in rising from his
chair. But the Princess de Waradin, who had observed Louis having been
left with the favourite, rather sarcastically replied to the Emperor's
question.
"If Your Majesty will do the Marquis de Montemar the honour of
enquiring of him, he can give every information; as he has been tte
tte with Countess Altheim, in that room, for some time."
Ripperda knew the character of the favourite; and recollecting
his son's admiration of her; with an alarm he did not allow to be
visible, he requested the Emperor's commands, to assist the Empress's
interference in whatever accident might have happened.
"Certainly," replied he, "and let any body who may be of service, go
with you."
This license sent every-body into the room.
Elizabeth had found Louis, on one knee, by the side of the insensible
Otteline. He was pale, and speechless. And fearing that he might soon
be in the same state with her he ineffectually attempted to raise,
while the young Archduchess clung, weeping, to her lifeless friend,
the Empress turned round at the approaching steps; and the first that
was near her, being Sinzendorff, in a hurrying, but suppressed voice,
she said,--"Chancellor, take care of de Montemar, take him from these
people's eyes."
Almost without consciousness, Louis obeyed the impulse of Sinzendorff's
arm, and soon found himself withdrawn from the gaze of strangers.
The Chancellor had led him, without speaking, across a passage that
opened from the music-room, into the Imperial library. When he saw his
agitated companion throw himself into a seat, and cover his face with
his clasped hands, the worthy statesman laid his hand on his shoulder
while he broke silence.
"Marquis, will you tell me frankly? Do you love the Countess Altheim?"
The friendly tone in which this was asked, recalled Louis in some
measure to himself; and without altering his position, for he shrunk
from shewing the weakness that might be discovered in his countenance,
he answered. "I do love her, more than I could have thought it
possible, after a full conviction that she can no longer be conducive
to my happiness! Oh, my lord, you were present at the scene which
decided my fate. What she then avowed, convinced me that she and I must
never be united: I have just dared to tell her so.--But the situation
to which it reduced her, severs my soul from my body."
"Virtuous young man," cried Sinzendorff, "let it not sever your
principle from your soul! You are formed for better things than an
intriguing woman's slave. Hear what I am now going to say to you! But
as you are worthy the confidence I place in you; and as a breach of it
would ruin me with the Imperial family; you must not discover, even
to your father, that the facts I am going to state have been learnt
from me. When I have told them, examine into their truth, and act on
the result. Know then, that the woman, who causes you this emotion,
is unworthy of a single regret from a mind like yours. Could you be
satisfied with beauty alone, I acknowledge it is there in amplest
perfection; but she is without one feminine feeling, wholly abandoned
to ambition, and careless by what means she raises herself to the
point of her hopes. At the age of sixteen she married one of the
worst characters in the Imperial court, to be elevated to the rank of
nobility. When a widow, she attempted the affections of several noble
strangers, who, however, were too wary to be taken in her toils; but
at last she entangled the passions of my sister's son, Don Ferdinand
d'Osorio; and wrought him to the most extravagant excesses, while her
own selfish aim was only to perpetuate her rank. This, his father told
me; but he interfered, and the young man recovered his senses. Her
next trial was on yourself! And I solemnly assure you, that from the
first of your appearance in this palace, she knew that you were not
the Chevalier de Phaffenberg. And, though I doubt not, she prefers
your youth and graces, to the age and decrepitude of the dotard to
whom she first sold her duty as a wife; I know her well, and can aver,
that she has no value for the superiority of your mental qualities.
Do not mislead yourself, de Montemar, by investing her with your own
feelings. It is not the loss of yourself that caused the situation in
which you left her; but the loss of an illustrious husband:--the loss
of one, who would have re-introduced her to the circle which her pride
insulted, and the members of which, dread, while they despise her. My
dear Marquis, excepting the infatuated Empress, she has not one friend
in Vienna!"
"She warned me, that she had enemies," replied Louis, in an interrupted
voice, "but with me, her worst enemy is herself. Chancellor, I am
grateful for what you have said, and you shall find by my fidelity,
that I am so. But not even all these charges could have weighed against
the pleadings of my heart in her favour, had I not been present that
fatal evening in the boudoir."
"A man of your principles," replied Sinzendorf, "ought rather to regard
it as a providential evening!--If they be principles, you will abide
by them; and I shall see you free, honoured, and happy. If they be no
more than sentiment, (which is common with youth!) they will evaporate
in her first sighs, and I shall soon have to congratulate her as
Marchioness de Montemar. In that case, I will forget all that I have
said, since I cannot disbelieve it."
Louis felt the force, and the friendship, of this admonition.
"Your Excellency shall never have reason to forget the generous
interest you have taken in my happiness. And, in apology for this
emotion, you must accept the excuse of one, young as myself, (but, oh,
on how enviable an occasion!) my body trembles at the purpose of my
soul."
"Could I believe, that she did not love me, my task would have less of
torture!" This last thought, was in his mind, though he did not utter
it; and before the Chancellor could proceed with the commendation
this resolution merited, a page appeared at the door, to inform them
the Emperor had dismissed the company; and that the Duke de Ripperda
awaited the Marquis in the vestibule.
CHAP. XIV.
Not a word passed between Louis and his father, while they drove home.
Count de Patinos was in the carriage; and would have sat mute also, had
not the Duke, with his usual power over all tempers, brought the sullen
youth to converse freely on the entertainments of the evening.
As soon as they alighted, Ripperda desired his son to accompany him to
his cabinet. Louis was in such heavy internal distress, he hailed the
command as a summons to unburthen his unloaded bosom; and to receive
that advice, or rather support, in the fulfilment of his resolution, he
found he so woefully required. He followed his father with alacrity.
When the Duke had closed the door, and saw that his son had thrown
himself into a seat, he took a place near him.
"Now," said he, "the time is come, when you are to give the confidence
you promised me. I no longer consider myself the arbiter of your
conduct. That responsibility I leave to yourself. The extensive duties
of my own destiny are sufficient for me. I, therefore, shall advise,
but I command no more. You must rise or fall by your own resolves;
and, if I guess right, you stand now, on a point of no insignificant
decision. Tell me, what has passed between the Countess Altheim and
you, to give rise to the extraordinary scene of this evening; and to
sanction the request which the Empress made to me at parting, that I
would go to her to-morrow, to decide on the fate of one, who was dear
to her, as her own life!--Have you pledged yourself to the Countess?"
"I hope not," earnestly replied Louis. "I do not understand you!"
returned his father, "by what has just occurred, she has shewn to the
whole court, what she wishes people to suppose has passed between you;
and you must be aware that the favorite of Elizabeth is not to be
treated with idle gallantry. What grounds, then, have you to hope, that
you have not pledged yourself beyond recall? Or, did the warning voice
of the Sieur Ignatius come to late?"
"It came too late," replied Louis, "to save me from the intoxication of
her beauties; and no prudence on my part, could counteract the effects
of that luckless rencontre with the Electress of Bavaria. Yet, in the
wildest tumults of my heart, I still wrestled with myself; in the very
moment of my greatest weakness, I recollected the Sieur's admonition,
and, re-awakened to filial duty, checked the vow on my lips; and,
telling her I was not my own, I trust, I saved my honour." Ripperda
shook his head, "Louis, did I not warn you against the power of beauty?"
"You did!" vehemently replied he, "and, from this hour, I forswear it
for ever!"
Being ignorant of the real cause of this abjuration, it surprised
the Duke. He had supposed that Louis's disorder had arisen from a
consciousness of having transgressed the spirit, if not the letter, of
the Sieur's injunctions, and that Otteline's emotion was to be dated
from fear that his father would not sanction the romantic passion of
her lover. For many reasons, the Duke had no wish to sanction it; and
while he regretted that woman was fair, and youth susceptible, he was
pleased to hear the unexpected exclamation from his son. He did not
remark on it, but required a recital of particulars, word for word, of
all that had passed between him and the Countess, that he might be an
impartial judge of Louis's freedom, or his bonds.
He obeyed ingenuously, till he came to the parts where her conduct
might be translated into a direct wooing of himself. Ripperda saw him
hesitate, and the generous colour that mounted to his down-cast eyes.
"Proceed," said he, "I can divine what your honour, or your delicacy
inclines you to conceal. She played upon your open nature, to make
you believe she loved you so passionately, she could not await your
time of drawing the secret from her! I know the sex, Louis. For more
than thirty years, I have been an object of their various practices.
And, once for all, you may receive it as an unerring rule, that, when
a woman runs before a man in the profession of her love, her love
is nothing more than profession. Her views are something baser."
Ripperda pursued the subject; and Louis was, at last, brought to
acknowledge, that the Countess had given him reason to believe that she
loved him devotedly,--too devotedly; and then, without with-holding a
circumstance, he related the whole affair, from the commencement of
their acquaintance, till the moment when he wished to close it for
ever. But, he confessed that what had happened in the music-room, had
roused all within him to rebellion, though his judgement was as stern
as ever against the pleadings of his infatuated senses.
"Oh, Sir!" cried he, "I love, and I despise her. And yet, when I stood
over her insensible form, which had become so, from the wound I had
inflicted, I could not but ask myself,--Am I a god, that I should thus
ruthlessly condemn human error, and break the heart that loves me?"
The Duke was a long time silent, after his son had ceased speaking.
Then looking up, he abruptly said, "Louis de Montemar, you are the
first man of your sort, with whom I ever came in contact. I see of what
spirit you are; but it will not do in the station you fill, or in the
times in which we live. The world is always changing, and you must go
with it, or it will leave you. I ought not to have left you so long at
Lindisfarne!"
Louis turned his eye on his father.
"I do not blame your instructor for educating you like himself. But the
style is obsolete, Louis. Had you been intended for a desert island, it
might have been well; but a citizen of the world requires other maxims.
The fault is mine, that I did not bring you to me before. Now, you
come into society, like an unarmed man into the midst of his enemies;
and, instead of hastening to shelter, you expose yourself to their
weapons, by acts of impotent hostility. You must content yourself in
maintaining your own principles; to stretch another's virtue to your
standard, you will always find a vain work of supererogation. In all
that you have described, the Countess Altheim has only acted as any
ambitious woman would have done; and ambition is not less rooted in the
sex, than in ourselves. She must not, therefore, be contemned for that.
Neither do I object to her, on account of her obscure birth. The blood
of your family is too essentially illustrious, not to raise to its own
elevation, whatever we mingle with its stream. But I wish to strengthen
our hands in Spain, by a marriage between my heir and one of its native
daughters. Besides, the Countess Altheim is dangerous in herself. Her
haughty spirit would embroil you with this, and every court, to which
you might conduct her; and persons might be inclined to disrespect the
man who could suffer the weakness of passion to subject him to an union
so universally despised."
During this discourse, the confidential warning of the Chancellor
seemed to sound again in the ear of Louis. He recollected the hints
which Wharton had dropped on the same subject; and, with sickening
attention, listened to his father, who, in less reserved language,
related every leading event of the life of the beautiful favourite.
No word glanced at her honour, as a chaste woman; but, every sentence
completed the portrait of mean-spirited, insatiable ambition. Shocked
to the soul, by the description of Count Altheim, whose character was
of such grossness, that it seemed impossible for a virtuous woman to
consent to be his wife; Louis hastily exclaimed, as the Duke rose to
depart. "I will never see her more! I will never trust myself again,
with any of her betraying sex! Henceforth, my dearest father," cried
he, with a feverish smile, "I will have no mistress but glory! Why,
why, did I ever withdraw my eyes from her divine face?" "She always
suffers, when woman disputes her rights," returned the Duke.
Louis kissed his father's hand, and retired to his own apartments.
His spirit felt beaten and bruised. It cowered under a sense of
self-degradation; and throwing himself on his bed, he passed a night of
painful retrospection, on all that he had seen and heard of her, who
was so lately the object of his untameable wishes.
"Cold, calculating, and unprincipled!" cried he, "and to such a woman,
did I give the first flames of my heart! Did I light up the sacred
altar to a fiend, in the form of the Queen of Heaven!--Wretch that
I am, to have so debased what was most noble within me! To sigh for
a piece of painted clay; to adore--and, even now, to weep over a
creature, whose soul, if I could behold it divested of its beautiful
garments, would disgust me by its sordid, earthward visage!" The
morning found his agitated spirits subsided to a calm. The intemperance
of passion was extinguished in his breast, and as he relinquished the
desire of possessing her, who had now lost every grace in his eyes, he
strengthened in the hope, that the killing words he had last pronounced
to her, were final to her views on him.
Noon brought several animated visitors, to interrupt the studies
which were his usual morning occupation, and generally, unfailing
tranquillizers. These young Austrians came to invite him to share in
various sorts of diversions for the day and the evening; and an hour
passed gaily on, in the vivid conversations of versatile youth. A few
of the Spaniards made their entrance, and disappeared again. De Patinos
was not among them; he had reproached those who had shewn a wish to
cultivate the kindness of Louis, with a mean submission to the minion
of temporary fortune; they, therefore, merely made their bow, and
without joining in the discourse, soon took their leave.
Louis found an amusing diversity of character in the Austrian group.
Most of them held commissions in the Imperial service, and were full of
the campaign against Turkey, which the valour of Prince Eugene had just
brought to a close. Others, were merely jocund spirits, "hot with the
fires of youth, and high in blood." And a few, had a philosophic turn;
some in the strait, but most in the crooked path: and these latter,
were the least agreeable of the set; as they united an ostentatious
assumption of purity of intellect, with a systematic corruption of
morals. Louis soon comprehended them, and treated them with marked
avoidance. The military young men were decidedly his favourites, their
profession was that of his own secret preference, and their manners
were most congenial to his taste. There was a brave ardour in their
deportment, and a careless enunciation of their sentiments, which,
whether wrong or right, had no aim but the utterance of the moment;
and, commonly, could as easily be turned from the wrong to the right,
as from the right to wrong. The faction was in their blood, not in
their understanding; and when the one was cooled, the other might soon
be recalled to order.
While Louis was attending to Count Koninseg's account of the tremendous
battle of Belgrade, a messenger arrived from the Duke de Ripperda. He
brought a letter for the Marquis de Montemar. With a blanched cheek, he
broke the seal; but the contents were a reprieve. The Duke told him,
he had not yet seen the Empress. She was gone to the Baths at Baden,
with Maria Theresa, who had sustained a relapse; and Countess Altheim
was their companion. The Emperor, had retired with his Council, for
a few days to the Luxemburg, to avoid the persecution of the foreign
ministers; and thither, by his command, Ripperda had accompanied him.
Louis closed the letter with a renovated countenance. He was left to do
the honours of the Embassador's table, not only to its usual guests,
but to a party of noble Austrians, whom Ripperda had invited. The Duke
being absent, the Spaniards were haughty and reserved at dinner, as
they affected to be, when they encountered Louis apart; and, as soon as
the desert was placed, de Patinos, and another of the name of Orendayn,
rose from their seats; and, with cold bows to the young secretary of
legation and his guests, quitted the room, to join societies more
agreeable to their humour.
Till the opera hour, the time passed merrily with the Austrian
group; and forgetful of his bosom's care, by their animated host.
The ring-leader of the Spaniards' discontent being gone, in the
person of de Patinos, the rest of the young grandees fell in with
the cheerfulness of the company. Subjects of taste, war, and beauty,
ruled the glowing hours; but on the latter subject, Louis discoursed
uneasily, and he was glad to see Koninseg look at his watch, and point
to it as a signal for adjourning to the theatre.
"My aunt, will be impatient," cried he, "she is determined, that he who
danced with Amelia at her first ball, shall conduct her to her first
opera."
It was also the first opera to Louis. He had never seen any in England;
and until now, he had no opportunity of visiting that at Vienna. The
Palais de Espagne soon poured forth its gay inmates; and Louis and
Count Koninseg turned towards the mansion of the Princess de Waradin.
It was lit up in the fullest splendor, although no other visitors were
expected but de Montemar, and her nephew. The artless Amelia smiled
and blushed, and smiled again, when her mother, putting her arm into
Koninseg's, requested Louis to take charge of her daughter. He politely
obeyed, and led her to the carriage, while she prattled all the way
with the volubility of a giddy child, delighted at being treated like a
woman.
The opera-house presented but a gloomy appearance, from the extreme
scarcity of light, till the curtain drew up, and discovered a brilliant
chandelier, which hung directly over the actors. The illumination
of the stage cast the audience into deeper obscurity; therefore, of
the company in the boxes Louis had very little cognizance, while the
dresses and decorations of the opera, and the exquisite singing, might
have filled him with admiration, had not the style of the music,
reminded him of the first time he had heard the like, when the fair
Italian sung in his uncle's castle. He recollected his consequent
feelings that night; and humiliated in the remembrance, compared those
hours of infatuation, with his admiration of Otteline, and exclaimed to
himself--"What a slave have I been, to my eye and ear! Music, I shall
never like again; and beauty I shall abhor!"
As there was little of the latter, excepting youth and a blooming
complexion, in the smiling Amelia, to warn him of his abjuration; her
incessant questions and remarks on what was going forward on the stage,
amused him; and his attention to what she said, gratified the views of
her mother.
Apostola Zero, the father of the regular Italian Opera, had been
invited to Vienna by the Emperor; and to reward his acquiescence,
Charles invested him with two dissimilar, but productive
employments--Imperial historiographer, and poet of the court opera.
The grateful Italian dedicated his comprehensive genius solely to his
munificent patron; and the present performance was the first night of
a new composition he had formed on the story of Proserpine. The last
act was a representation of the infernal kingdom; laying bare the
foundations of tna, and exhibiting all the terrors of the subterranean
world. The curtain had hardly dropped, which it did in some confusion,
when an extraordinary bustle was heard behind the scenes. Soon after,
the theatre filled with smoke, and cries of fire were distinctly heard
from behind. Persons from the boxes jumped on the stage, while the
curtain was rent down by those before and behind it; and the scene
of horror that was discovered to those, who were not so entirely
absorbed in their fears but they could look around them, is not to
be described. The fire was seen bursting in several directions; men
were mounted aloft on the burning rafters, breaking down with their
hatchets the combustible apparatus in the way. Water was dashing and
streaming everywhere. The terrible light which filled the stage, too
well pourtrayed the inside of a raging volcano; sheets of flame, like
forked tongues, threw themselves forward from a thousand gaping mouths,
licking the ceiling, and entering the boxes. Shrieks, and groans, and
dismal cries, mingled with the iron clang of hammers, the fall of
timber, and the rush of fire and of people, assailed the ear in one
horrid moment of time.
At the first alarm, the ladies in the box with Louis, had been hurried
out by him, and some other gentlemen who had joined them in the course
of the evening. The poor little Amelia, true to nature, no sooner
thought herself in danger, than breaking from the protecting arms of
Louis, (who had caught her in them to hurry her through the pressing
crowd), she threw herself upon the bosom of her mother, and fainted
away. The Princess had more fortitude; and, assisted by hey nephew,
bore out the insensible girl, while Louis and the other gentleman made
a passage for them to the great door.
In passing the entrance of an obscure gallery, that led to an upper
range of boxes, he distinguished, in the midst of the uproar, shrieks
of peculiar distress. It was the very cry of agony and despair. Looking
round for a moment, he saw that his present charges were well enough
protected, and that he might safely leave them, to see and to succour
this terrific appeal. But even in the instant he was turning to obey
the impulse, he heard a fearful crash behind him; and a rush of people
followed, who bore him and his party, like a flood, into the square
before the theatre. All, then, was secure with them. But for the poor
suppliant, whose cries had pierced his heart, she was either lost, or
abandoned to the flames! At least, he would attempt to hear if her
voice yet sounded. Struggling his way back through the last crowds
who were making their escape, some, who felt him push by them in so
destructive a direction, cried aloud,--"Whoever you seek must have
perished. The top of the stage has fallen in, and the theatre is full
of fire."
But Louis, still fancying he heard the voice, pressed more
determinately forward, and soon found himself surrounded by smoke
alone. No sounds were distinct, but the raging of the flames in the
interior of the building, which roared in their work of destruction,
like the temple of Eolus, with all its winds. The heat was so intense,
that perspiration burst from all his pores; and the air around him was
a burning vapour. He hesitated to advance; and while his lungs filled
to suffocation, and the black smoke gleamed with horrid light, he was
stepping back, when the shriek burst forth again. Louis flew to the
sound. He rushed up a few steps into a narrow passage, answering the
cries as he advanced, in a loud voice, promising help. At the extremity
of the passage, which was short, he was interrupted by a closed door,
on the other side of which was the terrified suppliant, shaking it
with frantic violence. "I cannot open it!" cried she, in answer to his
demand.
"Stand from it, then," said he.
He was obeyed; and dashing his foot against it, it flew from its
hinges, and a lady instantly precipitated herself into his arms.
Another started from her knees, and with a hardly articulate cry of
joy, threw herself towards him. Louis clasped his almost insensible
burthen firmly to his breast, and bade her trembling companion cling
closely to him, as they must move swiftly, to have any chance of
escape. He turned round, and the lady, winding her arm in his mantle,
flew by his side, till they plunged at once into the dreadful smoke,
now red with advancing flames. He dashed impetuously forward; and his
almost stifled companion, partaking the desperate exertion, in a moment
afterwards they found themselves, with the issuing volumes, on the
platform of the portico.
He ran forward into the middle of the square, with his motionless load.
Dangers of a different kind, now menaced them. The flying rafters from
the consuming building, the pressure of people, with the throng of
carriages, and every confusion attendant on so tremendous a scene. In
an agitated voice, his companion asked him, whether he had strength to
bear his insensible burthen to the opposite side of the quadrangle.
Louis replied in the affirmative. She told him to go strait onwards to
the convent of Saint Magdalen; and, as he obeyed, she clung closely to
his arm.
When they arrived at the back of the convent, she let go her hold, and
taking a key from her bosom, opened a little low door in the building,
and whispered Louis to enter. When he was in, she locked the door
again, and bid him follow her in silence. She walked hastily along a
narrow stone passage, faintly lit by a few glimmering lamps. Opening an
iron-grating at the end, she issued into a garden, which she as swiftly
crossed; Louis still following, while the lady he carried, appeared to
be reviving under the influence of the fresh air. A high dark structure
rose on the other side, the top of which was illumined by the reflected
flames, which now rose in spires from the burning theatre. In the side
of this building was an arched door, surmounted by a cross. The lady
opened it, and Louis followed her into a little chapel; thence, through
several winding passages; till they brought him to a superb room, where
he laid his charge, now warm with returning animation, on a sofa.
His fair guide instantly applied essences to the recovering senses of
the lady, and in a few minutes she opened her eyes. He could only see
this happy change, by the gleam which fell on them, as the lids slowly
raised; for the apartment was immense, and only one wax-light stood
on a distant table. A moment after, she spoke in a low, inarticulate
voice; and looking round on the chamber, and then on Louis, who stood
by her, she caught the hand of her anxious companion, and exclaimed
with a cry of joy, "We are saved!--and, by whom!"
Her head dropped on the arm she had seized, and tears followed this
burst of feeling. Her friend bent only her head, and whispered
something in her ear, which Louis could not hear. The agitated lady
replied, "No, no;" then raising herself from her weeping position, and
sitting up on the couch, she said to Louis,--"I have no words in which
to thank my preserver, and, I will not seek any to deceive him. Even
by this light, I can see that I owe my life to the intrepid humanity of
the Marquis de Montemar."
The other lady obeyed the motion of her friend's hand, and set the
solitary candle on a stand near them. In the full light, Louis
recognized the face of the Electress of Bavaria, in the person he had
carried from the flames. He had no thought in the recognition, but
satisfaction at having rescued female helplessness from so direful a
death; and his reply was in unison with his feelings. It was not the
Princess he saw before him, nor the enemy of himself and his father;
but a woman, agitated from past terror, and grateful to him for having
averted its horrid consummation.
She explained the dreadful state of despair, in which he had found
her. For, hastening with her only attendant, Madame de Altenstein,
through the box to the inner passage door, while attempting to open
it, in the confusion of alarm she turned the key wrong, and having
strained the lock by the violence of her first application, no effort
could move it. She had then no resource, but cries for help, but
they passed unnoticed. And when the terrible crash, at the outcry of
the fallen roof, assailed her ear, in aimless phrenzy she would have
rushed back into the box, and leaped over into the flames, had not her
friend prevented her, by clinging to her knees. Again she flew to the
door;--again she rent the air with her unavailing shrieks,--"till you
came," continued she, "like a good angel, to my rescue!"
How different did the Electress appear now in the eyes of Louis, from
what she had seemed in the two former times of his seeing her. In
the boudoir of Countess Altheim, she looked, and expressed herself,
with the proud acknowledgement of a superior, to the vassals who had
done her service. At the fte in la Favorita, she gazed around in
haughty carelessness, and remarked with contemptuous sarcasm, on every
object. But now, she leaned on the sofa, conversing with him, with the
frankness of one who felt that danger and obligation had rendered them
equal; and her fine black eyes, large and luminous, as those of the
wild gazel, shone on him with eloquent gratitude. In all she said, the
force of her character appeared, in the strength of her understanding,
and the energy of her feelings.
She explained the nature of the whisper which her confidential
attendant had made in her ear, while she lay on her arm. It told her
the Marquis de Montemar was her preserver; and it asked permission to
dismiss him without farther discovery, "But," continued the Electress,
"would I not trust with my fortune, he who has preserved my life?"
She then said, that should it be known to her enemies, that she had
been at the Opera, they would blazon it abroad, as a decisive blow to
her hold on the affections of the people. The year of mourning for her
husband, was not yet expired; and should it be reported that she had
been at any public place, before that stated period, the superstitious
populace of Vienna, regarding it as a sacrilegious irreverence to
the memory of the dead; would consider her, who had committed the
act, as deserving excommunication from the Church,--repudiation from
the Imperial family; and a declaration from the Empire, that she had
forfeited all claims to her birthright.
"It is mere prejudice, that is against me;" said she, "but a prejudice,
having nothing to do with reason, is inaccessible to argument; hence, I
can only avoid its sentence by concealment."
In excuse for the rashness of having incurred so great a risk, for
so trifling a gratification, she pleaded her attachment to music,
the innocence of the amusement, and the frequency with which she had
enjoyed its stolen pleasures without discovery. By the indulgence of
the abbess of Saint Magdalen, who was the aunt of Madame de Altenstein,
she passed through the convent garden, which joined the Bavarian
palace; and thence, gliding along by remote passages in the sacred
dwelling, always reached the Opera-house in security. No other person
than Madame de Altenstein was ever her companion; and therefore, when
danger came, as no one knew she was there, she had none to watch her
safety, or to seek her preservation.
Louis listened to her animated discourse with admiration; but at times,
saw a fiert in her manner, that recalled to his recollection her who
had sanctioned the several attempts on his father's life and his own.
She rose from the sofa, with a countenance full of noble sensibility;
"come with me," said she, "and I will shew you the heir of my
gratitude."
He obeyed the motion of her hand, as she passed before him with a light
step into an adjoining room. It was a bed-chamber, and in the bed lay a
boy in profound sleep. She approached him, and drew Louis to her side.
She turned her eyes, brimming in radiant tears, from the child, to her
preserver; and putting the hand of the little sleeper, into that of
Louis, she gently pressed them together.
"This is my son," said she, in a suppressed voice, "and thus I commit
him to the honour of a generous enemy."
Louis bent his lip to the cherubic hand that lay in his; and without a
word, glided back with the Electress into the apartment they had left.
She then told him, that as the fortunes of herself and her son,
depended on maintaining the affections of the major part of the
citizens of Vienna; her fate was now in the power of his lips. In
such a crisis, what was she to expect from his honour to her, or his
devotedness to the Empress?
"My silence, on what has passed," replied Louis.
"Then I am your friend for ever!" cried the Electress, her eyes
flashing a triumphant fire, and her lips parting with the smile of
conscious power; "you, and you alone, shall share my confidence, with a
man worthy to have been the adviser of Augustus. Come to me to-morrow
night at this hour, and I will bind you, heart to heart, with the glory
of manhood, undaunted Wharton!"
Louis started back.--She laid her hand on his arm.
"I know your bonds to the Empress, my ambitious, and unjust rival! Your
father's views, and her glozing tongue, have fastened you there, beyond
recall. It is not, then, your services as a partizan that I invoke;
but to give your society to my private circle. You are my preserver!
I repay you with my friendship; and that sentiment alone, I require in
return."
She now held his hand. He felt there was no deception in this demand;
no covert device; and the noble frankness of the speaker, so reminded
him of the beloved friend whose heart she had offered him, that with
irrepressible emotion he sunk upon his knee, and clasping the gracious
hand he held, earnestly yet respectfully between his, he replied.
"My veneration, illustrious Princess, must ever be yours. But I am
born to withstand my heart!--and while, in reverence to you, I keep an
eternal silence on what has happened; in fidelity to myself, I must
never venture again into this gracious presence!"
The Electress was not aware that the agitation which rendered his voice
and his looks so touching, as he remained at her feet, was excited
by tender remembrances of the friend he again abjured, in rejecting
her society. She was pleased with what she regarded as proofs of
sensibility to herself and her cause; and urged him, that if he feared
to make his visits openly, they might be paid in secret. With brevity,
and ingenuous freedom, he showed how impossible it was for the son of
Ripperda, in his present notorious situation, (as the great promoter of
all that concerned the pragmatic sanction;) to visit the adversary of
such a decree, either openly or in secret. If openly, he must assign
a reason for such apparent contradiction in conduct; and the only
adequate reason, could not be given without injury to the Electress.
Secret visits could not be made without a chance of detection; and that
incurred, the ruin of his own honour must be the consequence.
"I see the cogency of your arguments," returned she, "but I grieve to
allow them unanswerable. Fortune may yet favour us. You have twice
assisted me in distress. If it happens a third time," added she,
smiling impressively, "take care of your destiny!--At present I grant
your release.--Silence must be our mutual bond, till we can meet in
open day!"
"Silence, inviolable silence!" returned Louis, as he put her hand to
his lips, and rose to withdraw.
"Altenstein," cried she, "give me that casket."
The lady obeyed; and the Electress, pressing a spring, opened it. She
took out a small miniature of herself, set in plain gold.
"I intended this for the bosom of my best counsellor;" said she, "but
he will not object the transfer to him who has preserved my life. Take
it de Montemar. It will not, by word or action, betray your esteem for
Maria of Bavaria."
"I need not the picture, since the image is stamped on my heart!" said
Louis, pressing it to his breast, and then laying it back into the open
casket; "I must not be the possessor of so dangerous a treasure."
A vivid colour kindled on the cheek of the Electress; and with a little
elevation of her head, she closed the lid of the box upon the portrait,
and said, "For a brave man, Marquis, you are a very coward!--But it
shall be as you say.--Farewell, till more propitious hours."
Louis bowed.
"Altenstein," continued she, "shall conduct you out by a private door;
and then----Farewell!"
She stretched her hand to him. He again put it to his lips; and as she
instantly withdrew, he mechanically obeyed the summons of Madame, to
follow her.
As the faithful Lady of the Key, (who certainly did not appear to
have her name for nothing,) dismissed Louis from a little obscure
door, into a back street, he observed three men approaching; at sight
of him, they evidently drew back into the shadow; and as he passed
them, the gleam of the lamps attached to this part of the Bavarian
residence, fell on his face. Of this he was unconscious, and thinking
no more of the eves-droppers, (on whom his absorbed attention had not
cast a second look,) he walked swiftly along.
The observers were no other than Duke Wharton, and the two Spaniards,
de Patinos and Orendayn. As soon as he had passed, de Patinos
exclaimed; "surely, that is de Montemar!"
"And from the Bavarian palace by stealth!" remarked Orendayn, "what can
it mean?"
Wharton was not less surprised than his companions, at a rencontre
with Louis at so incredible a place; and the more so, to see him issue
from a portal, which, to this instant, was sacred to his own regress
at hours of untimely counsel. But surprise did not appear in him, by
look, start, or exclamation.
"No;" replied he, with perfect indifference, "it is one Phaffenberg,
who, I believe, has been thought like the Spanish secretary."
"By heaven," said the Count, "I never was so deceived in my life! The
air of his figure, and the turn of his profile, I could have sworn to;
but I now recollect, de Montemar went out a gay coxcomb, in embroidery
and plumage, and this person is rather in dingy apparel."
"A poor scrivener!" replied Wharton, "so I know not how he could be
otherwise."
With this observation they proceeded down the street, towards the
consuming theatre. De Patinos believed he had been mistaken, and
dismissed the subject of the hated de Montemar. But Orendayn, not
less vindictive than his countryman, was more crafty; and suspecting
the manner of Wharton, (his eyesight not being sufficiently clear
to give him conviction,) walked on in silence, ruminating on future
observation. For the Duke himself, though he discoursed on a thousand
subjects, he thought of none but Louis, till he could hear his
appearance at that door accounted for by the Electress herself.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
CHAP. I.
The first thought that occurred to Louis next day, was a wish to
enquire at the door of the Bavarian Palace, after the health of its
noble inmates. The frank and ardent gratitude of the illustrious widow,
had interested his feelings; and, adding to this, the undescribable
attaching quality which lies in an obligation, such as that he had
conferred on the Electress, seemed to draw him towards her with an
irresistible attraction. Benefits and gratefulness, when interchanged
by generous natures, are bonds, garlanded in paradise. They draw, by
invisible cords, but their rivets are eternal. Gratitude looks up with
endearing confidence to the bestower of its good; and the consciousness
of yielding protection, like the divine source of all benevolence,
fills the heart with a sweet tenderness towards its object.
With all this in his thoughts, Louis allowed prudence to put his wishes
to silence; and he left it to accident, to inform him of the health or
indisposition of them he had preserved.
His official duty of this morning passed with a deputation from the
merchants of Ostend. He had received his father's commands to that
purpose, to hold a conference with them respecting the sanction which
the Spanish Monarch had granted to their Indian trade, to the great
umbrage of the mercantile interests of Great Britain and Holland. The
Emperor had insisted on this guarantee of Spain; and the Queen, with
her usual impatience, ordered it to be accorded without reserve. But
Ripperda, when he yielded to the temporary necessity, had guarded it
with a clause in the privileges, to which Charles as well as themselves
continued to object. To know the result of the Spanish minister's
further deliberation was the cause of their present embassy.
When Louis had discussed the affair with the merchants, their president
retired with the young negociator, to sign, in the name of the company,
several papers, which Ripperda had left for that purpose. Louis and he
were then alone. When the merchant had endorsed the deeds, he took two
caskets of different sizes from under his vest.--He unclasped them, and
laid them open on the table. They contained unset jewels, of a value
that seemed incalculable.
"These, my Lord;" said he, "are poor tributes of the high consideration
in which we hold the able conduct of the Duke de Ripperda, and his
secretary of legation, in this troublesome affair. I am empowered by
my colleagues to say, that the larger casket is worth 30,000l., and
the lesser, 20,000l. But were they millions, they would be inadequate
to repay our boundless obligations to the Ambassador of Spain:--and on
the renewal of our guarantee, every seven years, we will give the same."
This kind of gratitude was so little foreseen by the Duke de Ripperda,
he had not given his son any directions respecting it. Louis did not
feel that he required any:--It was not the gratitude that softened
and subdued his heart. He closed the caskets, and putting them back
into the hands of the merchant.--"Sir," said he, "the Ambassador of
Spain, and his Secretary, are sufficiently repaid for the discharge
of their duties to their country, and to the world in general, by the
approbation and prosperity of those they serve. Rewards of any other
kind, they cannot accept; as they neither understand, nor value them."
The dignity with which Louis said this, as he laid the implied
bribe from his hand, struck the president for a moment speechless;
but hastily recovering himself, he held the caskets forth a second
time, and was opening his lips to enforce their acceptance, when
Louis, rather haughtily, as well as sternly, put out his arm with a
repelling motion, and interrupted him.--But in the moment he spoke,
Orendayn entered the apartment to pass through. Seeing it occupied,
he apologized, and hastily retreated, though not so fast, but his
sordid eye caught the glittering treasure. Louis resumed. "Sir," said
he, "do not irrecoverably offend the son of the Duke de Ripperda, by
shewing him that you have mistaken his father! If either he, or I,
have influence in these affairs, when the guarantee is to be renewed,
we must forget that we have heard of, or seen these caskets, before
we can put our hands to a second grant. You will excuse me now, Sir,
if I withdraw." With the word, he bowed and left him. The confused
merchant gathered up his caskets and his charter, and, with the air of
a culprit, stole out the room.
At the usual hour of stirring abroad, Louis bent his course to the
Princess de Waradin's, to enquire of her health after the late alarm.
As he drove along, he passed the crowded ruins of the Opera-house, now
lying a smoking mass of stone and smouldering timber. He shuddered to
think, but for his perseverance, the amiable boy he had seen, would
have been left a helpless orphan; and the lovely mother, who had led
him to behold her son as he slept, at this moment a blackened corse
under the steaming pile before him. That he had been instrumental in
saving two fellow-creatures, from so horrible a death, dilated his
bosom with aweful gratitude; and when he alighted at the house of the
Princess de Waradin, he sympathised with unaffected piety, in her
thanksgivings to heaven, for the escape of herself and her daughter.
Amelia was indisposed, and in her chamber. Her mother did not lose the
opportunity of enforcing upon Louis, her daughter's conviction, that
she owed the preservation of her life to him. He combated the idea
with frank eagerness, shewing the little share he had in exertions, in
which so many had assisted. But it was useless for him to disqualify
those claims on her gratitude she was determined to think he possessed;
and, insinuating that Amelia alone could repay them, he felt more
embarrassed than gratified with her flattering pertinacity.
The views which the Princess de Waradin had upon Louis, made her use
every maternal art to domesticate him in her family; but the hurrying
vortex into which he was plunged, rendered that impossible. Every
house of consequence at Vienna was open to him; and in all he found
different orders of amusement, according to the character of the
several sets. Though the rank of these circles might be on the same
level, yet the component parts, by an involuntary attraction, formed
themselves into distinct societies, according to their different
degrees of constitutional gaiety, mental qualifications, or hereditary
prejudices. In some, he was wearied by everlasting state ceremonies,
and the stiffness and stupidity inseparable from a superstitious regard
to formalities. In others, he was occasionally entertained, interested,
or disgusted, in proportion as he met with amiable manners, personal
kindness, or riotous excess.
To kill time seemed the great purpose of amusement, in the world to
which he was now introduced. Whether he dined with statesmen, with
military, or with philosophers; though the conversation at table might
be to his soul's content; of "battles fought, and glory won;" of the
"gordian knot" of policy; or the high-reaching thoughts of those who
analyse the universe:--still the evening ended the same. They all
proposed adjourning, some to one place and some to another; and many to
scenes of idle dissipation, against which his taste revolted. However,
he remembered his father's advice, "to wear his own superiority,
meekly!" and seldom refused to accompany them to places, whence he
generally returned wearied, offended, and displeased.
The gambling table; the board spread to excess; the smiles of
meretricious beauty; all were found, in the scenes to which his new
acquaintance introduced him. He thought, "If of such stuff be the
pleasures of young men, it is well they are dissipations of mind, as
well as of time; else, how could reflection bear the retrospect of the
best hours of human life, spent in such base vassalage to the lowest
propensities! It is a disordered state of being, in which nothing
is seen, and felt, and heard, but through the medium of delirium. I
cannot mingle with it; I cannot make this sacrifice of my time and
feelings, even to comply with the wishes of my father."
He wrote to Ripperda, to this effect. But the answer he received, would
not permit him to withdraw. The Duke told him, that he was called
upon to know, and to act with mankind; and how could he do either,
if he only saw them at their hours of form? He must attend them in
the undress of their minds; when the passions unveiled their hearts.
There would then be no need of a window in the bosom, to understand
how each man might be stimulated or restrained. With regard to his own
situation in this crucible of character; as he felt disgust at what was
temptation to others, he ought more readily to submit himself to the
apparent trial.
"You have genius, and distinction sufficient, already," added
Ripperda, "to create jealousy enough. If you have a mind above the
common recreations of man, let that be, I repeat, to the private
satisfaction of your own heart; it will keep your judgment cool, and
your proceedings independent. But while you act with men, and would
incline them to your purpose, you must appear to partake their nature.
Let me hear, when I return, that you go wherever you are invited. Your
companions will be too much absorbed in their own pursuits, to mark
whether you are an actor, or a spectator; but go with them."
Louis compared these principles with that of Wharton, I mingle with
the dross of the earth, to extract its gold! They were the same; they
were specious to the adventurous virtue of youth: and rinding his
partiality to the English Duke, strengthened by this sympathy in maxim
with his father, he more readily determined to struggle against the
delicacy of his taste, and to pass through things so discordant to him,
with sealed ears and eyes. During the lengthened absence of Ripperda,
which was prolonged by the Emperor much beyond the time he proposed;
Louis saw all that a luxurious capital could present to the seduction
of youth and affluence. There were circles of dissipation, of a higher
class than those to which he had first been introduced; and these were
at the houses of a class of nobility, who lived to pleasure alone.
If vice were there, she was arrayed by the graces, with splendor,
and softness, sophistries, and flatteries, to make man forget he was
mortal, and had ought to do in life, but sail with the fabling syrens,
down the silver sea of time. No voice of sorrow was ever heard in its
air; no sigh of care ever breathed on its flowery shores; no tear
ever dimmed the eternal lustre of that sky. Human nature's curse of
travail and woe; man's distresses, and sympathy for pain, were all here
excluded. The blest inhabitants lived for themselves alone; and all
was revelry, from the rising to the setting sun; from moon-light, to
the morning star. But Louis had a heart and a soul, as well as eyes and
ears; and still he found no satisfaction in such waste of enjoyments.
The bosoms that panted there, beat with animal life alone; and the
souls which animated their bodies, were asleep in their vapoury cell.
As he passed through the crowded chambers, in which his spirit felt
a happy solitude, the conversations of Mr. Athelstone often occurred
to him; and he leaned pensively against many a rosy-wreathed arcade,
musing on the prophetic lessons of his earliest friend.
All around was prosperity and enjoyment. But he recollected, that his
uncle had said, "sweet are the uses of adversity!--Bitter to the taste,
but aromatic in effect, they preserve nature from corruption. Man, in
the indolence of repletion, breaks out with infinite disorders; and
like the ocean, whose constant motion keeps its waters pure, requires
exercise of mind and body. If it be not active to good, it will be to
evil, for what lies between is stagnation. Unchanging prosperity cloys
by possession; and the sated spirit looks around for new excitements.
It is then that the passions and the appetites wander abroad in the
stimulating search, and are easily tempted to forbidden paths." The
Pastor of Lindisfarne had once paused on the page of Shakespeare, which
his nephew was reading to his cousins:--
"Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell!
It fell upon a little western flower;
Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound;
And maidens call it Love in Idleness."
"Not love, my children," cried the venerable instructor; "love was
bestowed by heaven on man, to be a help-mate to his labours. It is
wantonness, that is the offspring of idleness. But the son of the
bondswoman, arrays himself like the heir of promise, and the sons
and daughters of earth, are a while mocked by his pretensions!"
When Louis saw this scene performed before him, he thought how
melancholy it was to behold the cheat; how wretched to see the
blessings of life transformed into its bane. To view men and women of
rank and talents, and abundant power to become the benefactors and
examples of mankind, immerese all in one broad system of selfishness,
till a dangerous delusion spread over every faculty, and the character
exhibited one mass of sentimental weakness, intemperate passions,
splendid follies, and hardened vice!
In many of these parties, Louis met Duke Wharton; but he never staid
more than a few minutes, though those few were hailed by an adulation
that might have detained a prouder spirit. He ever left sighs behind;
and Louis shared the regret; though still his friend passed him by
unheeding; except, sometimes by a smile from a distance, or a glance of
the eye, as they mingled in the crowd.
By a similar wordless communion, Louis found the impression he had
made on the Electress, was not effaced. In riding through the Prato,
he often met her carriage; and she always leaned forward, with looks
he could not mistake; and when she thought herself unobserved, she
kissed her hand to him, with all the eagerness of suppressed, but
ardent gratitude. He generally gazed wistfully after her carriage;
for the image of Wharton united with her idea. He was her counsellor,
her friend. How great must be her qualities, to have secured such a
distinction!--Louis would not believe that she could have been privy to
the murderous policy of some of her agents: he had seen enough in his
last interview, to excite his fancy to complete the flattering picture;
and where his imagination kindled, his heart was too apt to glow.
Things were in this state, when the Imperial family, and with them the
Duke de Ripperda, arrived suddenly from the country. As soon as he
alighted at his own house, Louis flew to welcome him.
"Follow me," replied the Duke.
Louis saw a contraction on his father's brow, which he noted as a
herald of disagreeable tidings, yet he did not linger in obeying. They
entered the saloon.
"I see you anticipate what I have to tell you," said the Duke. "The
Empress is resolved on your marrying her favourite."
Louis was momentarily shocked by this announcement, but rallying
himself with the hope that he had offended Otteline past forgiveness,
he answered; "could I be weak enough to second the Empress's wishes;
after what I said to Countess Altheim in our last conference, she must
reject me." "If she loved you she would. But as it is all one to her,
by what means she ascends to distinction; she cares not whether it be
on your heart, or over her own delicacy. The Empress, too, forgets
her own consequence, in eagerness to aggrandise her favourite. She
protests that you have given Otteline every proof of attachment; that
circumstances demanded it; and your honour is pledged to redeem the
reputation she has lost on your account."
As his father recapitulated her patroness's discourse, in which, more
earnest than judicious, she allowed too much of the selfish aim in
the views of her friend to be seen; the entire remains of Louis's
infatuation, (which still lurked in the shape of pity), passed away
like a mist; and with faculties, at once cleared from every suggestion
of vanity or tenderness, he strongly declared that he never would
marry Countess Altheim. He allowed, that he had shewn too many signs
of headlong passion; but he repeated, in his extremest phrenzy, he
had warned her that he was at his father's disposal alone: and, for
her reputation being sacrificed, that could be no longer an argument,
since the avowed object of his visits to the Empress would sufficiently
confute the slander grounded on them.
"It must not be avowed that your discovered visits to these apartments
were to the Empress. The Emperor knows that you negociated with
Sinzendorff; but am I to remind you, that should he ever suspect her
private interference in the affair, his latent jealousy would find its
object, and the consequence I need not repeat."
"Then," exclaimed Louis, in a sudden agony of spirit, "I am lost!"
"Not if your father can extricate you," returned the Duke; "but I fear
you must marry her."
Though his heart had just told him the same, the words uttered by his
father were like a death-stroke; and knocking his clenched hand upon
his breast, he groaned aloud.
"De Montemar," said the Duke, "does not the spirit you so devoutly
dedicated to glory, does it not suggest the means of performing this
hard act of duty to your country; and yet not allow it to trouble you
beyond the present hour?"
"Impossible," returned he; "in marrying the Countess Altheim, I shall
marry my disgrace and my abhorrence."
"The act must pass for that of headstrong passion; or, perhaps, a
little more in your own way, as an act of romantic justice to the woman
who has incurred dishonour for your sake.--Passion always finds its
apology with men; so the world may smile, but it will forgive you; and
when she is your wife----"
"My wife! never, never!" interrupted Louis, "my name shall never be
rendered infamous by giving the world to suppose that it was possible
for me to make her my wife, whom even her future husband could
persuade from virtue. How could the Empress sully her matron-lips with
the vile suggestion? I never dishonoured the Countess Altheim, in word
or deed; and I will not act as if I had been such a villain. I will not
brand myself as a seducer, a dupe, or a madman! One of the three he
must be, who unites himself to the reputation she has incurred, by her
own arts and follies alone!"
The Duke permitted him to exhaust himself before he again spoke.
Equally averse with Louis, to his son's union with the mere minion of
any crowned head, he was aware that open opposition in this instance,
would embarrass all his other objects. The Queen of Spain's fury
against France, and her eagerness for revenge, had put the Spanish
interest totally into the power of the Empress. In her first rage, she
had written a letter to Elizabeth, of unguarded relinquishment; which
Ripperda vainly attempted to qualify. The Empress saw the advantage
Isabella had yielded, and in spite of her friend's representations, she
maintained it in the amplest sense. Spain had, therefore, by the fury
of its Queen, given up all check upon the non-execution of the most
momentous articles in the treaty. She soon found the effects of her
rashness; and in letters of despair to Ripperda, acknowledged that it
now wholly depended on his fidelity and contrivance, whether Austria
should fulfil its engagements, or the business end in loss and disgrace.
Another reason, besides her infatuated attachment to the companion
of her childhood, urged Elizabeth to insist on the engagement of de
Montemar with Countess Altheim, Ripperda marked her manner; and foresaw
the vexatious delays she would throw in the way of the execution of the
treaty, if he should appear to thwart her wishes. When she arrived
from Baden, at the Luxemburg, it was not long before she granted him
a private interview; and, notwithstanding all the influence of her
partiality in his behalf, when he attempted to give his own reasons
against his son marrying at so early an age, she turned on him with
a look and demeanour, more like that with which Catherine de Medicis
repelled the insinuations of Cardinal Mazarin, when he sought to betray
her into sanctioning a marriage between his niece and the king; than
the familiar confidence with which Elizabeth had always regarded the
Duke de Ripperda. Ripperda understood her suspicion, and her scorn; and
had he not possessed a political self-command, equal to his towering
pride, the reply of his eyes and his voice at that moment, would have
severed a friendship which had lasted eighteen years, and dashed to
atoms the present vaunted fabric of peace to Europe for succeeding
generations. He affected not to have observed the air with which she
had uttered these otherwise innoxious words.
"Your son is old enough to be the colleague of politicians; and surely
he is not too young to be the protector of an amiable and tender woman,
whose only strength lay in my love, and her spotless name. The last
she has lost through his handsome face, her fidelity to me, and the
malignancy of the Electress of Bavaria; and, my love, and his honour,
must and shall restore, what he and I have destroyed!"
In short, she gave him to understand, more than had ever passed
between Otteline and his son; but sufficient to convince him, that she
considered Louis bound beyond release; and that his attached mistress
was so assured of the same, there was nothing on the earth could induce
her to withdraw her claim. She accused Louis of cold, dissembling
vanity; treated with disdain the high principle which had impelled
his rejection of her friend; and added, that she should influence the
Emperor not to permit the reversionary investiture of Don Carlos into
the possession of the Italian Dukedoms, to take place on the person of
Louis, till Otteline should appear at the ceremony as Marchioness de
Montemar.
After this insinuation, Ripperda saw there was no resource but to
dissimulate and gain time. But, knowing the sincerity of his son in
all his transactions; he found it necessary to alarm his delicacy and
honour, to induce him to embrace, without consideration, any prospect
of escape from so disreputable a union. The base exaggerations of
Otteline, in her representations to the Empress of his conduct, and his
own desperate entanglement with her, wrought him almost to phrenzy.
The Duke owned, that as circumstances were, there was a necessity
for the marriage; or, at least, an appearance of preparing for its
celebration. Should events compel the ceremony, Louis might extricate
himself from its domestic discomforts, as soon as the affairs between
the two countries were brought to a happy consummation. He might then
leave his bride, and never see her more; being well assured, that she
would be fully satisfied in the enjoyment of her new rank, by the
side of her infatuated mistress. But this was taking the case at the
worst, for could they mislead the Empress and her favourite by apparent
compliance, and real delays in the performance, events might start
forward to elude the whole.
"I cannot, Sir," cried Louis, "I cannot compromise myself one moment on
so abhorrent a subject! How could I look up, if I were to be pointed at
wherever I moved, as the future husband of this justly contemned widow
of Count Altheim? My Lord, command me in every thing but this! Send me
from Vienna,--banish me where you will, but do not entangle me farther
with that insidious woman! Do not subject me to the consciousness, that
I am any way deserving the punishment of being ensnared beyond the
power of extrication."
"Louis," replied the Duke, "there is nothing that I can command, or
counsel you to do, to unite the preservation of your private freedom,
with your public duty, but a temporary system of deceiving the Empress
and her favourite. When you entered a political career, you engaged
on oath, to sacrifice every thing; your bosom's passions, and even
your reputation with men, to the service of your country, should it be
demanded. You are now called upon to perform the first part of this
vow."
"Yes, Sir, but I did not engage to sacrifice my conscience. That
belongs to God alone; and, I will perish, or keep it so."
"Then you must marry the Countess Altheim," calmly, rejoined his father.
"In the hour that I do," replied Louis, "I shall have given my heart's
dearest blood to the country I have never seen! to the country I will
never see! I will abjure the world, and retire to die a despised
wretch, where I may not hear the derision I have plucked upon the name
of de Montemar."
"And will that be obedience to your conscience?" asked the Duke, "if
so, mark its inconsistency, and sometimes doubt its text. Before
I quitted the Empress, I brought her to apologise to me, for the
offensive innuendos she had dropped at the beginning. I brought her to
tears, when I reminded her how I had served her and her daughter, in
the establishment of the Pragmatic Sanction. But before I accomplished
this conquest over a self-willed and powerful sovereign, I removed
every impression from her mind that I had any other objection to the
proposed union, than your youth, and the lady being so much your
senior. In the moment of reconciliation, I smoothed your path. I
alledged that my duty towards my new country, obliged me to write
thither, to ask permission of the King and Queen of Spain to form a
foreign alliance, before I could formally give my consent. In this, the
Empress acquiesced. Here then, is one delay secured. Meanwhile, should
you appear to concur heartily in the arrangement, I have little doubt
of winning upon Elizabeth to grant the investiture before the messenger
can return; the engine will then be restored to our own hand; and we
may protract and excuse, and finally break away without danger."
"No, Sir," replied Louis, "I abhor this marriage, because of the want
of all honourable principle in the woman who had infatuated me; and I
never will move one step to avoid it, by becoming the thing I abhor. If
my liberty is only to be regained by acting a falsehood,--a treacherous
falsehood! I submit to my cruel destiny, and I will marry her."
"That is to yourself alone," replied the Duke, rising from his chair
with a disturbed, and even a severe countenance. "But, remember, it is
your duty to await the return of my messenger from Spain."
"I will wait, my father, as long as you please. But, I repeat, it is
with no purpose to deceive. If I ever appear again in the presence
of the Countess Altheim, to permit her to consider me as her future
husband; it must be with the intention, on my part, to become so at the
prescribed time. My weak vassalage to beauty has brought me to this;
and heavy will be the punishment, but it is more tolerable than my own
utter contempt." "You must visit her this evening."
"Not alone, my Lord! That never shall be exacted from me. Till she
bears my name, no power shall compel me to be alone with her!"
"Who, then, must be your companion? I cannot."
"Tell the Empress, I demand it of her tenderness for the Countess's
honour, that some person be always present when we meet. Should I ever
find it otherwise, in that instant I will withdraw."
"In that, you are right," replied his father; and quitted the
apartment.
CHAP. II.
Elizabeth's reply to Ripperda's note, respecting the delicate scruple
of his son, told him that herself would be present at the scene of
reconciliation.
To go to this portentous interview, was, to Louis, like setting forth
to execution. A curtain seemed to have dropped between him and all the
world. It closed out, not only every domestic comfort, but every aim of
ambition. Fame was now robbed of its glory; and the ardour of pursuit,
turned into a joyless resolve of fulfilling his task from a sense of
duty alone. His heart felt like a petrifaction in his breast; his veins
were chilled; and, with a cloud over every faculty, he paced his way,
as a man in a dream, through the often trod, but now hateful galleries
of the Imperial Palace. He knew not how his faultering steps bore him
into the boudoir where he expected to see Otteline, but instead of
her pleading or resentful form, he found himself in the august presence
of the Empress.
She advanced to meet him, all smiles; but what her first words were, he
knew not. She observed his pale looks, and the distracted wandering of
his eyes; but she would not notice either.
"Whatever was your quarrel with Otteline, in your last meeting;"
continued she, "her gentle spirit is ready to grant you forgiveness.
Shall I conduct you to her feet?"
"To her presence, Madam," replied Louis, recalling his attention; "I
shall be honoured in following Your Majesty; but not to her feet. I
cannot ask her forgiveness, for addressing her with candour."
Elizabeth looked sternly at him.
"Young man, you are not come here, to brave the Empress of Germany!
Beware, Louis de Montemar, of insulting my friend, beyond, even her
persuasions to pardon!"
"I come to speak the truth;" replied he, "to declare that I am ready to
fulfil every claim that Countess Altheim demands of my honour; but also
to throw myself on Your Majesty's justice to me, and tenderness for
her; by a frank avowal, that I shall contract this marriage against my
heart, and against my conviction, that my honour does not acknowledge
the pledge she asserts."
The Empress remained indignantly silent, while he briefly recapitulated
the cause of his repugnance to the union she was determined to
accomplish.
"It is as impossible for me to restore her to my esteem," added he,
"as to relinquish my nature. But if, under the circumstances I have
mentioned, Your Majesty deems me bound, where no engagement was made;
and when I have already told her, that our hearts are as separated
as our natures;--I am ready to submit to become her husband, with the
cold, soul-less duty, the name may enforce."
Louis stood firm, though pale and respectful, before the resentful gaze
of Elizabeth.
"Sir," said she, "you know how to insult; and you know how to attempt
to wrest from a tender woman, the rights you have given her over your
honour,--But I am her protectress; and shall hold the chain that binds
you, until death severs it. Young man, I know more of that vain heart,
than I can easily pardon.--And yet, you dare to tell me, that your
honour made no engagement with Countess Altheim, because you did not
say, in veritable words--I offer you my heart, my hand, my fortune,
and my life! But, did you not weep on her hand? Did you not press it
to your breast, while you vowed you loved, adored, and lived only in
her smile? Did you not proffer her your life, to clear her aspersed
fame? Did you not pledge her your heart; were you not sensible that you
were master of hers? and what was all this, but a bond to be hers; a
pledge, that you were hers? What is honour, if it be only a word and
not an action? and, in this case, an interchange of soul for soul?--All
this has passed between you, and yet you talk of your honour being your
own!"
Louis stood impressed, but not confounded by the truth of this appeal.
While he felt the reproach to many of his sex, he might have said with
Hamlet:--
"Let the galled jade wince; my withers are unwrung!"
Elizabeth observed a change in his countenance, and with all the woman
in her Imperial heart, she exclaimed, "Oh, man, man!" But checking
herself from completing the apostrophe, she turned proudly away, and
walked up the room. She returned, and addressed him.
"I have condescended to argue thus with you, because you are the son
of the Duke de Ripperda. His unswerving probity disdains subterfuge;
act as becomes his son, and I may forget, what Otteline is too ready to
pardon."
Louis looked up. The noble candour in his eyes almost dazzled the
stedfast, doubting gaze of Elizabeth.
"Had I sought a subterfuge," replied he, "I should have merited the
utmost of Your Majesty's disdain; but from the first moment that I
found myself too sensible to her charms, I struggled against the
disclosure; and when circumstances extorted the confession from me,
with the declaration of my love, I also declared that I was not at my
own disposal. These reproaches, do not, then hold on me. For had she
still appeared, what I then supposed her; had my father refused his
consent, I would have proved my fidelity by never giving my hand to any
other woman."
"Your father gives his consent!" answered the Empress, "and as you
yield obedience to his commands, it is well they coincide with the
bonds of your honour. I accept your offered terms for my friend; your
hand, with the consideration due to your wife. For know, vain boy, that
Otteline has a spirit as dignified as it is tender; and will not brook
obloquy, either from her lover, the world, or her husband!"
Louis would have spoken, but she put out her hand in sign of silence.
"Follow me, Marquis," cried she, "and the consequences of the next two
hours be on your own head."
The consequences he already felt in his heart; and, without further
look of remonstrance, or attempt to utter another word, he bowed and
obeyed.
She opened a door in the farthest apartment, and discovered the
beautiful favourite, seated on a sofa awaiting them. She was luxuriant
in every charm. And perhaps the flush of a smothered indignation,
irradiated her complexion with redoubled brilliancy. But all was worse
than lost upon the senses of Louis. Every beauty appeared to him, like
the serpents on the Gorgon's head, wreathing to sting him. She rose as
the Empress entered.
"Otteline," cried Her Majesty with a proud smile; "I have brought you a
penitent. Can you pardon and receive him again to your heart?"
"Oh, Wharton!" exclaimed the inmost soul of Louis, at that moment
recollecting the rejected warning of his friend; "This Semiramis and
her subtle confidant, have, indeed, bound me in a toil unto death!"
As he approached, the Countess made some answer, which he rather heard
in its tones than its words; for almost instantly, Elizabeth had put
the hand of Otteline into his. He held it, but it was without pressure;
without recognizance of the delight with which he once grasped it.
"Now," continued the Empress, "I am happy since I see the son of my
earliest counsellor, thus affiance himself to the cherished friend of
my youth!"
As she spoke, she pressed their hands together, while a mortal coldness
shot through the heart of Louis, at this consummation of his fate; and
stupified, he neither saw nor heard for a few moments. In this interval
the Empress disappeared. Otteline sunk, weeping into a chair. He turned
his eyes upon her; but no sympathy was in their beams; no belief in the
semblance of her tears. She looked up and met his rigid observation.
Her beautiful eyes swam, like sapphire gems in the summer dew. A soft
attraction was in their lucid rays. A melancholy smile, gave utterance
to her faultering accents; and holding out the hand he had dropped, she
gently, timidly, and tenderly articulated,
"De Montemar! Is it a mutual forgiveness? The hand that is now yours,
is a feeble pledge of the reconciliation of my heart!"
Louis did not approach her. He felt there was poison in that honeyed
tongue; and though he came to commit himself to her for ever, he shrunk
from being cozened again, by her charms or her art, to become a willing
sacrifice. Could he now unite himself to her from any other impulse
than hard, extorting duty, he felt how deep would be his degradation in
his own thoughts; and he looked down to shut all these witcheries from
his eyes.
After a minute's pause, while he stood painfully silent, she resumed in
great emotion.
"What is it I have done, to deserve this harsh contempt? Oh, de
Montemar, I have only proved myself, a fond, a feeble woman? For your
sake, I gave way to the suggestions of a zeal, that would have carried
me, as surely on the points of your enemies' daggers, as to violate
the letter which gave notice of your danger.--And thus am I repaid!"
With a suffocating gasp, she fell back into the chair on which she sat,
and covered her face with her hands. Her whole frame was shook, as if
life were indeed passing in agonizing throes from her body. The heart
of man could not bear this. Could these mortal struggles be indeed
dissimulation?--Whatever they might be, he could not look on them
unmoved. He hastily approached her, and touched her hand. It was cold
as death, but the plastic fingers closed on his agitated pressure. He
trembled fearfully as he drew it away from her pale face, and beheld
those matchless features convulsed with mental agony. Again her eyes
opened upon him, as he hung over her. They fixed themselves on his
face, with a languid, but pleading sorrow.
"Countess!" said he in a voice of anguish. "Oh, call me Otteline--your
Otteline!" cried she, impetuously grasping his arm, and hiding her face
on it; "or, repeat that word, and release me, by killing me! But, I
have survived your esteem, and why should I longer wish to live?"
His heart was subdued; and with tears starting from his own eyes, he
exclaimed. "And is it possible that you do really love me?"
In that moment she was on her knees beside him. She clasped her
hands; and looked up with such beaming beauty in every feature,
such effulgence in her dewy eyes; that his were rivetted on her, as
they would have been on a kneeling angel. Her lips appeared vainly
to attempt sounds, that were too big for utterance; and, finding it
impracticable, she turned towards him, and meeting the relenting
expression of his anguished countenance, she smiled like heaven, and
threw herself upon his breast. Louis's heart heaved, and panted under
the beautiful burden it sustained, as her sighs breathed on his cheek,
and her tender tears bathed it; but, even in that moment of female
victory, the excess of his emotion smote on that betrayed heart: and
sensible to all the shame of his defeat, the rapid current in his
veins, chilled to its former ice; and, with a tremor, far from ecstacy,
he replaced her in her chair, and, almost unconsciously knelt down by
her side.--But the attitude was dictated by his humbled sense of his
own weakness, not, indeed, addressed to her; though he now believed she
loved him; and while he looked on her agitated frame, he thought to
himself:--
"If I cannot be happy myself, in the degradation to which I am doomed;
at least, I do not leave you miserable! I will cherish, and protect;
and, perhaps, recall that fond heart, to respect the principles of her
husband!" As he thus thought, he raised her hand to his lips; and, by
that action, sealed to himself, the compact to be hers.
"My de Montemar!" murmured the Countess, feeling the import of this
mute symbol. At this crisis, she heard a light step in the room.
She looked round, and beheld the young Arch-duchess, standing pale,
and fixed in the middle of the floor, with her eyes rivetted on the
kneeling figure of Louis.
"The Princess!" exclaimed Otteline, in a voice of surprise, to Louis.
He started from his knee, and in the confusion of his feelings,
retreated a few paces back. The gentle Maria Theresa smiled mournfully,
but did not speak. Taking her hand, the Countess enquired her commands.
The Princess still kept her eyes fixed on Louis, while, in a suppressed
and unsteady voice, she answered her governess.
"My mother wishes to speak with you. But, perhaps, had she known the
Marquis was here, she would not desire you to leave him. God bless you,
Marquis!" cried he, addressing him with agitated earnestness; "Be kind
to my Otteline; for, when you are married, I shall never see her
more."
With the last words, she tore her eyes from his face, and threw herself
into the bosom of the Countess.--Otteline looked her adieu to her
lover, as in a tumult of undescribable disorder he hurried out of the
room.
CHAP. III.
Though Ripperda had made it a point with the Empress, that there should
be no public intimation given of the proposed marriage of her favourite
with his son, until the Queen's consent should arrive; it is probable
Her Majesty might have sent it abroad by a private whisper, had she not
seen the prudence of not stimulating the ill offices of the Princess de
Waradin, and others, by any hint that the heir they courted for their
daughters was promised to their proudest enemy.
When Elizabeth appeared to grant this silence as a favour, she insisted
that it should not deter Louis from making his daily visits at the
Altheim apartments; it was a respect due to the amiable forbearance of
his future bride; and it should always be in the presence of one of
her confidential ladies, who was also a friend of the Countess.
Louis had now abandoned himself to his fate. But he had hardly given
full sway to compulsive duty, and to the pleasing credulity that was
re-awakened by compassion, before a thousand circumstances arose, to
bid all his former repugnance return. The veil of imagination had been
too forcibly rent from his eyes, ever to pass again between him and
the object of his past idolatry. Unblinded by its delusions, every
succeeding day shewed him clearer views of a character she vainly
sought to disguise in assumed sentiment and delicacy. He perceived
that her defects were not merely those of a perverting education, but
of a radically warped mind. She had no spontaneous taste for moral
greatness. Grandeur was her object; but it was that of station, of
splendour, of dictating power. But still she loved him! loved him with
a devotion, a fondness, a bewitching fascination, that, at times,
made him almost forget she was not the perfection that might have
been the mistress of his soul. The beautiful deception never lasted
many minutes; and his heart sighed for its partner, with a sterile
consciousness that spoke of desolation, and dreariness, and solitude,
through the whole of his after-life.
In moments like these, how often has a frequent quotation of his
Pastor-Uncle occurred to him! "He that does a base thing in zeal for
his friend, burns the golden thread that ties their hearts together.
Such proof of love is conspiracy, not friendship!"
In the midst of this banishment of his hopes, from ever knowing
the sweets of domestic comfort again, he received large packets
from the dear home, where his best instructor presided, and where
perfect happiness dwelt with humility and innocence. The counsel of
the venerable man strengthened him in every disinterested rule of
life; but the letters of his aunt, and his cousins, made his yearning
heart overflow with rebellious regrets. The spirit of virtue and of
tenderness breathed through every eloquent line that dropped from the
pen of Cornelia.
"Ah, sister of my soul!" cried he, "I could fly with thee into
the bosom of paradise! Here is all celestial purity, all divine
aspirations! and I wished to wander from such a heaven! I longed to
busy myself in the ambitious turmoil of the world! I am in that world;
and, what is my achievement? I find myself chained to the foot of a
woman, my noble Cornelia would despise! I dare not confess to those who
love and honour me, so degrading a disappointment of their hopes."
He turned to the gentle accents of his sweet Alice, breathed in a
letter which had been wet with her grateful tears. Don Ferdinand had
complied with her petition. He had written to her mother, and avowed
his love for her daughter. But throwing himself upon her pity, he
implored her not to betray him to his father; and to assure her that
he meant nothing disobedient to him, nothing clandestine to her in the
demand, he released Alice from every vow, only reserving one claim on
her compassion; to be allowed, at some future day, to throw himself at
her feet; should the issue of certain circumstances, which still gave
him the privilege to hope, hereafter induce his father to consent to
his happiness.
Alice added that her mother had written to Don Ferdinand, that she
pardoned what had passed, in consideration of the amplitude of the
restitution; that she should preserve his blameable conduct from his
father's eye, since it was repented of, and relinquished; but, that
he must not suppose she yielded any encouragement to the continuance
of his attachment for her daughter, as she desired, that here all
correspondence must cease.
"But," added Alice, "I know he will be true to what he has written; and
I know I shall always love him dearer, for having taken that dreadful
load from my heart. I am therefore quite sure I shall be content to
await his father's consent, should it not come these many years. If
you knew how happy I am now, since I can lift up my eyes in my dear
mother's presence, and no longer feel ashamed at being pressed to the
affectionate bosom of my blameless sister; you would be ready to pour
as many tears of joy over the welcome of the little strayed lamb, as
your kind heart shed floods of sorrow that melancholy night, when you
found her so sadly wandered from her fold! Oh, my Louis, shall my
gratitude to you ever find words to express it?"
Mrs. Coningsby's letter was not less energetic in thanks to her nephew
for the judicious advice he had given to her almost infant Alice; and
for the activity of his exertions, to bring it to effect.
Louis smiled with glistening eyes, over these letters; for he was yet
to learn the science of forgetting his own privations, in the fullness
of others. The comparison now only aggravated the pangs in his breast;
and rising from meditations that subdued, agitated, and maddened him,
he rushed into crowds for that dissipation of thought he vainly sought
in the exercises of study, or the fulfilment of his official duties.
Count Koninseg had lately introduced him to a house, in which he
moved about at perfect ease, and met with every gratification to put
his usual indifference to gay society, to the test. It was the abode
of the Count d'Ettrees, a French adventurer of rank, whose wife and
sister formed an attraction of wit and beauty, that rivalled every
other assembly in Vienna. Under their magic auspices, every amusement
was presented that capricious fancy could desire or devise; and all
lavished with a splendor of luxury, and an elegance of taste, which
must soon have been exhausted, had not the fountain as it flowed
returned by another channel to its native bed. Count d'Ettrees drew a
revenue from that spirit for play, which his display of means excited
in his guests.
Louis could never be induced to touch a card, or the dice-box,
despising them both as sordid and senseless in principle; but found
ample entertainment in the conversations of, indeed, an epitomised
world. In these assemblies he saw persons from all countries and of all
parties; but they were the chosen of all. For, to make the attraction
the greater, so select was the Count in the rank and pretensions of
those whom he admitted, it was deemed the highest proof of consequence,
and of being un bel esprit, to be seen in this privileged circle. The
Countess Claudine and her sister-in-law, Angelique d'Ettrees were
ostensibly women of character, and really women of talent. But, while
all around shewed a gorgeous pageant of amusement, wit, and genius;
ruin lurked in the rooms, dedicated to play; infidelity and pride
animated the philosophic colonade; poetry and Voltaire, Rousseau and
bewildering sentiment, discoursed alike with talents, or with beauty;
and vice sapped the unwary footstep where-ever it trod.
At present, Louis was too self-absorbed by the struggles within him,
to look deep into what was passing around him. It was sufficient for
him that the varying intellectual enjoyments of the place, wrested
him from his thoughts; and he gave himself up to all their power
with a desperate avidity. He found his mind roused and exercised, by
discussions with men of genius; he was delighted with the brilliant
wit of the women, and the graceful frankness of their manners; and,
perhaps, he was unconsciously propitiated by the indirect flattery
which was offered to himself, by the Countess and her sister, and
which, being paid to his talents alone, he received without suspicion.
One evening, while he was thus engaged, he observed de Patinos and Duke
Wharton enter together. It was the first time he had seen the Duke in
the hotel d'Ettrees. The Spaniard descried Louis at the same instant,
as he sat between the Countess and her sister Angelique. De Patinos
drew his arm almost immediately from Wharton, and approached the group;
but when near, he stopped, and turned away, casting a furious look at
Ma'amselle d'Ettrees. She soon left her seat, and Louis afterwards
saw her and the Spaniard in close conversation, while they, at times,
turned round and glanced at him, as if he were the object of their
discourse. De Patinos seemed very sullen, and Angelique very earnest.
Soon after they parted, with a sarcastic laugh from the Spaniard, and
Ma'amselle mingled with the crowd.
Without any known cause of offence, a tacit acknowledgement of mutual
dislike was shewn by Louis and de Patinos. For some time, their
civilities had been merely confined to a cold bow at meeting in the
Palais d'Espagne; when they met elsewhere, they passed as strangers.
Baptista Orendayn was de Patinos's shadow in all things. But the
conciliating manners of Louis, and (when he could emerge from his bosom
regrets) his brilliant powers of amusement, had won the other Spaniards
to court his society, and regard him with more confidence. This
desertion from his party, incensed de Patinos the more; and a lurid
fire burnt in his angry eye, whenever it encountered his admired rival.
As Louis left the side of the animated Countess d'Ettrees, and was
passing away through the rooms, in a crowd of attendants rather than
of company, his shoulder pressed against that of Wharton. They turned
their heads, and their eyes met. Louis snatched his friend's hand, and
in the grasp, the embrace of his heart was felt. Wharton's luminous
smile played on his lip, as he whispered.
"Something better than the garden of the Hourii! Socrates, or
Alcibiades de Montemar?"
Louis did not answer, for at that moment he met the glance of Orendayn,
who was just entering. He bowed with obsequious lowliness, both to him
and the Duke, and passed on. Wharton and Louis had withdrawn their
hands at the same instant they caught his eye; and the Duke turned
into the circle. They were conscious however, to having been observed,
but whether with a malicious or an indifferent observation, Louis
did not pause to think on. Indeed, persons of all parties conversed
so indiscriminately in this Elysian society, where nothing seemed
considered but the free enjoyment of all which was delightful in the
human mind, that he saw nothing to apprehend in the simple circumstance
of having been known to speak to Duke Wharton in so privileged a scene;
and for any inferences, which the busy ignorance or ill nature of
Orendayn might chuse to draw, it could be a matter of no consequence,
as most of the Spanish grandees in Ripperda's suite conversed openly
with Wharton; and Orendayn, though a nobleman, was known to be a
character of contemptible craft and falsehood.
Thus, Louis continued to throw away the time that was once so precious
to him. But it was no longer the friend, with which he joyed to "take
sweet counsel," and lay open a bosom that knew no guests but hope and
exultation. It was become a heavy monitor of remembrance, to remind
him in solitary hours, of the blank his youthful infatuation and hard
destiny had made of his present and future days. His official duties
done, his home saw him no more, till their recurrence recalled his
steps, or the hour of rest demanded him to his pillow.
An hour, each morning, was passed in the Altheim apartments,
where the Empress often met him with unvarying graciousness; and
Otteline received him with as stationary smiles. But the vesture
of art cannot elude the penetration of every day. In spite of her
vigilance, he became master of her secret; and, no longer deceived
into self-complacency, by the idea that she loved him, he saw himself
consigned to be the prey of frigid, unfeeling, circumventing ambition.
From her, he rushed to Princess de Waradin's, to his military
associates, the Hotel d' Ettrees; or into any vortex that would hurry
him from himself, and present him with other meditations than Otteline
and his misery.
The Empress and Ripperda were now sailing forward on the unruffled sea
of success. He had brought her to yield him such implicit confidence,
that she exerted her own influence with the Emperor, to hasten the
investiture of Don Carlos in the Duchies of Parma and Placentia.
Charles promised that the official documents should immediately be
finished; and the ceremony be performed with the earliest dispatch.
He put into the Duke's hand, his final renunciation, for himself and
his posterity, of all claims on the succession of Spain; and he gave
him written bonds for the payment, at certain seasons, of a large debt
of many millions, owed by the Empire to the Spanish monarchy. He also
signed several new articles to the secret treaty; one of which was, to
relinquish the Netherlands to Don Carlos, as a dowry with his intended
bride.
About this time Cardinal de Giovenozzo arrived from Rome, on a special
mission from the Pope; and with the usual caution of the reigning
Pontiff, all parties were to be conciliated to the measures he
proposed. To this end, his first proceeding was to collect round his
table the foreign Ambassadors, and the leading men of the different
factions at Vienna.
At one of these entertainments, it chanced that the Duke de Ripperda
and the Duke of Wharton were placed at the same table. If there were
any man in the world whom Ripperda absolutely hated, it was this rival
of his politics; and he hated him, because he was the only man, who had
ever effectively crossed them. But while he cherished this hatred, he
would not own to himself that it was mixed with any fear of the talents
he affected to despise. He, therefore, took no notice of the Duke at
table, but by a stiff bow; and he would not, even have granted that,
had it not been at the board of the representative of the Father of
Christendom, where such mutual recognition of universal brotherhood in
the Catholic church, was a regular ceremonial.
During dinner, some observations were made by Wharton, respecting the
balance of power in Italy, which extracted two or three angry flashes
from the eye of Ripperda; but he disdained to appear to attend to any
thing advanced by him, and continued, with an air of indifference,
drinking wine with the British Ambassador, and conversing with the
Cardinal at whose right hand he sat. The animated Wharton proceeded in
his remarks, at the end of the table he occupied; and in a strain of
argument and eloquence that gradually attracted every ear, until even
Giovenozzo himself bowed without reply, to some passing observation of
Ripperda, and bent forward to catch what Wharton was asserting relative
to the Pontiff's rights, in the transfer of principalities in Italy.
This temporary triumph of the English Duke, over the imposing presence
of Ripperda, stung him to the quick; and, for a moment he laid open the
wound, by the impatient scorn with which he glanced on the resistless
speaker. The Portuguese minister, who sat next him, remarked on the
powerful consequences of the last argument of Wharton. Ripperda
contemptuously replied.--
"Wind is sometimes mistaken for thunder."
Wharton caught the words, and with a gay but pointed laugh, looked
towards the top of the table.
"Jove wields both in his rod; and the lighter the stroke, the quicker
the smart."
"When the bolt is launched against presumption," retorted Ripperda, "it
harrows up the dirt that blinds the multitude."
Wharton smiled. "I have no ambition to be the glorious malefactor!"
And bowing to the Duke, the reference could not be mistaken. Some of
the company did not repress the answering smile that flickered on every
lip. It was too much for the incensed pride of Ripperda, and starting
from his chair he turned indignantly to the Cardinal.
"When Your Eminence understands the distinction between the accredited
representative of the King of Spain, and the lurking emissary of a
dethroned, and medicant Sovereign; then the Ambassador of His Catholic
Majesty may appear where he is not to be insulted."
Every person had risen from their seats in consternation; and
Giovenozzo, not the least alarmed of the party, seized the Duke's arm,
and began a confused apology for the attention he had paid to Wharton;
and even attempted an excuse for the English Duke.
"I beg Your Eminence, not to trouble yourself with my apology," cried
the unruffled Wharton;--"I meant all I said. And, I am obliged to
the candour of the Spanish Ambassador, for so publickly declaring
the distinction that is indeed between us! He is the representative
of a King in the plenitude of power; at the head of the fountain of
riches and honours; and the stream flows bounteously! I am the lurking
emissary of a dethroned and mendicant monarch: but it has not yet been
my good fortune to play the successful Gaberlunzie in the courts of
rival sovereigns, or to beg alms for my Prince, at the gate of the Duke
de Ripperda!"
Ripperda, turned on him with an eye of flame. His soul was on fire;
and, at that moment insensible to every thing but the expression of his
burning hatred, he sternly exclaimed:
"Were not Duke Wharton as impotent as he is vain, I might stoop to
chastise what offends me: but I pardon, what I pity."
"And I," replied the Duke, "am proud to imitate so great an example!"
Ripperda, almost beside himself with wrath, struck the hilt of his
sword fiercely with his hand. Wharton turned gaily on his heel, and
asked some indifferent question of the Duke de Richelieu.
The Cardinal followed Ripperda out of the apartment. Alarmed at the
consequence of suffering him, who seemed to hold the balance of
Christendom in his hands, to quit his roof unappeased, he drew the
enraged Duke into another room, and vainly tried to assuage his fury.
Ripperda's pride was in arms, at being so insolently braved before
all the nations of Europe, in the persons of their Ambassadors. He
was angry with himself, at having shewn himself susceptible of insult
from the man, it was his policy to teach others to despise; and in a
disorder of mind he had never known before, he poured on the Cardinal
all his resentments against the Duke and himself. He saw that nothing
could redeem him to the vantage ground he had so intemperately
abandoned, but an ample and formal apology from Wharton; and, he told
Giovenozzo, he must force the English Duke to make that restitution;
else he should act from a conviction that they had been invited
together, to insult the politics of Spain in the person of its minister.
The Cardinal feared Ripperda; and flattered himself, that he might work
upon the zeal and good-nature of Wharton, to serve the interest of His
Holiness by this concession. When Ripperda arose to withdraw, on being
informed that his carriage was ready, Giovenozzo attended him to the
foot of the stairs, and absolutely promised to bring him the demanded
apology next day.
But unfortunately, the company in the dining-room, supposing that
Ripperda had been sometime gone, moved to depart also. In the hall,
Wharton again met his proud antagonist; and, in the instant when most
unhappily the spirit of discord seemed to have extended itself to
their respective domestics. Wharton's carriage and that of Ripperda
had drawn up at the same moment; and their coachmen were disputing the
right to maintain the door. From words, they had recourse to whips.
"A comfortable way of settling a controversy!" exclaimed Wharton, who
stepped forward, to order his servant to draw off; but Ripperda, who
felt the late scene festering in his heart, and supposing a different
intention, and a new affront in the Duke's prompt advance; cried aloud,
with an air of derision:--"Less haste, my Lord! or the whip of my
coachman, may chance to brush Your Grace's skirts!"
"If it did," replied Wharton, with a glance that told he understood the
remark; "I should know where to repay the impertinence."
Ripperda was again in a blaze.
"Insolent!" cried he.
Wharton, who had checked his advancing step, on the first word from
his antagonist, now leaned towards him; and whispered:
"The lion may be chafed beyond its bearing! It is possible for the
father of Louis de Montemar to go too far with the Duke of Wharton!"
This assumption of forbearance to him, Ripperda felt as the climax of
insult; and starting back, with all the pride and resentments of his
nature rushing through his veins, he touched the hilt of his sword with
a significant glance, and in a subdued voice, replied:
"If you do not shroud cowardice under the name of my son, you will
follow me!"
This had cleft the threatened cord; and, in one moment the two Dukes
had vanished through the colonades of the hall, into an interior and
lonely court of the building.
In the same instant they found themselves alone, the drawn sword of
Ripperda was in his hand, and he called on Wharton to defend himself.
There was no time for further forbearance or parley. Wharton had hardly
warded off the first thrust of his determined antagonist, before a
second and a third were repeated with the quickness of lightning.
The glimmer of the lamps, which lit this little solitary quadrangle,
marked each movement of the weapon with a gleam on its polished steel;
and Wharton continued rather to defend than attack. But a noise of
approaching steps, withdrawing his attention for a moment from his
guard, a desperate lunge from the infuriate arm of his adversary, ran
him through the breast, and he fell. The blood sprang over his hand, as
he laid it on the wound.--His proud destroyer stood confounded at the
sight.
"I forgive you my death!" cried Wharton, "but I guess your son will
not. Rash Duke, to you he dies in me!" The tongue of Ripperda clove
to the roof of his mouth; and in the next instant the Cardinal and the
French Ambassador appeared at his side. As the bloody scene presented
itself, Giovenozzo shut the door, and bolted it behind him, to prevent
further entrance. Richelieu hurried to the prostrate Duke, and spoke
to him. Wharton looked up, and in hardly articulate accents, said,
"bear witness, Richelieu, that I acquit the Duke de Ripperda. He was in
wrath, and I provoked him. Let not his high character be dishonoured by
my death."
This was the first time that Ripperda's lofty consciousness of
consistent greatness had ever shrunk before the eye of man; he could
not brook the strange humiliation, and with asperity he haughtily
exclaimed; "my honour does not require protection. I know that I have
been intemperate and rash. But let the world know it as it is: I have
done nothing that I am not prepared to defend." Wharton raised himself
on his arm to reply; but in the exertion he fainted and fell.
The Cardinal, (in consternation at the report he must give to the Pope
of such an affray under his holy roof,) implored his implacable guest
to pass into the oratory, which was on the opposite side of the court,
and await him there, till the French Ambassador and he had borne the
insensible Wharton to a place where his state might be examined.
Ripperda complied in silence; and Giovenozzo, wrapping his scarlet
scarf around the bleeding body of Wharton, between him and Richelieu,
bore him round the back of the oratory, into one of the penitential
cells. His Eminence having been a brother of the Order of Mercy,
understood surgery; and staunching the Duke's wound, so as to leave
him for a short time in safety, though still insensible; he came forth
with Richelieu. The French Duke gave him his word of honour, that if
Ripperda could be induced to keep silence on this terrible affair,
whether Wharton lived or died, the secret should never escape from him.
Richelieu had his own views in this secrecy; and took his part, in
returning to the hall to quench suspicion there. Those who had lingered
to know the issue, with what degree of credence suited them, listened
to his hasty account, that he and the Cardinal had just arrived in time
to laugh at their zeal; for Wharton had given a merry explanation of
his ill-timed raillery to the Duke; laying it to the account of the
Cardinal's bright Falernian; and Ripperda, with the dignity of a great
mind, having accepted the apology; no more was said about it.
All appeared to believe this statement, for there was no disputing
the word of honour of an ambassador!--But there were a few drops
of blood on the point ruffles and bosom of Richelieu; which, being
observed by Count Routemberg alone, told him a different story; and he
remained a few minutes behind the rest. When the hall was cleared of
all but himself and the French minister, he did not speak, but pointed
significantly to the testimonies on the ruffles and frill. Richelieu
was hurrying out some excuse, invented on the moment; but Routemberg,
(who was president of the Emperor's council,) whispered something in
the embassador's ear. They both smiled, shook hands, and parted.
When Ripperda returned to his palace, he entered the room where his son
was completing some especial communications to Spain. Louis put them
into the hand of his father. As he did so, he beheld that form and face
which, a few hours before, had left him gallantly habited, and bright
in lofty complacency; now discomposed, pale and haggard. He gazed
on the alteration with surprise, while Ripperda seemed to read the
dispatch with a moveless eye. "It will do," said he, laying it on the
table. He mechanically took up one of the candles, and was turning away
to his own chamber. Louis could keep silence no longer.
"You are ill, my Lord!" cried he, "or something terrible has happened!"
"What is there terrible to have happened?" returned Ripperda, pausing
as he approached the door, and looking on his son.
"Nothing, that I can guess," replied Louis, "but your looks, my father,
are not as when you left me!"
"How often have I told you, de Montemar," returned the Duke, "never to
guess at a stateman's looks! I have come from a party of many vizards,
and you must not be surprised that mine has changed in the contact. I
am well; let that satisfy you."
With these words the Duke withdrew.
CHAP. IV.
Morning reported all that had passed at the table of the Cardinal.
What happened in the hall, was slightly mentioned; for little of
that had been generally heard; but an account was circulated, that
notwithstanding the good offices of Giovenozzo had produced a shew of
reconciliation, some serious consequences might be anticipated.
When Ripperda entered to his son the next day, he perceived by his
pallid hue and averted eyes, that he had heard something of the affray.
Without preface, he abruptly asked, what had been told him of the
Duke of Wharton's behaviour the preceding night. The informant of
Louis had shaped the story under a flattering veil for his father; and
the anxious son had heard nothing but of the insolence and scoffing
speeches of the English Duke; and of the dignified forbearance of
Ripperda.
The blood that accused his friend in his heart, rushed to his face,
when he repeated what had been told him.
"And how," demanded Ripperda, "do you mean to act towards the man who
could so taunt, deride, and insult your father?"
"Though he twice preserved my life," returned Louis, "he has now
wounded me in a more vital part; and I shall ever after regard him as a
stranger."
Ripperda shook his head, and laid his hand on his son's arm. "And what
would be your decision, were I to reverse the charge?"
Louis looked on the flushed countenance of his father.
"Man is fallible, Louis!" cried he, "and, after thirty years
of undeviating self-control----" Ripperda broke off, in the
acknowledgements he believed it magnanimous to make, and in the
bitterness of his mortification thrusting his son from him, he
exclaimed,--"How must I hate the man who burst my fettered passions,
and, for one desperate moment, made me their victim, and his sport!"
Louis did not speak, in his astonishment at what he hoped would end in
some acquittal of his friend; but the pleasurable feeling was quickly
smothered by this tremendous burst from his father; and he saw revived
before him, the terrible moment in which the Sieur Ignatius clenched
his dagger at his breast. Without a word, or a look upward, he stood,
awefully expecting him to proceed.
After a minute's pause, the Duke turned desperately calm to his son.
"Discredit the vile flatterers, who would tell you, that Wharton alone
was the aggressor. We met like hostile bulls, and wonder not that we
should plunge at once upon each other's horns! Respect him still, for
he is a noble enemy; but I am his, for ever."
Louis threw himself at his father's feet.
"My gracious father! oh that the visible pleadings of my heart, that
its dearest blood, could make you regard him as a friend!"
There are hearts that cannot bend where they have injured. Ripperda's
was of this proud mettle; and looking down on his kneeling son, he
exclaimed:--"Impossible! that has passed between us which has made our
enmity eternal. Your conduct in the affair I leave to yourself. But I
can trust to you, that you will not compromise your father's honour by
broadly shewing fellowship with his most open enemy."
Louis pressed his father's hand to his lips; that hand which was hardly
washed from the stain of Wharton's blood! But he was ignorant of that
part of the horrid tale; and the Duke, in a milder voice, bade him rise.
"You will not soon be called upon to act a Roman part between your
father and your friend!" continued he. "I saw Cardinal de Giovenozzo
this morning; and he tells me that Wharton has disappeared."
This information was balm to Louis, as it seemed to promise a peaceful
termination to so threatening an affair. That his friend had withdrawn,
was a pledge of his pacific wishes; and, with a lightened countenance,
Louis rose from his knee.
Ripperda said no more; and his son was left to his meditations.
Whatever details he afterwards heard of the affair, were so confused
and contradictory, he could form no certain criterion, which was most
to blame. But Giovenozzo at last put all to silence, by a declaration,
that he should deem all further discussion of a transaction which
passed under his roof, as an impertinent interference with his
responsibility. He pronounced, that neither the Duke de Ripperda,
nor the Duke of Wharton, could have acted otherwise than they did,
consistently with their own dignities; and he insinuated to Louis,
that a third person, whom he could not mention, was the origin of
a dissention, which had ended in a manner to reflect honour on his
father. The Cardinal then hinted, that Wharton had vanished on some
occult mission, to circumvent the Italian investiture.
"And so," added the smiling ecclesiastic, "I doubt not, he seeks to
revenge the triumphant magnanimity of his transcendant rival."
From all this, though Louis could not learn much to criminate his
friend, he gained enough to impress him with an encreased conviction of
his father's greatness of mind; that a generosity, something like his
own romantic nature, had impelled the few words of self-blame which had
dropped from him in their first, and, indeed, only conference on the
subject. After that discussion, it was never resumed; and the whole
matter dying away from people's tongues and memories, Ripperda appeared
in every circle as usual, bright and serene as the cloudless sky in
midsummer.
The favour in which he was held at Court was made more apparent than
ever; and though the dispatches which were to bring the royal assent
to Louis's marriage, seemed unaccountably delayed; yet to shew that no
doubt remained in Elizabeth's mind, of the father and son's sincerity,
she permitted the solemn installment of the latter in the name of Don
Carlos, into the reversion of the two long-disputed Italian dukedoms.
This important rite was just completed, when a packet was put into
Ripperda's hand from Spain. It brought his recall to the council of his
sovereign.
The various objects of the treaty with Vienna had so alarmed the other
kingdoms of Europe, that the cabinet of Madrid was besieged day and
night by the clamour of their respective envoys. Grimaldo, the prime
minister, enfeebled by age, and adverse to the new system of politics,
had begged to resign his office. Philip granted the petition; and
now sent for Ripperda, to take the supreme chair himself; and, (in
the King's own words,) to consummate the greatness of Spain. Their
Majesties desired that the Marquis de Montemar should be left Charge
des Affaires; and that the Duke himself would immediately set forth on
his return.
Ripperda examined farther into the packet, to find the expected consent
for his son's marriage; but it was not there; and no notice taken of
the application he had made for it. On questioning the messenger,
whether he had omitted to bring any part of his charge, the man told
him that a special courier, which was Castanos, had been dispatched a
few days before him; and he was not less surprised than alarmed, to
find him not arrived, as he knew he brought dispatches of great value.
The disappointment Elizabeth sustained in this procrastination of the
marriage of her favourite, was absorbed for a time in her regrets
for the recall of her friend. Louis could think only of his father's
glorious summons, to perfect the happiness of his country; and when,
in the midst of his preparation for departure, Castanos did arrive,
this affectionate son, hardly cast a thought on the reprieve, that he
brought no dispatches.
Castanos told Ripperda, he had been beset on the road, in the mountains
of Carinthia, by a band of armed men, who rifled and left him for dead.
A poor herdsman found him, and took him to his hut; where, having
recovered strength to pursue his journey, he came forward, to apprise
his master that he had lost the dispatches, and with them a casket of
jewels from Don Carlos to the Arch-duchess. The bruises on Castanos's
person bore witness to the truth of his assault; and the Empress and
her favourite, were obliged to resign themselves to await a courier
from Ripperda himself, when he should have arrived in Spain.
On the third day after the declaration of his recall, Ripperda took his
official leave, and presented his son in his new office. At parting,
the Emperor invested the Duke with the Star of the Golden Fleece;
in which order, he was the only exception to an undeviating line of
Sovereign Princes. The Empress presented him with her picture set in
brilliants; and when the Court broke up, she told him to follow her, to
receive the farewell commands of her daughter.
Louis waited in the anti-room, while his father entered the apartment,
where the still invalid Princess sat on a sofa, supported by the
Countess Altheim. Louis could not help seeing the lovely group, through
the half-obscuring draperies of the open door. The Princess was pale
and thin; and, though dressed superbly, seemed fitter for her chamber.
When Ripperda drew near, a faint colour tinged her cheek.
"The Duke approaches you, my love," said the Empress, "to bear your
commands to Don Carlos; and to receive from your hands, the portrait of
his future bride."
"Where is it?" said the Princess, turning hurryingly to Otteline.
The Countess drew a beautiful miniature from its case, which lay on the
sofa near her, and presented it to her young charge. Maria Theresa held
it in her hand, and looked on it a few seconds with a languid smile.
"It is very pretty, and very fair!" said she, "Do not you think so,
Duke?" added she, putting it into Ripperda's hand, who received it on
his knee; "But tell the Spanish Prince, I shall be much fairer before
he looks on it." And then she cast down her eyes, and sat perfectly
still and silent.
"What means my love, by so strange a message?" enquired the Empress.
The Princess did not answer, but merely sighed, and looked round,
uneasily. Elizabeth repeated the question, with enquiries, whether she
wished to send the Prince any thing else, that she looked about so
searchingly.
"O, no," replied the young creature, shaking her head, and rising from
her chair; "I only wish to give this rosary to the Duke of Ripperda,
for himself;--himself, alone!" cried she, and clasping her fair hands,
as she dropped it into his, she turned hastily round with a glowing
cheek, and flew out of the apartment.
At the moment of her last raising her eyes, she had caught a glimpse of
Louis, as he stood in a distant corner of the other room half concealed
in its draperies, but regarding with a pitying eye the resigned victim,
who, like himself, was to be offered up to the ambition of others.
In evident emotion, Elizabeth put her hand on the arm of Ripperda, and
withdrawing with him into a part of the room out of sight,--Otteline
advanced to his son.
Louis's soul was full of sympathy for the interesting Maria Theresa;
the import of whose melancholy message to Don Carlos, he well defined:
and his compassion for such thraldom, extending to himself, made him a
very unfit companion for his own future bride. He could have wept over
the sweet, and faded Theresa; while the blooming cheek and rosy smile
of Otteline, at such a season! withered him as she approached; and he
stood sad and absorbed, after he had given her the ceremonious salute
of the day.
The Countess had found her account in not striving to change these
fitful moods in her lover. But while she suppressed the risings of her
haughty soul, she often said within herself. "Disdainful tyrant!--My
hour is coming!--When I am your wife, then you shall feel what you have
done by trampling on the slave, who only waits a few magic words, to be
your sovereign!"
For the whole of the remainder of the day, Ripperda's house was
crowded with ministers, foreign embassadors, and persons of various
descriptions. It was past midnight, before the last of these levies
was dismissed; in the midst of all of which, Louis had seen his father
like a presiding deity. He seemed the umpire of Europe; and as if
the monarchs of each realm stood before him in the persons of their
delegates, to hear from his lips the fiat of their weal or woe. To all
he was as gracious as he was peremptory: and while he asserted the
greatness of Spain, and proclaimed her claims in the various quarters
of the globe, he breathed nothing but peace and prosperity to the
nations that sought her amity.
Ripperda did not go to rest the whole night. He remained until morning,
instructing his son on the objects entrusted to his completion. Louis
received these lessons as distinctly, as a mirror receives the image of
the face that looks on it; but where that fled, these were stationary,
and remained indelibly stamped on his mind.
With the rising orb of day, the travelling equipage was announced.
Ripperda rose from his seat. Louis started up also, with an emotion to
which he would not give voice.
"I have spoken of all that relates to your public duty;" resumed the
Duke, "I wish your private concerns were in as fair a prospect. But
in my last conference with the Empress, I found myself obliged to
pledge her my word, (and to seriously intend its performance,) to
suffer no hesitation in the Queen's consent to your marriage with the
favourite. But cheer yourself under the sacrifice. Believe, that in
giving Otteline your name, you perform an act of self-devotion, of a
consequence to the interests of your country, I cannot now explain,
but it is worthy the price. Like your father, my son, you must live to
virtue alone; live for mankind; live to future ages!--Do this, and all
common concerns will be lost in the imperishable glory!"
Louis threw himself on his father's bosom.
"For this once!" cried he, in the full voice of filial affection; "For
this once, let me be pressed to the heart that inspires me to virtue!
The heart that I most honour and love in the world!--Oh, my father, may
I be like unto thee; and all minor enjoyments shall be nothing to me!"
The Duke strained him to his breast. Louis's cheek was wet with tears;
but his own flowed; so he knew not whether his father's mingled there.
Ripperda strove to break from him, with an averted face. Louis clasped
his hands, as he sunk on his knees; "Bless me, Oh, my father!" cried
he, "Bless me, ere you leave me to this dangerous world!"
The Duke paused, and looked for a moment on the bent head of his son.
"Bless you, Louis!" said he, "But be firm in yourself, and you will
need no beadsman's orison."
Louis hardly heard the latter sentence, in his growing emotions; and
pressing the hem of his father's garment to his lips, it slid from his
hand as the Duke drew it away, and disappeared through the door.
CHAP. V.
Ripperda was gone. Day rolled over day; and the most splendid
preparations continued to be privately made for the betrothment of
Maria Theresa, and the marriage of Otteline; but the Empress had still
to count the hours with impatience, until the ceremonial consent should
arrive.
Meanwhile, the conduct of Louis, in the management of the intricate
affairs confided to him, gained the universal suffrage of the foreign
ministers with whom he conferred; who united in saying, that had he
been the son of the obscurest individual, his talents and strict fair
dealing, would have ensured him every honour that he now received as
the son of Ripperda.
Routemberg, the prime minister, affected to treat him with peculiar
confidence; and he was with him when a packet arrived from his father.
He opened it; and it contained the very dispatches which had been
taken by the robbers from Castanos. The Duke accompanied them with a
few lines, dated from a post-house in Carinthia, saying, that he had
recovered them in a very extraordinary manner, which he should describe
in his first letters from Spain; but he now lost no time in dispatching
them forward to Vienna, under the care of Martini.
Subsequent considerations made Ripperda withhold this adventure; but it
was briefly as follows.
Just as the Spanish suite had passed into the mountainous tracks of
Carinthia, and Ripperda had entered the solitary post-house in the
forest of Clagenfurt, he was followed into his apartment by the master
of the house. The man told him in a mysterious manner, that a person
in a strange foreign habit, had waited for His Excellency some hours
in an upper chamber; and he now requested to speak with the Duke for a
few minutes on a subject of consequence; but that it must be in a room
without light.
Ripperda desired that the person might be told, it was not his custom
to admit strangers to his presence, and never to suffer dictation in
the manner he was to receive them.
In a few seconds the innkeeper returned with a charged pistol, which
he presented to Ripperda, with this message. "The person who sent
that, was as little accustomed to arbitrary decisions as the Duke de
Ripperda. He had matters of moment to impart to him. If he did not
chuse to receive them on the stranger's terms,--well,--and they should
rest with himself; but if he decided otherwise, he must admit the
communication under the obscurity of total darkness. If he suspected
personal danger, he was at liberty to stand on his guard during the
interview, either with his sword or that pistol."
There was something in the boldness of the demand, and the gift of the
pistol, that stimulated the curiosity of Ripperda. He could protect his
life from a single arm; and from a more supported treachery he had an
armed guard in his suite.
Without further hesitation, he told the innkeeper to return the pistol
to him from whom he had brought it; to take the lamp from the room, and
to introduce the stranger.
When the door re-opened, a man was let in, the outline of whose figure
and apparel the Duke caught a glimpse of, in the reflected light from
the outer chamber. The person was tall, seemed in a military garb, by
the clangor of a heavy sword, in an iron scabbard, striking against
the door-post as he approached. But there was a great involvement
of drapery about him; and the black plumage of his head brushed the
door-top, as he stooped and entered. The door closed on his back; and
the twain were in total darkness.
"Your business, Sir?" demanded Ripperda, with a tone of superiority.
"It is to confer an obligation on the proudest man in Christendom,"
returned a hoarse and rough voice, in as lofty a strain. "Ten days
ago your courier was stopped in these mountains, and robbed of his
travelling case. The contents are a padlocked casket and a sealed bag.
It fell in my way; and I restore them to you."
"Brave stranger!" returned Ripperda, "whoever you are, accept my
thanks. Point but the way, and the proudest man in Christendom would
feel himself prouder in being allowed to repay such an obligation."
"I doubt it not," replied the stranger, sarcastically; "but my taste is
not man's gratitude. If it were, I should starve in this generation."
"Try the man on whom you have just conferred this favour! Pardon me,
but by your language, you appear to have been outraged by mankind? Let
me make restitution? I love a brave spirit, and could employ and reward
it."
The stranger laughed scornfully.
"Mine is Esau's birth-right, and I have employed it manfully; witness
this sword!" cried he, striking it down with his hand upon the hilt,
and rattling its steel against the floor; "witness that bag of policy
and riches I despise; which the Duke de Ripperda now holds in his hand
as the gift of an outlaw and an enemy!"
"You are a fearless man," returned the Duke, "and have proved yourself
an honourable one! You know my power. Name the country that has
outlawed you, and I will obtain your pardon. Name the price to make
you my friend, and I will pay it."
"Ripperda," replied the stranger, "I leave that behind, which will
direct you where to find its owner. If you use it wisely, it may be
Ulysses' hauberk; if you reject it, the shirt of Nessus were a cooler
winding-sheet!--Farewell."
Before Ripperda could unclasp his lips to reply, the stranger had
opened the door, and passed through it like a gliding shadow.
The moment he had disappeared, the Duke called for lights, and the
landlord brought them in.
When Ripperda was alone, he examined the case his rugged visitor had
put into his hand. He broke the seals of the bag, in which he found
the key of the casket; and on looking over the contents of both,
missed none of the jewels, whose answering list was amongst the
dispatches. The jewels were a magnificent present from Don Carlos
to the Arch-duchess Maria Theresa; and a necklace, inscribed by the
Queen's own hand for Countess Otteline Altheim; but amongst none of the
papers was there any trace of the expected consent. The present of the
necklace seemed a presumptive proof that Her Majesty did not intend to
withhold it; but, until it was formally given, Ripperda could add no
further sanction from himself. However, to inform the Empress, as soon
as possible, of even this promise of Isabella's acquiescence, he lost
no time in summoning two or three of the young noblemen, who, wearied
of Vienna, had chosen to return with him to Spain. He told them of
his having recovered the dispatches, by the gift of the leader of the
banditti he believed; and of his intention to forward them that night
to Vienna, if they had any commands to send by the messenger he should
dispatch.
Don Baptista Orendayn, who was present, eagerly offered a suggestion
that Martini ought to be the messenger, as the most trusty person; and
Ripperda, pleased with his zeal, having ordered a sufficient suite
to attend whomever he should select, adopted his advice, and saw the
faithful Italian set off on his return to the Austrian capital, just as
the dawn opened behind the farthest mountains.
His equipages were getting ready for the prosecution of his own
journey; and, not having found any letter or memorandum from the
stranger himself, in the case which had held the casket; he was
wondering to what mysterious manner of tracing him he could have
referred, since none certainly had presented itself, when the landlord
entered the apartment; he carried a scarlet mantle in his arms, and
laying it on the table before the Duke.
"My Lord," said he, "the person you saw last night, left this cloak in
the chamber where he waited for you. He told me to bring it to Your
Excellency in the morning."
Ripperda's eye fell upon the mantle,--it was discoloured a dark red
in many places, he nodded his head, and the man withdrew. Ripperda
then took it from the table, supposing a name or a direction might
be affixed to it; but on the ample folds disengaging themselves, he
started with a shudder.--He had seen it before!--It was marked with the
keys of Saint Peter!--It was embroidered on the shoulder with the arms
of Giovenozzo!--It was stained with the blood of Duke Wharton!
Ripperda dropped it from his hand.
"Accursed Wharton!" exclaimed he, now recollecting, in the disguised
tones of the stranger's voice, some notes of the Duke's, "this insult
shall not be pardoned! I am not to be cajoled nor menaced into peace
with you, my most detested, most insolently triumphing enemy. We have
once measured swords!" and his eye glanced on the blood-stained scarf;
"when they next meet, the blow may be surer!"
Wharton's graces of mind, body, and political management, formed the
only character which had ever peered with that of his haughty rival. He
was the only man who had ever foiled Ripperda by secret machination. He
had made him feel that he had an equal, that he might have a superior.
He had discovered that the all-glorious boast of Spain was not exempt
from the infirmities of common men. He had wrought him to commit an
injury, and he had stood between him and the world's cognizance. To
be so humbled in the knowledge of any living being, was the vultures
of Prometheus to the proud heart of Ripperda. Wharton, by the present
action, had declared his triumph,--had presumed to promise, or to
threat! and the hatred of his enemy was now wound up to a height that
could know no declension, till its cause was laid low in the silence
of death.
A wood-fire burnt on the hearth of the room Ripperda occupied. He
thrust the Cardinal's mantle into it, and stood over the smouldering
cloth, till the whole was consumed to ashes.
Comprehending that Wharton must have set his emissaries to way-lay
the Spanish dispatches, merely to afford him the opportunity he had
boasted, of conferring an obligation on his rival, Ripperda assuaged
his enraged thoughts by devising schemes of revenge as he rapidly
pursued his journey towards the seat of his power.
He met with no accident nor obstacle, till on the night of the 25th of
July. The tops of the hills were laden with thunder-clouds, and the
turbid atmosphere laboured with the stifling Sirocco. His long train
of attendants had dispersed themselves amongst the narrow and shelving
roads, which traverse that line of the Appenines, which form the mural
diadem of the gulph of Genoa. Ripperda's equipage wound down a long
and twisting defile between two precipitous rocks. The intricacies and
abrupt turns in the road separated him from his immediate followers. It
was the darkest hour of twilight, when there was just enough of gleam
from the lurid sky, to shew the outline of objects.
As the Duke's carriage turned a jutting cliff, he found it suddenly
stop, and then heard a volley of oaths from his drivers, mingled with
more direful imprecations from strange voices. While he was letting
down the glass to enquire the cause, the lash of whips accompanied the
mutual swearing, and he felt the struggle of his horses to force their
way forward. The next moment a pistol was fired at their head, and a
deep groan shewed it had taken too true an aim. As the window dropped,
Ripperda saw the wounded postilion fall on the neck of his horse. But
he saw no more. The carriage door was instantly opened, and before he
could snatch a pistol from his own belt, he was dragged from the seat
by the collected strength of several arms. Having thrown him upon the
flinty way, one man of colossal bulk, cast himself upon the prostrate
and struggling Duke, and kneeling upon his body, with both his knees,
coolly and determinately put a pistol close to the temple of his
victim. Ripperda had now grasped his own weapon, and with one hand,
striking aside the arm of his antagonist, the pistol went off; where
that ball fell he knew not, but with his other hand, at the same moment
he lodged the contents of his own pistol in the heart of the ruffian.
The wretch tumbled aside, with a convulsive recoil, and was no more.
His comrades, deeming the Duke's destruction sure, were rifling the
carriage, while others were posted at the entrance of the defile, to
prevent a rescue from his attendants. One of them turning round at
the double report of the pistols, and seeing his coadjutor thrown
motionless off the body of Ripperda, who sprang on his legs, alarmed
his fellows, and rushed towards their prey. The Duke saw he must sell
his life dearly, for he was determined never to yield it to such base
assailants, and drawing his sword, set his back against the precipice,
and held them at bay. But the strength of his arm, and the bravery of
his heart could not have defended him long against their determined
attack.
The men, whose poniards his sword parried, had recourse to fire-arms,
and two pistols were fired at him.
"He stands yet!" cried one of the ruffians, "give him another volley."
A volley did sound, and instantly; but it came from the rocks above,
and three of the villains fell. The rest drew back a few paces in
surprise, and in the moment several men jumped from the shelving
precipice to the side of the Duke. The conflict closed, and became
desperate. Ripperda was bleeding fast from the graze of a ball on his
head; and though he assisted his defenders with a resolute heart,
he was nearly fainting. A party of his new friends had cleared the
entrance of the road, for the approach of his followers; and the
discomfited ruffians, foreseeing further contention must end in their
utter destruction, laid hands suddenly on their wounded and dead;
and throwing them over a chasm in the precipice, were presently lost
themselves amongst the bushy recesses of the perpendicular rocks.
The persons who had come thus opportunely to the rescue of Ripperda,
assisted his servants to bind his wound; and to place him, now as
insensible as his lifeless postillion, in the carriage. Martini was on
his mission to Vienna; but another valet was put into the chariot to
support the Duke. The man respectfully enquired of him who appeared the
superior of the group, what name he should say, when his master should
ask for his brave deliverer?
"Some day, I will tell it to him, myself;" returned he, "meanwhile I
shall exchange swords, as a memento of this hour."
He closed the carriage door, and ordered the trembling postilions to
drive on. The valet, calling from the chariot window, implored his
further protection; he nodded his head in acquiescence; and, with his
train, escorted the alarmed party safe through the defile. As it opened
into the champaigne country, the remainder of the suite, under the
leading of Don Baptista Orendayn, approached from another road. At this
sight, the gallant travellers turned their horses' heads, and leaving
Ripperda to his friends, galloped across the plain in an opposite
direction. The Duke had recovered only to a dreamy recollection. But
his medical staff having gone before him to Genoa, when he arrived
there, his wound was properly dressed; and a day's repose left him no
apparent effects of his adventure, but the bandage on his head; and
his regret, that such immediate insensibility had deprived him of the
opportunity of thanking his deliverer. He spoke to Orendayn about his
gallant preserver: but the young Spaniard could give no account of
him; as he was lost among the mountains at the time of the attack. He,
however, informed Ripperda, that while enquiring his way, the Alpine
cottagers had told him of a noted banditti, which prowled in their
neighbourhood in search of prey; and he did not doubt these assailants
were the very troop. He lamented with great bitterness, that the
stupidity of his guides, should have led him so far astray, when his
patron was in danger; and envied those who had come to his rescue,
with many encomiums on their timely valour.
Ripperda was pleased with the exchange of the swords; as the fabrick of
the one which had been left in the place of his, was of a fashion that
proved its owner to be a gentleman, as well as a brave man. Strange as
it may seem, the former citizen of Groningen, had now imbibed so much
of Spanish prejudice, he would have been sorry to have thought that his
eagle-crested rapier, might now be suspended at the side of a man of
ignoble blood, even though the hand that hung it there was that of his
deliverer.
On the morning of Ripperda's recommencing his journey, he put the sword
into his belt. It had once saved his life! And he wore, and wielded it
hereafter, in many a menacing and perilous scene.
CHAP. VI.
The Duke de Ripperda no more troubled his son with a narrative of
this attack in the Appenines, than he satisfied his curiosity, by
the promised relation of the adventure in Carinthia. The one passed
from his mind, as it was attended by no apparent consequences; and
the other, though it lived in it, was connected with Wharton, and the
memory of a transaction he would gladly obliterate for ever.
Martini set out to rejoin his master, as soon as he had delivered his
trust; and when Louis opened it, he found the Queen's commands to
himself, that he should be the representative of Don Carlos, in the
betrothing ceremony with the Arch-duchess. He sighed as he laid the
papers on the table; for he thought the task would be a harder one than
even his own immolation.
"Ah," cried he, "can I have a hand in striking the sacrificial knife
into the innocent lamb, that shrinks so pleadingly from the horrid
altar!"
The Empress was not satisfied with the Queen's slowness in expressing
her consent to the marriage of Louis; and the less so, as she wanted to
have had it solemnised immediately. Otteline was summoned to Brunswick,
to attend the dying moments of her father; and Elizabeth would have
been glad to have secured Louis eternally her's, before so many leagues
should divide them.
The day that had been fixed upon between the four illustrious parents
of the intended royal pair, for the celebration of the affiancing
ceremony, now approached. All the preparations were ready; and the
adversaries to the mutual aggrandisement of Austria and of Spain,
beheld these pledging nuptials with despair. Ripperda, with whom the
whole scheme had originated, seemed omnipotent.
Indeed the splendour of his proceedings in his new office of Prime
Minister of Spain, realized the visions of all its former statesmen. He
moved forward with a magnificence of design, which surpassed Alberoni
in grandeur, and Cardinal Ximenes in boldness of spirit, and determined
execution. The eyes of Europe were fixed on the mighty hand, which
moved all their interests as the interests of his own country prompted;
and while a feeble prince sat on the throne, the minister bid fair to
make the Spanish monarchy as vast and dominant as under the sceptre of
the Emperor Charles. The pragmatic sanction, and a marriage between a
Spanish prince and the heiress to the German empire, might accomplish
this, and other plans, which were bursting to their ripening. But the
withering mildew was now breathed forth, that was intended to blast
this goodly harvest.
On the night in which Wharton was carried, even as a dead man, out of
the mansion of Giovenozzo, the Cardinal had him carefully transported
to a monastery in the neighbourhood, where he slowly recovered to life
and strength. He learnt enough from his only visitors, Giovenozzo and
de Richelieu, to know that Ripperda, not merely had disdained his
justification and his friendship, but persisted in every circle, to
treat his name with not less pointed, though silent contempt. Wharton
smiled at this littleness in so great a man, but determined that he
should feel the power he despised.
With the active English Duke, it was only to will and to do. Distances
were to him as nothing; and difficulties only stimulated him to give
his adversaries a more signal overthrow. What Swift said of Lord
Peterborough, was as aptly adapted to Wharton; for while his rivals in
the various courts of Europe were hearing of him at Rome, Paris, and
London, and marvelling whether he would not next be in South America or
Prestor-John's dominions:--
"Still as they talk of his condition,
So wonderful his expedition,
He's with them like an apparition!"
As soon as he recovered from the immediate effects of his wound, he
set forward on his new pursuit; and he did not move to and fro upon
the earth on a vain errand. Before his rencontre with Ripperda at
the Cardinal's, he had penetrated all the secrets of the Altheim
apartments. The jealousy of Count Routemberg, respecting some of the
objects of the Spanish policy; and the private dispositions of the
Emperor on the same subject, he had also mastered, by having secured
the key of Routemberg's bosom, the beautiful and avaricious Countess
d'Ettrees. The secret wishes of half the nobility in Spain, were also
unfolded to him by the envy of de Patinos; and the venality of Orendayn
was at his service.
Wharton was fully aware of the disgust that Maria Theresa had taken to
Don Carlos; likewise of her romantic prepossession for the person and
manners of Louis, and of the Empress's design to hasten the betrothment
on this account. The Duke saw his vantage ground; and Ripperda's last
conduct determined him to storm the breach he had made in these secret
counsels.
It was easy to gain the ear of Routemberg, through the woman he
worshipped. Through her insinuations, and the graver representations
of His Excellency's confessor, (who knew the value of Wharton's gold,)
the minister was made to suspect much dangerous matter in Ripperda's
complicated influence at Vienna. Claudine d'Ettrees accused him of
more sway with the Empress, than was consistent with her high station;
that his designs in marrying a prince of Spain, to the heiress of the
empire, were very apparent; while a secret connection he had with the
leader of the Bavarian faction, was totally inexplicable. To circumvent
his prime movement, the confessor gave hints of the wisdom of uniting
the Arch-duchess to a prince, whose interests must be wholly German;
and Francis of Lorraine, a ward of the Emperor, and who was just
returning from his travels in Italy, was suggested as the properest
person. Routemberg detested Ripperda; and gave such efficient credence
to every representation, that he beset the Emperor night and day, till
he brought him to accord with all his new views.
Proof was given to him, of Elizabeth having admitted Ripperda to
private political discussions in the Altheim apartments. Also, that
her daughter was desperately attached to Louis; and that the worst
consequences might be anticipated from the ambition of the father, and
the power of the son, when the innocent Princess should be entirely
in their hands; as must be the case, should she marry the man she
abhorred, and be continually in the society of the man she preferred,
and who had an interest in preserving the preference.
Wharton had recently seen the Prince of Lorraine at Venice. And the
circumstance which inspired the idea of his supplanting the Spanish
match, was a general resemblance in his person, countenance, and
manner, to him who now filled the heart of the youthful Princess. The
Duke found no difficulty in awakening the wishes, which were necessary
to his scheme, in the mind of young Lorraine. His ambition was easily
aroused, to aspire to the heiress of an empire; and his imagination was
not displeased with the picture Wharton drew of his proposed bride.
"In your progress," rejoined the Duke, "you may consult me, as the
ancient heroes did their gods; but I must be equally invisible."
Every impression was made on the Emperor's mind, that Wharton desired.
And to carry forward his measures against the Spanish minister, and his
Empress, without a chance of impediment, Charles kept all that had been
discovered to him, locked in his own breast.
Elizabeth, meanwhile, was filled with alarms respecting her
daughter's unhappy infatuation. Her former placid temper had changed
to irritability; and her conduct at times became so strange and
desponding, the anxious mother was in hourly fear of her doing
something rash with regard to Louis. Since the departure of Otteline,
by unlucky accident, she had met him twice alone in the Altheim
boudoir; and her repugnance to the Prince of Spain seemed so to
encrease, the Empress saw no resource, but to hasten the day of
affiance.
The Emperor was no sooner informed of her intentions; than he made a
feint of sparing his daughter's feelings during the preparations; and
took her with him to pass the intermediate time at the summer palace.
Elizabeth had always intended that the marriage of her favourite should
be solemnized the morning of the day in which the young bridegroom was
appointed to represent Don Carlos at the Imperial altar. Louis had
always understood this; and she feared to give his dislike of Otteline
such advantage, as to yield him opportunity to retract his engagement,
should she reserve no great political object to hold him in check. In
this dilemma, she determined to throw herself upon his honour; and from
her knowledge of his romantic generosity, she thought she could easily
bring him to pledge it; and then she believed Otteline secure.
She told him she was anxious to comply with a private letter from
the Queen of Spain, to hasten the union between her son and the
princess; and she would do so, provided he would promise to perform
his engagement with Otteline as soon as she should arrive. Isabella
had already implied her consent, though its formalities were yet
to be declared. On the strength of this, and his father's granted
approbation, Elizabeth demanded of him to say that he would marry
Otteline, on any day she would name; and on such a pledge, the Empress
would rest on his good faith, and the betrothment should proceed. All
hope of escaping this hated union had long been over with Louis; and
on Elizabeth representing that some strange clouds had lately hung
over her husband's brow, which might burst, she knew not where, to the
subversion of all the Spanish plans, the young patriot was the more
readily persuaded to give the word of honour she required.
"But," added Louis, with a smothered sigh; "in the august ceremony of
next week, I conjure Your Majesty not to command me to be proxy!"
The Empress turned round.
"De Montemar! That is a bold petition. By what presumption, dare you
offer it to the mother of the Arch-duchess Maria Theresa?"
"Her Highness is young, and fearful of the engagements to which
that rite will bind her; and, as, in spite of myself, my heart will
dare to compassionate even a Princess, in a moment of such aweful
responsibility, I dread my weakness might dishonour the solemnity."
"And you have no weakness, but compassion for your future Princess?"
asked Elizabeth, turning her Pallas-like eyes, full upon him.
Louis felt their appeal; and while a blush of mingled sensibility and
modesty, coloured his manly cheek, he laid his hand on his breast and
answered, "None; on the life I would dedicate to her service, and to
that of her illustrious mother!"
The Empress turned from him, and walked up the room. Her own discretion
seconded his plea; and when she approached him again, it was with a
gracious countenance, and to say that his petition should be considered
with indulgence.
But when the Emperor returned with his daughter from the Luxemburg, a
competitor, more formidable than the image of de Montemar had taken its
station in the breast of the young Princess. The Prince of Lorraine
had been introduced to her rescue, in a contrived moment of danger on
the lake; and, in the confusion of fear, believing her preserver to be
Louis, she had thrown herself in speechless gratitude upon his bosom.
Her father, approaching, explained to her, that he who had saved her
from a watery grave, was Francis of Lorraine; and every day afterwards,
during her residence at the Luxemburg, she gladly admitted him to
her presence. The young Prince was of the same age with Louis; and
possessed so much of his grace of mind, as well as person, that he had
no difficulty (by tender and unobtrusive attentions,) in transforming
her fanciful attachment to De Montemar, into a grateful passion for
himself.
The understanding of Maria Theresa was beyond her years; but it was
tinctured by the systems of expediency amongst which she had imbibed
her education. She was therefore prepared to sustain her part in the
drama Routemberg was bringing on the tapis. Her father, apparently
moved by her abhorrence of the Spanish Prince, and her predilection for
the German one, sanctioned their mutual vows; but engaged her to keep
the whole affair secret from her mother, until he could find a safe
opportunity of breaking with the Spaniard. He exhorted her to persist
in refusing her presence on the proposed day of betrothment; he would
secretly support her resistance; and throw obstacles in the way of the
Empress's measures, until all should be obtained from Spain, and they
might finally throw off the mask.
The resolute opposition which Elizabeth now met with from her, who had,
hitherto, appeared like a drooping lilly, yielding unresistingly to the
heavy shower that bowed her to the earth, amazed and perplexed her. As
Charles had been careful to conceal his daughter's interviews with the
Prince of Lorraine, and Francis did not come to Vienna; the Empress
could trace no cause for this extraordinary change: and when she talked
to her husband, of Maria Theresa's stubborn refractoriness, he coldly
replied--
"The Marquis de Montemar has been admitted too familiarly to her
presence. He is, as seeming fair, as his father: he may be equally
false." Surprised at this unexpected, and, she was sure, unprovoked
aspersion on the Duke, the Empress cautiously took up the defence of
his unswerving truth.
"He is unworthy your confidence;" replied the Emperor, "for, after all
his affected hostility to Wharton, as the instigator of every vexatious
act from the Bavarian conspiracy, I have discovered from unquestionable
evidence, that he has secret intelligence with him. On what subjects,
ambition, boundless and wild as his own, can alone guess. Look to his
son, Elizabeth, and to our daughter."
Charles would not explain farther, and left the Empress in encreased
perplexity.
In vain she interrogated her daughter; in vain she insisted on her
union with Don Carlos: she was resolute in not answering a word to any
of the charges her mother put to her, as the reason for her refusal.
When the Empress was angry, Maria Theresa remained sullenly firm; when
her mother was tender and imploring, the hapless Princess wept in
silence, but would not yield.
One morning Elizabeth entered her daughter's apartment, with a
determination not to leave it, until she had brought her to the
point, whence, she was resolved there should be no escape. She spoke,
persuaded, threatened, implored; but the Princess was more obstinate
than ever; though, so agitated by her mother's language, that she fell
back in hysterical emotion into her chair. The violence of her disorder
discomposed her dress, and the vest of her robe bursting open, the
eye of her mother caught the glitter of something like the setting of
a picture. With an immediate impulse she snatched it from the bosom
of her daughter; and beheld, what she believed, the portrait of de
Montemar.
Her eyes, for a moment, fixed themselves with a horrid conviction of
a wide and nameless treachery. She looked from the picture to her
daughter, with a frightful glare, in their before mild aspect. Maria
Theresa, alarmed out of her hysterics, had sprung from her seat,
and stood before her mother, with her hands clasped, in speechless
supplication.
"And when did he give you this?" demanded Elizabeth, in a hollow, and
almost suffocated voice.
The Princess dropped, trembling on her knees, without power of
utterance; for, not aware of her mother's mistake, she thought the
discovery of the Prince's picture in her breast, had betrayed the
secret of her father: and, on its preservation, he had taught her to
believe, entirely depended her future happiness.
"Theresa, I command you, to confess to me, the whole of de Montemar's
treachery. When did he dare to give you this?--and--unhappy, degenerate
girl! how did you dare to give the encouragement, to warrant such
treasonable presumption?"
Every word that now fell from the agitated Empress was balm to the
affrighted nerves of her daughter. Her father's secret was then safe;
and, still retaining her humble position, she said in faultering
accents; "Spare, de Montemar, my gracious mother! As I hope to see
heaven, he is guiltless of all my offences against you. But ask me no
more--I dare not answer it."
"He has bound you by a vow! or, you, wretched dupe, have disgraced your
sex----"
The mother's lips could not finish the charge she was about to put upon
her innocent child. She paused, and threw herself into a chair; for her
own heart recollected its youthful and chaste admiration of the father
of this very de Montemar, and she burst into tears. The picture fell to
the floor. Theresa looked where it lay, but forbore to touch it. Her
heart was softened at her mother's silent tears; and her own trickling
down her cheeks, she ventured to take the Empress's hand, and put it
to her lips. Elizabeth pressed the filial hand that trembled in her's;
and then Theresa faintly articulated,--
"Oh, my mother! release me from this horrid betrothment, and you shall
know every thought and deed of this agonized heart!"
The Empress dried the tears from her eyes, and turning gently on her
child,--"I pity you, Theresa," said she, "but I can do no more. You
are born a princess; and your inevitable fate is to marry, not where
your inclinations may prompt, but where the interests of your country
dictate. Your birth-right gives you a sceptre, ordains you to be the
dispenser of good or evil, to millions of dependent subjects; and you
have nothing to do with love, with private, selfish joys. We, that are
born to such destinies, must forswear the one, or resign the other."
"Then let the Electress of Bavaria take the reversion of the German
empire!" exclaimed the Princess, ardently, "let me resign all state
and power, and only make me the happy wife of ----"
She checked herself, and buried her head in her mothers lap.
"Of him you must never see again!" returned the Empress, rising from
her seat, and kissing the burning forehead of her daughter as she
replaced her in her chair.
"I pardon your youth and innocence; and yet, was it innocence to forget
the claims of Otteline upon his heart? Oh, my child, how deep must
have been his wiles! That unblushing face of falsehood; that affected
champion of honour! Never, never, will I forgive him. Theresa, you
have seen de Montemar for the last time, till you are the wife of his
prince."
As she spoke, she moved back, and found something under her foot. She
stepped aside. It was the portrait which she had crushed, crystal and
ivory, into one shattered mass. The half-smothered cry of Theresa at
the sight of the destruction, and the tears which gushed from her eyes,
as, she involuntarily sprung forward to save the obliterated relics,
confounded and penetrated her mother. While she hung, weeping, over
them, the Empress drew a troubled sigh, and quitted the apartment.
In passing to her own chamber she met the Emperor, and, in the
agitation of her maternal fears, told him all that had passed. Her
heated prepossession changed the tacit acquiescence of her daughter, in
the portrait having been that of Louis, into a positive confession that
it was so. Charles was rather surprised at so direct a falsehood from
his daughter; but as it was to maintain his secret, he rather wondered
at her presence of mind, than blamed its obliquity.
The Empress talked herself into every suspicion of Louis's arts towards
the Princess, and insulting coldness to his own affianced bride. While
the Emperor stimulated her wrath, he tried to spread it from the son
to the father, by new insinuations against the sincerity of both. He
dwelt upon certain documents he possessed, that the quarrel at the
Cardinal's, was concerted between Ripperda and Wharton, to blind the
French minister, who had suspected their private friendship. He also
mentioned the stolen glances which the Electress of Bavaria was often
observed to give to de Montemar; and that he generally replied to them
in the same clandestine way. It had been noticed in the Prato; and
particularly at the assemblies of the Countess Lichtenstein, where,
one night, the Electress evidently dropped her fan before him, that
he might take it up; and, as he presented it, she closed her hand
over his as she received it,--"and gave it a quick pressure, and a
glance," continued the Emperor, "that pretty plainly declared they
were no strangers." The Empress listened to all with greedy, because
prejudiced attention. But nothing of the information affected her with
regard to Ripperda; a partial spirit presided in her mind, when he was
accused; and she would believe nothing of such aimless treachery. Of
Louis she now entertained the very worst opinion; and she determined
to send for him immediately, and tax him at once with all that she had
heard, against both his father and himself.
Charles remarked, that he knew from one or two of his young
chamberlains, that Louis's profligacy was equal to his talents; that he
was a constant frequenter of the most dissipated circles in Vienna; and
therefore, he intimated the impropriety of committing the reputation
of the Arch-duchess, by even implying to so vain and unprincipled
a young man, the least hint of her preference for him; or allowing
the possibility of his daring to turn an eye of passion upon her.
Elizabeth saw the delicacy of this caution; and while she consented to
restrict her reproaches to political subjects alone, she determined to
revenge herself on his presumption and duplicity, by precipitating the
marriage she knew he abhorred.
CHAP. VII.
While this was passing at the palace, dispatches arrived from Madrid.
On breaking the seals of the packet of the latest date, Louis perceived
that the Queen supposed the Arch-duchess was now the betrothed of
her son, for it contained congratulatory letters on the event. But,
there was also another which might not be quite so pleasing to
Elizabeth, although Louis felt it came too late for him. He received
copies, of what were inclosed for the Imperial pair; and this one was
from Isabella to the Empress, retracting any consent she might have
implied, to the Marquis de Montemar's marriage with Countess Altheim.
It was written with apologies, and regrets for the necessity, but it
was positive. Ripperda accompanied this unexpected refusal, with a
laboured epistle to his imperial friend. He excused the Queen's changed
sentiments, by pleading a great point which she hoped to gain, by
uniting his son in a different direction. With sincerity, he expressed
his own distress, at being obliged to yield his wishes in favour of
the Empress's beautiful protege, to the duty he owed his sovereign;
but, he concluded, with repeating, that in all essential circumstances,
Elizabeth should find she had put no vain trust in Ripperda.
After all the polite cunning of Isabella's letter, and the hard-wrung
finesse of her minister's, it was easy to discern that truth was
conveyed in neither.
The fact was simply this:--De Patinos's correspondence with his friends
at Madrid, and the whisperings of Orendayn, when he arrived there,
had gradually made their way to the Queen, with insinuations and
representations of the Empress's personal power over the Duke and his
son. So much was said, that her jealousy was at last excited, to check
it from proceeding further; and to try how far it could cope with her
own influence in the same quarter, she told Ripperda her intentions
that Louis should break with the Countess Altheim, and marry one she
should hereafter name. Not suspecting her motive, he represented the
hazard of putting so great an affront on the favourite of the Empress.
Isabella was a passionate woman; and, when self-will urged her,
she often acted as pertinaciously against her judgment, as against
her counsellors. On this subject, she would hear no reasoning; no
representation of the vexatious resentments that might be anticipated
from Elizabeth. The more he dwelt on the Empress's mortification,
the more she was resolved to excite it. She felt something of female
vanity, as well as sovereign pride, in this opportunity of shewing
her rival Elizabeth, that she could make Ripperda sacrifice his early
friend's wishes to his new mistress's commands.
Isabella was peremptory, and the dispatch was sent off; and with
additional triumph too, for letters had arrived from Vienna to some
of the attendants at court, mentioning the departure of a messenger
to Madrid with accounts of the royal betrothment. In vain Ripperda
protested against acting on such vague information; or indeed, on any
information that did not come in the regular official train. Isabella
laughed at his fears, and derided the idea that a rupture between his
son and the favourite of the Empress, could have any effect on the
marriage of her son, with the heiress of the Empire.
The messenger set off, and the issue soon followed.
While Louis was reading these dispatches, he received a summons from
Elizabeth, to attend her immediately. He took the packet that was for
Her Majesty, and proceeded to the Altheim apartments. The Empress was
there, but she hardly noticed him when he entered the room. She had
caught a glimpse of his face as he approached; and the sight of its
seeming nobleness incensed her the more against his actual dishonour.
She gave no credence to the story that had been told her of his
father's insincerity. She knew the slanderous inventions of envy, and
she confided, without a shadow of doubting, in the friend she had
trusted from her youth. But for the delinquency of his son, she had
ocular demonstration; and her indignation was hardly to be repressed.
Louis presented the Queen's and his father's letters. Elizabeth
commanded him to read them. He obeyed without remark, though with an
unsteady voice, as he uttered communications he knew were so hostile to
her expectation. She listened in speechless amazement, first to the
one and then to the other. When he had finished, she took them from his
hand, and turning them round in agitated silence, examined their seals
and writing.
"It is his hand!" cried she, in a tone, from which the convictions in
her bosom had rifled all its sweetness. Then turning to Louis, with all
her lately suppressed wrath, flashing from her eyes, "It is meet that
a false tongue should have read such false language! Louis de Montemar
you are a traitor to me and mine, and your father is the same. He abets
his treacherous son, to the ruin of a name, of fifty years' unblemished
honour."
Louis was not less astonished at this charge, than the Empress had been
at the communication which aroused it. But attributing her displeasure,
to a suspicion that he had wrought on his father to influence the Queen
to prevent his marriage, after the momentary shock of his, first
surprise, he calmly and respectfully answered her;--"that he was as
faithful to all his bonds, made under the sanction of Her Majesty, as
he believed, were the dictates of his father's heart. He regarded his
promises to her, and his engagements to the Countess Altheim, as now
too sacred to be broken by him, even at the command of his sovereign."
"Indeed?" Answered Elizabeth, hardly attempting to conceal her scornful
doubt of his sincerity.
Her manner amazed him; it was so unlike the aspect of fair
interpretation, with which she usually discussed a dubious subject.
"And you will marry the Countess Altheim?" continued she.
"Assuredly, Madam."
"And knowing my affection for her, you will generously leave her with
me? You will follow the suite of my daughter to Spain, and you will
become the bosom Counsellor of the wife of your Prince? I apprehend
your honour and your loyalty?"
She paused, and fixed her eyes on the calm astonishment of his. There
was a haughty condemnation in her looks, he could not misunderstand;
but still he was at a loss to account for the origin of so unmerited a
judgment; and with the confident appeal of an unburthened conscience,
he entreated to be told how he had incurred the displeasure he read in
her words and manner.
She too well remembered the Emperor's caution to explain the offence,
though the resentment of a suffering mother could not be entirely
repressed. She cast down her indignant eyes, and with petrifying
coldness replied:
"Your offence is of no moment. The shadow of an eclipse, which leaves
no stain on the fair disk it would have darkened! But your father! He
cannot start from his sphere, without troubling nations, and quenching
his own rays, which should have shone to eternity!"
While the Empress spoke of Ripperda, it was rather to utter the
lamentations of her heart, over the dereliction of the coadjutor in
whom she gloried; than addressing his son, who, she now thought,
too worthless for remonstrance. She sat for a few minutes, looking
abstractedly down, grasping the letter she had received. He did not
interrupt her reverie. Conscious of no blame in himself; and equally
convinced of his father's uprightness; with patient respect, he awaited
her further explanation. At last she looked towards him, with an
austere, but calm countenance. She opened her charge against the Duke,
by repeating what the Emperor had told her of the pretended exchange of
insults between Wharton and Ripperda at the table of Giovenozzo. She
avowed that she had repelled the story as a slander; but the letter she
held in her hand, proved that Ripperda could surrender her dearest
wishes, to his own fancied interests. She warmed in resentment, as she
dwelt on his base compliance with the caprice of Isabella.
"One failure in fidelity," continued she, "is a sufficient earnest.--I
believe the rest."
As the Empress had proceeded in her allegation, Louis's countenance
brightened at the unfounded tale; and, without reserve, he unfolded to
her all his father's hostility to Wharton: all at least, that he knew;
for he was yet ignorant that the contention at the Cardinal's had ended
in bloodshed. He spoke of his own attachment to the English Duke; but,
that by the commands of his father, he had passed him by as a stranger,
and was admonished never to consider him as a friend. Having exacted
such a sacrifice from his son; and politically opposed every measure of
Wharton's during his life; was it credible, that he would now stake
the grand objects of his existence, by forming a clandestine union with
a man, with whom he had no common interest, and whose personal self he
determinately hated?
"If my father ever had a sin in his son's eyes," continued Louis, "it
was, and is the inveteracy of that hatred."
During this defence, the Empress frequently shook her head; and when it
was finished, she rose from her chair.
"It will not do!" said she, "I see the brink on which I stood, and the
consequences must come."
"Madam," replied Louis, "I conjure you, by the completion of your own
object, in supporting my father in his labours for the peace of Europe;
I conjure you, not to permit the accusations of real traitors, to turn
your confidence from as true a benefactor of the human race, as ever
devoted his life to man! Their tongues, when credited by your ears,
are of more mortal stroke, than all the daggers which struck at him
under the garb of the Sieur Ignatius."
"And what is your tongue? Dissembling de Montemar!" cried she, "had
you been true, those words, that voice, would have been evidence to
out-weigh a multitude. But you are false;--and your father suffers by
his advocate."
"In what am I false?" cried Louis, "not in affirming my father's
integrity; for I am ready to seal my evidence with my blood!--Not
in re-affirming my resolution to marry the Countess Altheim; for
I am ready to pass through the ceremony, whenever Your Majesty
commands!--But I should be false, indeed, were I to say, that I
performed my hard-wrung word of honour, with my heart as well as my
hand."
"Then you dare avow----?" demanded the Empress, turning rapidly towards
him, and then checking herself.
"No more than what I once presumed to tell Your Majesty, on the same
knee, with which I now bend before this incomprehensible displeasure.
I then said, and I now repeat, that, finding all her principles
discordant to mine, it is her own exaction, and my honour alone, that
compels me to make her my wife. Truth urges me to this last avowal; and
self-defence, that her benefactres may judge if he can be false, who
redeems his honour at the price of his happiness."
"Happiness! honour!" cried the Empress, and she laughed bitterly;
"young hypocrite, I penetrate all thy artifice!--But if you can have a
hope, that I shall pardon what I know, meet my Otteline at the altar
on the very day she returns from Brunswick. Treat her with the duties
of a husband, and the respect due to my friend; and once more the name
of de Montemar may be heard by me without detestation."
With these words the Empress turned away, and left the chamber. Louis
returned home, appalled and distressed, by the scene which had just
passed. He saw there were charges against himself in her bosom, which
she did not chuse to deliver; to rest under them might be dangerous;
and how could he confute what she disdained to utter?
CHAP. VIII.
In the midst of this confusion of mind, he arrived at the Palais
d'Espagne, and was immediately involved in a host of perplexing
discussions. Ministers and messengers awaited him in various
apartments. As supereminent talent, united with virtue and power,
has a force almost omnipotent; the powers of Europe, who aimed at
aggrandisement by dishonest policies and aggression, dreaded the
master-hand of the new minister of Spain.
This was a fact, enforced on Louis, in each succeeding audience; but
while the remonstrances, and even threats of the representatives of
these princes, assailed him in their different hours of conference;
other applicants, in the shape of consuls and agents passing to
various countries, spoke of the Spanish trade, which now embraced
the habitable globe; and added to the account, that while the sun of
Ripperda's glory thus spread its rays over the whole earth; warming,
cheering, and fructifying to the distant poles; he turned his careful
eye, with all a parent's interest, to the internal policy of Spain.
By his exhortations and his example, he persuaded the grandees to come
down from their sterile heights of indolent enjoyment; to disperse
their riches by the patronage of genius; and to excite the people
to industry by generously rewarding its labours. As for the people
themselves, they whom the unworked-for golden tides from America had
gradually sunk into stupid pride, and at last left to squallid poverty,
he aroused them from their lethargy and laziness, by appearing to
take pleasure in their interests; by visiting them in their towns and
villages; and stimulating them to bring prosperity to them all, by the
active labours of agriculture, manufactures, and commerce.
For nearly two centuries the Spanish people had been a nation of
drones; they were now become a common-wealth of bees, and the hive
filled with honey. The origin of the change was honoured as a god; and
while,
"He raised his voice, and stretched his sceptred hand,"
perhaps he sometimes forgot that he yet was mortal.
But there is a pinnacle of human success and of human opinion, on which
human foot was never yet permitted to rest. He who has attained it
grows giddy, and the fiercest winds are summoned to blow him from his
eminence. Man's enthusiasm in praise of a fellow mortal, is soon damped
by the original sin of his nature--rebellious pride! and where he
cannot find a mote in the eye he once thought omniscient, he will fancy
a beam; and proclaiming the discovery, the supposed blind guide is at
once thrust into utter darkness.
Such spirits were now at work against Ripperda, both in Spain, and
in the rival countries; and their labour in undermining, and laying
trains, was equal to the great object of their overthrow. Routemberg in
the German Court, and de Castallor, (the father of de Patinos,) in the
Spanish, permitted neither sun nor stars to set upon a pause in their
deep and dangerous machinations. Their agents were indefatigable and
subtle; and as they were various, and apparently insignificant, the
work moved onward as surely as invisibly, to the object of its aim.
The Empress was now assailed, daily and hourly, with information, which
none would have dared to hint, had she not betrayed to her husband,
some signs of doubting the perfect sincerity of Ripperda. A thousand
things were brought forward to prove his entire devotion to his new
country; the devotion indeed, of ambition; for it was made apparent
to her, that he was now its actual sovereign. Philip was a puppet in
his hand; and the queen, who had exalted Ripperda to such despotic
power, was to be propitiated, by every sacrifice to her caprice. One
of her humours was to unite the son of her minister, with a niece of
the widowed Queen of Saint Germain's. It was represented to Elizabeth,
that Ripperda had sanctioned the pragmatic deed, not so much to gratify
her, as to flatter the ambition of Don Carlos, in making him the
husband of the future Empress; and that his reconciliation to Duke
Wharton, who was alike the emissary of the Stuart, and of the Bavarian
factions, might now be accounted for: though the termination of such
complicated and opposing views were certainly beyond calculation.
These, and other innuendoes, and references to the remaining articles,
public and private, of the late treaty, were amply descanted on; and
the misled and irritated Elizabeth, (the more irritated, on account
of her personal regard for Ripperda,) was wrought to so high a pitch
of indignation, that she did not deign to answer either his, or the
queen's letters on the premature congratulation and withdrawn consent.
She resolved to harass them on one object, and to disappoint them
in the other; and while she countermanded the preparations for the
betrothment of her daughter, she hurried every arrangement for the
marriage of her favourite. From the hour of her last interview
with Louis, she never admitted him to her presence; but she wrote
to Otteline to hasten her return to Vienna, although she knew her
venerable father lay at that time at the point of death.
Elizabeth now took as much pains to proclaim the intended union of
Countess Altheim, with the son of the Duke de Ripperda, as she had
before been cautious to conceal it. The astonishment it excited,
broke out in wonder from some, and lamentations from others. It was
the conversation of every circle; and discussed according to the
dispositions, or views of the speakers. Princess de Waradin wept over
her disappointed wishes for her daughter; and Countess Lichtenstein
railed at the mortification of hers. The women, in general, were
incensed at such a triumph, for a woman they despised; and the men
smiled on each other, at the young minister's folly. Count Sinzendorff
alone felt no surprise; for he had seen Louis's entanglement, from the
moment he knew of his renewed visits at the Altheim apartments. He,
therefore, did as he said; made no further observation, but conducted
himself to his young friend with grave distance. Louis, understood it;
and durst not, then, offer an apology, by revealing the truth. Now, the
Empress had declared it; and Louis felt, that all knew his shame, in
having pledged himself to the most venal, most contemned woman, in the
German Empire!
Letters arrived from Otteline, which told her patroness that her
invalid was no more; and that a certain day should see her at the
feet of her mistress. Elizabeth suppressed the death of the old man,
resolved that nothing should delay the ceremony which should make Louis
her favourite's vassal for life; and the only time she condescended to
notice him before the arrival of his bride, was to name the day, and
command him to prepare for his nuptials. He bowed in silence, and she
passed on.
He had written a distinct account to his father, of the Empress's
charges against him, and of her inexplicable conduct to himself; he
had also enforced the necessity of fulfilling their mutual engagements
to Countess Otteline; and affirmed his own intention of immediately
obeying the commands of Elizabeth to that effect. Having dispatched
this letter, he prepared to go through the unavoidable sacrifice with
propriety and composure of heart; and he determined to act by her with
forbearance and kindness, though he felt that it was to a living death
he was consigning that heart; he was preparing himself, as one wedding
the cold tenant of the grave.
From meditations such as these, he walked abroad into the open air of
a retired glade, diverging from the gardens of the Palais d'Espagne,
towards the Danube. The evening gale was fresh and cheering, but still
the load was on his soul; no breeze could waft it hence, no sigh could
shake it from its deep adhesive lodgement.
"I contemned love!" said he, to himself; "I despised the tranquil and
blissful joys of heart meeting heart, in the tender and pure relation
of wedded affections. I must aspire to the agitating transports of
self-devotion, in scenes of sacrifice and peril! I must be all for
glory, or be nothing! And now, I bleed in soul, for glory, and the
result of this proud, unnatural heart, will be nothing! O, no; the
worm is there that never dies! The consciousness of having taken to my
bosom, a creature I despise; a woman, whom the world derides; and who
paralizes every feeling within me, of father, husband, friend. Yes,
ennobling love, honourable marriage," cried he, "you are revenged!"
He went on, ruminating on the vain shadow, into which his over-heated
ambition to act and to be distinguished, had involved him. He had been
bewildered in its intricacies,--but not intimidated by its thunderings
and its lightnings; he had pressed forward in the visionary atmosphere,
till the gulph met him; and, alas, in what early youth did it betray
him to this deep destruction!
He was returning homewards through an umbrageous aisle of chesnuts,
which led by the backs of the superb gardens, when he saw Duke Wharton
turn suddenly into the same avenue. There was not a creature in it
but themselves. Wharton and he were approaching each other; but the
Duke was walking musing forward, without raising his eyes, as in the
abstraction of thought, he was dashing away the pebbles in his path,
with the point of his sword.
The instant Louis beheld him, Elizabeth's accusations against his
father rushed to his mind; but their confutation came in the same
moment. He remembered how his father had execrated this noble enemy,
even at the time he declared his worth. He remembered his father had
acknowledged to him that the wine he drank at the Cardinal's had
affected him as wine never did before, and maddened his blood. In this
mood, he pressed insult upon Wharton, and Wharton revenged himself, by
screening his adversary from blame, and apologizing as the offender!
Ripperda, having brought himself to relieve his proud sense of
obligation, by this avowal to his son, had commanded his silence on the
subject for ever; but the remembrance was anchored in his heart.
At sight of this generous enemy, this faithful friend, how could he
restrain the grateful impulse to fling himself into his arms! Wharton
was alone; no one was near to report the momentary recognition!
"Duke Wharton!" cried he.
Wharton looked up, and, for an instant, around; his face lightened with
the flash of joyful surprise, and opening his arms, Louis did indeed
throw himself into them.
"Oh, this hug!" cried the Duke, as he strained him to his bounding
heart; "it is the resurrection of confidence in man. You are true,
and it matters not who is false." "True! for ever true!" cried
Louis, grasping the hand of his friend with unutterable feelings. In
proportion to his conviction, that love would henceforth be denied
him, his sensibilities pointed all to friendship; and poured into that
sacred flame the collected blaze.
"I needed these honest throbs to tell me so!" replied Wharton, "but
the world has reported and slandered Louis de Montemar, as I once
prophesied."
"Oh, Wharton, how much is on my soul, that you have so generously
endured for me and mine! Again and again, I have turned from you,
when that soul followed you. I fled from you in the palace; but you
know that my residence at Vienna was then to be concealed. I treated
your clinging friendship with harshness, and yet you pardoned me; you
risqued your safety, to preserve myself and the Sieur Ignatius from
danger. And when wine had unselfed my noble father, you received his
passionate insults with forbearance and forgiveness! Wharton, had I a
thousand hearts, they should be yours, for this unconquered friendship."
"And had I as many, dear de Montemar, to transfer into your breast,
they would be insufficient to repay the life you saved to me, in that
of Maria of Bavaria."
The Duke then hastily recapitulated the Electress's account of the
transaction, and her increased gratitude for his having maintained it
so profound a secret. Louis listened with pleasure, and dwelt with
delight on the interesting Princess and her son. Wharton smiled at
his animation: and, with all his former sparkling archness, softly
repeated,--
"Dum tu, Lydia, Telephi
Cervicem roseam, & cerea Telephi
Laudas Brachia, v meum
Fervens difficili bile tumet jecur."
Louis smiled also; but it was accompanied by a mantling cheek.
The praises of women might now have passed unnoticed, from their
familiarity; and, in general, it would have been so, but he respected
the Electress, and admiration from her recalled the blush of modest
consciousness. The Duke intimated a possibility of contriving a meeting
between her, Louis, and himself, at her villa on Mount Calenberg.
"I have much to say to you, de Montemar," added he, "much of
importance. That rare voice of thine has conjured a devil out of Philip
Wharton; and now you must have the arcana of his heart."
Louis looked on him, and grasped his hand; "and could you, indeed,
doubt me?"
"I will tell you more anon," replied Wharton; "come to-morrow night,
at ten o'clock, to Mount Calenberg. There will be no danger in such a
place, but much mystery, and, added he, with gaiety,---
"As veiled charms are fairest,
So stolen joys are dearest."
Before Louis could answer in the negative, he heard voices in the
adjoining garden. The friends were standing close to the wall; but on
these sounds they moved away; and a key presently turned in the door.
"You come?" cried Wharton, as his hand gave the pressure of farewell.
"Impossible," returned Louis.
Wharton stood for a moment.
"You must," cried he, "since she will dare it! But there can be no
discovery."
"I dare not, for my life and honour."
"For your father's life and honour, you must dare every thing! Osez
is my badge, and you will be wise to make it yours."
Wharton uttered this with a peculiar force of voice, and aweful
expression in his countenance. Louis was thunderstruck: and yet, how
could his father be involved in Wharton's demand? He was in Spain,
and no longer in danger from his former enemies! "My father's honour
forbids my compliance," replied he; "I dare not go to the Electress's
villa; I dare not meet, even you, by design."
The garden door at that moment opened, and a bevy of persons issued
from it. Wharton dropped the hand of his friend. "Faithless, deluded
de Montemar!" cried he; and breaking away, the friends mutually
disappeared.
CHAP. IX.
The influence of Ripperda over the minds of the King and Queen of
Spain had reached its acm. Isabella's enthusiasm for the new minister
was more like passion than patronage; and Philip's deference to him
possessed all the fanatic zeal of the devotee who worships the object
he has beatified. The King believed he had converted Ripperda to the
Catholic faith, and he exulted in the reclaimed heretic as a future
saint.
The minister's eye kept steady to one point; to raise the country
he governed, to the utmost pinnacle of earthly grandeur. But his
manner of conducting his projects, and demeaning himself after their
accomplishment, had suffered a rapid and extraordinary change since
he returned from Vienna. During his voyage from Genoa to Barcelona
he was attacked by a delirious fever, in consequence of the wound he
had received in his rencontre with the banditti of the Appenines. It
seemed to have jarred his nerves and affected his temper; or rather
to have taken off the curb which his self-control had hitherto kept
on the motions of his passions; but this alteration did not appear at
first. His habits of universal suavity prevailed for a time, until he
launched so deeply into business, as to forget all minor considerations
in its great results. He became not merely zealous, but impetuous in
the prosecution of his objects; not merely determined on a point, but
dogmatical in its assertion. He did not now persuade the Lords of the
Council, by his always subduing eloquence; but he commanded from the
consciousness of mental superiority, and the conviction of his power to
execute all his designs. The pride of the Grandees was incensed, and
the precipitation with which he urged forward all degrees of persons,
rather offended than served them. There is a restiveness in human
nature that resists compulsion, even to its own manifest advantage.
Ripperda saw no will but his own; he was sure of its great purpose,
and, therefore, stopped not to solicit the good from others, he
believed he could do more shortly himself. He went careering forward to
his point, overturning and wounding; but as he speeded on, he left a
train of enemies behind.
Even the King and Queen began to start from the patriotic despot they
had raised. Enamoured of his vision of happiness for Spain, he snatched
the prerogative too openly from their hands, and conceded privileges
to the people, novel to the Spanish laws. He dared to oppose the
extirpating power of the inquisition, by protecting certain Jewish
merchants from its fangs; and this being represented to Philip, as a
proof of his being a heretic in his heart, the monarch considered it
unanswerable, and determined to watch him narrowly. His most active
enemy with the Queen was Donna Laura; her nurse and confidant, an old
Italian, totally abandoned to avarice. Being irritated by his late
disdain of propitiating her as formerly, by successive magnificent
presents; she sold her interest in another quarter, and studied day
and night to destroy him in the favour of her mistress. She knew where
Isabella was particularly vulnerable; her vanity as a woman; and the
crafty dame had many stories to recount of Ripperda's early devotion
to Elizabeth. She insinuated, that it was rather to be near her than
to negociate for Spain, that he so willingly consented to go to Vienna
in disguise; and she easily corroborated her assertion, by turning
Isabella's attention to his gradually changing manner since his
return. But Isabella did not require to be reminded of the cessation of
his homage. Ripperda had lately omitted all those gallant attentions,
which spoke the lover, who may only dare to devote his heart and his
life to the pure object of his wishes, while she moves above him in
unsullied light, like Cynthia in her distant heavens.
Without adulation of this kind, Isabella could not exist; and it never
came so sweet from any lips as those of Ripperda; it never beamed with
so graceful a homage from other eyes. It was her delight to mingle
politics and chivalric devotion, in their long conferences. It was her
triumph, in the crowded court, to see his eyes fixed alone on her; and
to behold herself envied by her ladies as a woman, as much as she was
respected by them as their Queen. But when the change took place; and,
regardless of these useful arts, he became absorbed in his duties;
then, Laura taught her to believe he thought only of Elizabeth.
His enemies in the cabinet were quick to perceive when their devices
had taken effect on the King and Queen. Amongst the most formidable
of these illustrious conspirators, was the hoary headed Marquis de
Grimaldo, whose disgrace had preceded Ripperda's taking the supreme
chair. The old Grandee held a strict watch over his successor's
proceedings; and made it the business of his life to collect
observations on his minutest actions, and to misrepresent, or aggravate
them, to the ears of jealous Majesty. The Marquis de Castallor, who had
lost the office of Secretary at War, when the new minister absorbed it
in his ample grasp, joined with Grimaldo, heart and hand, to overthrow
his Colossal power. To this end they spread a distorted epitome of
his favourite views, amongst their retainers. These disseminated them
to the people, with proper commentaries, in dark hints and distant
observations. Ripperda was talked of as the son of a rebel; one who
had been born in a heretic country, and educated in its faith; who
had embraced the true church, merely from ambition; who was depriving
the Grandees of their privileges; and devising plans to reduce the
gentlemen of Spain to the rank of bourgeois and slaves, by turning
them to bodily labour and mechanic trades, and abridging them of their
evening siesta and morning revels under the shade of their groves.
While the fortress was undermining at home, they were not idle, who
were preparing to storm it from abroad. France, saw with apprehension,
His Catholic Majesty drawing such strict bonds with the house of
Austria. The States General were alarmed at the treaty of commerce.
England proclaimed a rough indignation at the demand for Gibraltar,
which Austria had made in behalf of Spain. And, it being reported
amongst the nations, that Ripperda's views were to compel by force,
what he could not obtain by negociation, his overthrow was considered
a common cause. The various silent armaments, which commenced on this
resolution, were represented in appalling colours to Philip; and as
the Court of Austria so slowly performed its part in the treaty, his
apprehensions were more easily awakened. The insincerity and insult of
this delay were doubled in effect by the private correspondence of De
Patinos to his father, who spoke mysteriously of the determination of
Charles's cabinet, from some hidden cause, not to perform any more of
their engagements.
Louis, meanwhile, unconscious of the storm that was circling round his
father's head in Spain, was stemming his way through the traversing
movements of his enemies at the Austrian Court. He contended firmly for
his political objects, but resigned himself with desperate despair,
to the current which bore his private happiness to destruction. He
had obeyed an intimation from the Empress, that Countess Altheim was
arrived, and prepared to name the day and hour for their nuptials;
and he went to her apartments to receive the abhorred appointment
from herself. She met him with all her smiles; for the memento of the
lowlines of her origin, presented to her in the domestic scene she had
just left, stimulated her joy at the prospect of being elevated out of
these humbling impressions, by the pomp of an illustrious marriage.
She had just quitted the bed of death, had just closed the eyes of a
respectable parent; and yet had vanity so steeled her soul to every
feeling of filial nature, that, banishing all, as a thing with which
she had no concern, she turned alone to views of splendid rivalry: and,
when Louis appeared, exultation in the full Court of the Empress swam
before her eyes with his entering form.
With unaffected rapture, she met his ceremonious salute, and softly
whispered, as his cold cheek touched hers, that she knew the object
of his visit. It was soon discussed. For Louis had hardly repeated
in words, what his promise to Elizabeth extorted, before her ready
favourite named the evening of the following day. He felt the paleness
of his countenance spread to his heart; and, without pulsation in his
veins, his lips parted in a vacant smile; and he suffered the glowing
hand she had put into his, to remain unnoticed in his motionless grasp.
At this moment, the Empress entered; and Otteline prevented any
involuntary exhibition of her resentment at the frozen demeanor of her
lover, by rising hastily, and as hastily informing Her Majesty that
she had obeyed her commands in naming her nuptials for the morrow.
Elizabeth read the despair of his countenance, as he started from
his seat at her approach; and, triumphing in her victory, she seemed
in that hour to forget all her inexplicable coldness, and to be as
gracious as ever. She embraced Otteline; and gave him her hand to kiss,
with repeated expressions of future confidence in the husband of her
friend.
The marriage was to be solemnised with unexampled magnificence in
the chapel of the palace; and the equipage which was to convey the
favourite to her husband's residence, was to be the gift of her
patroness. Louis summoned himself as well as he could, to perform that
with cheerfulness, which it was right to do at all; and, he conducted
himself, during the remainder of the interview, with respect to his
future bride, and extorted gratitude to her mistress.
The remainder of the day was passed in his official duties; but when
evening came, he could not endure his own thoughts; the anticipations
of to-morrow sickened and distracted him; and he rushed out, to fly
himself, and the image of her who had blighted all his prospects.
He hurried to the Hotel d'Ettres; but the scenes of careless gaiety
he saw there, seemed only to chafe his mind. The sight of young men of
his own years; some, with similar pursuits, moving on with honour; and
others, worthlessly wasting their time; but all, free and untortured
by bonds like his; barbed him to the quick: and he was hurrying from
the splendid mockery, when in the outward saloon, which was almost
solitary, he was met by the Countess Claudine. She accosted him with
wonder at his early flight. In his eagerness to escape, he made some
senseless excuse. Laughing, she put her fair hand upon his arm, and
told him a little more civility to her, and a little less impatience
towards his intended bride, would, at that moment, be more becoming,
in the representative of the most gallant nation in Europe! Louis
rallied himself to reply in her own way; and putting her arm through
his, she drew him back into the rooms. In her brilliant discourse,
so sparkling with wit, so exquisite in sentiment, she united all the
varied powers of "Bland Aspasia, and the Lesbian Maid;" and Louis
felt grateful for the lively interest with which she, evidently tried
to amuse him, during the long protracted evening. But ere they parted,
while she was walking with him down an illuminated and solitary avenue
of orange-trees that led from the supper-room, she contrived to let him
know that every body wondered at his having persuaded Countess Altheim
to so indecorous a step, as to meet him at the nuptial altar before the
ashes of her father had been consigned to the grave. Louis repelled
this charge from himself; and declared his belief that Claudine had
received wrong information respecting the death of Monsieur de Blaggay,
as it had never been intimated to him. His fair companion shook her
head, and while she turned her full bright eyes upon his face, she
calmly said:
"Were you convinced of this fact, would you marry the woman who could
commit so unfeeling a sacrilege on the memory of her parent?"
Louis could make only one answer, and he did it with downcast eyes.
"These are questions, Madam, to which I can give no reply. At this
moment, I consider Countess Altheim as having every claim on me; and
her character is under my protection."
"Generous, de Montemar!" replied Claudine, "How have you been entangled
in this engagement! I see your heart, and I urge no more. But forgive
me, that I lament such a destiny for such a man? Had all men your
honour----"
She interrupted herself with a convulsive sigh, and wringing, rather
than pressing the hand she had unconsciously snatched, she parted from
him. Louis disbelieved the story of Monsieur de Blaggay's death; but
he was affected by the manner of his accomplished informer; and slowly
withdrawing through the now almost deserted rooms, mused on the variety
of human misery.
CHAP. X.
When that sun arose, which, he believed, was to set on him a completed
wretch, he turned from its beams with a loathing sense of what his vain
credulity and headlong passion had brought upon him; a joyless youth,
an old age of desolation! How different from his home of Lindisfarne!
But he could not bear the reflection, and with fevered impatience, he
hurried through the business of the morning.
At three o'clock, just as he had shut himself into his study, to
brood over his last hours of liberty; and to consecrate them to the
unburthening of his full soul to his venerable uncle, in a letter,
which, while he wrote, he thought it would be cruelty to send; a
billet was brought him from the Empress: it contained these lines:
"A circumstance, which shall be explained hereafter, delays your
nuptials. Otteline is gone for a few days to the Luxemburg to join
my daughter. Tomorrow, at noon, be in the boudoir, and you will meet
Elizabeth."
This was heaven's reprieve to Louis; suspension was life, and with
almost hope of some unlooked-for escape, he repaired in the evening
to the Chateau de Phaffenberg. His object in visiting that lonely
habitation, was to consult papers that remained there, on a dispatch he
was making up for Sweden.
While the gorgeous sun-set, by which he had extracted the memorandums,
dissolved into a bloomy twilight; and the soft moon was rising in
silvering glory over the hills, Louis felt the soothing aspect of
nature; and gliding through the garden door, which stood half open, he
stood for a moment viewing the scene before him.
"How beautiful is nature!" exclaimed he, "how unobtruse her loveliness,
how guileless all her charms!"
He gently descended the steps of the terrace. All was still. Not a
zephyr ruffled the leaf of a rose, and a soft breathing fragrance
bathed his reposing senses. He walked on, and thought of the rapt
liberty of the soul in the sweet serenities of beautiful solitude. No
rebellious feeling of any kind then agitated his placid bosom; every
passion was at rest,--his ambition slept in its thorny bed, and his
remembrances of Otteline were quenched in the gentle dews of a resigned
spirit. Such power has the divine hand of Nature on the son that loves
her! and thus did he glide along, with the ethereal temper of his soul
beaming in every feature, like the reflected face of heaven.
In this blessed calm, his meditations had ascended far above this
sublunary world, when he observed a man spring off the battlements
into the garden, from the very quarter where he had once clambered
himself. A second glance, recognised the figure of Duke Wharton,
who, immediately, hastened towards him. An exulting smile was on his
countenance, as he hailed him in his approach.
"This is safer ground than the Horti Adonidis, I fixed for our
conference!" cried he, "no envious demon would ever think of tracing
Philip Wharton to so desolate a region as this!"
"I have found it a garden of peace," replied Louis, putting out his
hand to Wharton with glad surprise; "and, were it not for fear of the
consequence of this rash seeking me, I should call it the garden of
happiness too!"
"De Montemar," cried his friend, "it does not become friendship like
ours, to be always fearing consequences, and skulking past each
other, as if our meetings had guilty errands. How different are you
in this detested court of finesse, from the free-hearted, independent
De Montemar, who won my soul on his unbondaged native mountains!
Louis, where is that open eye, that open heart? that fearless, brave,
uncuirassed bosom? All that you can gain in Vienna or at Madrid, is not
worth one of those proofs of manhood!"
Louis turned on him a countenance, in which all that Wharton had
conjured up in that noble soul, shone bright in the moon-light.
"If I have fear, it is to do wrong; and that is no change of my nature.
If I shroud my heart, it is from them who cannot understand it; if I
shroud my eye, it is from them who are not worthy to read my thoughts;
and for my shut bosom, Wharton, would it gratify you, to hear it was
unlocked to fools? You have the key of it, my friend! A triangle
encases my heart," continued he, with one of his wonted smiles; "and
you have one of its sides."
Wharton pressed his hand.
"Then Csar has quite forgiven Brutus?"
"What could I not forgive him?" replied Louis. All the trust of his
partial and enthusiastic heart, spoke in those words; and he thought
within himself,--"Oh, that I might give my whole life to filial love
and friendship!" As the hopeless wish passed through his soul, the
iron entered with it, but did not pass away.
They walked together to a recess in the garden, where they sat down
under the full radiance of the unclouded moon.
"De Montemar," said Wharton, "this hour is portentous. Hear me to an
end; and you will then have an ample reply to your question, of why I
so named your father, when you broke from me in the avenue."
Louis was ready to listen; and his friend unfolded to him a scene in
the German court, which petrified him with astonishment, and made him
indeed maintain a breathless silence during the recital. He displayed
the insincere character of the Emperor, and explained his manoeuvres
in delaying the fulfilment of the great articles of the treaty, and
only executing the small, while he managed to draw every resignation
from the Spanish side. He imparted to Louis the secret arrangement
between Charles and the Prince of Lorraine; (though he withheld his own
share in the transaction) and shewed that the Arch-duchess was never
intended, by her father, to be the wife of Don Carlos. He also declared
that the Emperor derided the investiture he had sent to the Spanish
Prince, with the remark, when he signed it, that "swords would cut
through parchments." But the worst information was to come. He knew
that a plan was laid, to accomplish the political ruin of the Duke de
Ripperda, and by that achievement at once obliterate every engagement
that was made through him.
At this intimation Louis was all ear: For, during the varied
disclosure, he could connect its details with circumstances which had
embarrassed his diplomatic proceedings; and internal evidence stamped
the veracity of every assertion of his friend.
Wharton then explained the Empress's change towards Ripperda; in the
first instance, from her womanly jealousies respecting the Queen of
Spain, and now rendered complete, by her giving belief to the calumnies
of his rivals. She secretly abetted the Emperor's duplicity; and only
waited the completion of Louis's marriage with her heartless favourite,
to dare her former friend in the face of Europe. Louis's brain was in
a whirl. He could not doubt the proofs Wharton gave him of the facts;
but in the midst of a son's bitter anathemas against the faithless
Elizabeth and her deceitful husband, he yet found comfort in asserting
the adherence of his own sovereigns, to their chosen minister.
"You cannot judge of his security there," replied Wharton, "till you
know the machinery his enemies mean to move in that quarter."
And then he urged Louis to the necessity of obtaining this information;
and taking the sort of glorious revenge on the whole of the proud
conspirators, as would confound them, and excite the admiration of all
honest men. The information lay in the power of one who could furnish
him with the names of persons in Austria and Spain, who were sworn to
compass the ruin of Ripperda. But could the conspiracy be declared,
with its train of signatures, before it took effect, the eyes of the
public would be opened, and the Spanish Minister secured.
Louis declared his eagerness to seek such information at any hazard.
"But how is it to be obtained?" cried he.
"A bribe!" answered Wharton.
"The means are base as our enemies!"
"When a besieged city suspects a mine, do not the inhabitants dig
underground, and meet their enemy at his work?"
"Poniards to poniards!" returned Louis with a cheerless smile.
"Even so," answered Wharton, "shall I give your invisible friend carte
blanche?"
"Grant him every thing in my name," replied Louis, "which can be done
with honour. This conspiracy must be in my possession, before another
sun sets over my head."
"Then in this spot to-morrow evening, at the same hour," returned
Wharton, "you shall see me again; and with a document, that may free
you from another thraldom. I have my hand on many springs; and one has
started a true image of your Otteline, sculptured by herself; she dare
not forswear her work, and when it confronts her, if you will, you are
free."
"Nothing can free me there," replied Louis.
"Why, you would not hug your chains?"
"No; but they will clasp me until death. I am bound to her by every tie
of honour."
"Shew her, what I will bring you to-morrow night, and your honour will
release you."
"There is but one thing, that could release me!" cried Louis, the
ingenuous suffusion of virtue mantling his face; "Is it any charge, any
proof, of her dishonour?" Wharton laughed.
"If you mean by dishonour, a breach of truth, of honesty, of
delicacy, of every principle respectable to man, and graceful in woman;
you know, she is dishonoured below contempt. But if you restrict it,
to the sense in which it is commonly applied to the angelic sex, I am
not prepared to answer. She may be as chaste as unsunned snow, she is
certainly as cold: but for warm, inspiring virtue! she knows it not,
and she will wither it in every bosom to which she clings."
Louis's hand was now pressed on his aching forehead. The Duke continued.
"See, what she has done with the noble hearted Empress! And did you
know the effects of her example on the innocent Maria Theresa; how that
young creature conceals her love for the Prince of Lorraine, under the
appearance of a passion for you--."
"Impossible!" interrupted Louis. "It is the fact," replied Wharton,
"and on this argument, Elizabeth accuses you of aspiring to her
daughter, and urges your marriage with the favourite against every
opposition."
A strange emotion shook the frame of Louis: he saw the net which the
villainy of man and woman had coiled around his father and himself, and
starting from his seat, he exclaimed:
"Wharton, my only friend! Bring me the double documents; and I
will save my father and myself, or fall with him at once, into the
interminable ruin!"
"To-morrow night, then," cried Wharton, "you shall be master of your
fate."
Louis clasped the Duke in his arms; who, as he felt the full heart
of this anxious son throbbing against his side, said in a cheering
voice--"Courage, de Montemar! These conspiring fiends have not yet
found Jove's thunderbolt. Pay his ransom, and not a point of thy
father's glory shall suffer by their shears."
"Nothing, under heaven, can rob him of the glory of his virtues,"
replied Louis; "but by your aid, my tried, my faithful Wharton, he
shall not lose even an earthly ray. May the Providence which brought me
such a friend, and fastened my soul to him; may it bless your exertions
in this crisis of our fate!"
A burning crimson flushed over the cheek of Wharton, as Louis uttered
this ardent appeal to friendship and to Heaven.
"Hero-fashion?" cried the Duke, "mingle prayer with warfare! But thy
orison is for a graceless,--and half at least will be dispersed in
empty air."
"I will stand the hazard!"
Again they embraced, and separated.
CHAP. XI.
Had not Louis been forwarned by Wharton, and enabled to compare what
he saw, with what he heard, the events of the succeeding day were
calculated to lull him to security.
Elizabeth explained the delay of his marriage; and it was what the
Countess d' Ettrees had intimated, the death of Monsieur de Blaggay
having transpired. The Empress took upon herself the previous
concealment of the event; alledging to Louis, that she had done it, to
suffer no further impediment in the way of a ceremony so essential to
the happiness of her friend. She then insinuated, to her almost silent
auditor, what a proof she would regard it of his general devotion to
her, if he would urge Otteline, and petition the Emperor, to permit
the celebration of the marriage on the eighth day after the funeral
solemnity.
Louis ventured to say, that after so awful an event, the haste she
recommended, would seem so irreverent in the eyes of the world, he
could not persuade himself to commit such an outrage on propriety,
unless he might at the same time present some adequate apology to
society for his breach of its laws. While he spoke, it occurred to him,
how he might shew his innocence with regard to Maria Theresa, without
implicating even her happiness; (for he was well assured, that what he
was going to demand, would not be granted;) and he added, that he would
make his petition to the Emperor, provided Her Majesty would consent
that the Arch-duchess should be affianced on the same day. Elizabeth
started at this unexpected request; but, whatever were its motive, she
thought she could put it to silence for ever; and with a well-feigned
graciousness, replied, "yes; if you will stand the proxy!"
"I am ready Madam,--for I have sufficiently experienced the folly of my
presuming to decline it."
Baffled by this prompt assent; and astonished at the calmness with
which he continued to enforce the remonstrances of Spain on this head,
and on other delays of the Austrian cabinet,--she listened to him to
the end; and then rising from her chair, fixed her eyes on him, and
said.--
"Had I required any thing more to assure me of the nature of the man,
who has so coolly and comprehensively argued all these points; I should
find it in that coolness and those arguments on one of them. Marquis I
will reply to these subjects hereafter."
During his interviews with the different ministers, this day, he
could not but wish to have had a window in their breasts, to read
who amongst them were the enemies of his father. Observation on men,
however, had given him knowledge sufficient, to guess that the most
obsequious, the fullest in smiles and complacency, and the most
elaborate in compliment to the supreme minister in Spain, were the
persons whose names were most likely to be found in the confederation
against him. The president of the council, the crafty and luxurious
Routemberg, overpowered him with assurances of his peremptory demands
on the executive government for the fulfilment of every article in the
treaty; and, but for the information of Wharton, he should have quitted
the chamber in the fullest confidence of his father's entire influence
in the Austrian cabinet. The same game of finesse was played at his
own table; for there De Patinos had for some time assumed an air of
civility. But Louis could not trust the Spaniard's lurking and fierce
eye; neither could he relish the sycophants, who followed the tone of
their leader; yet he was polite to all: and a common observer would not
have guessed that treachery was on the one side, and antipathy on the
other. Louis had no suspicions mingled with his dislike; for he could
not suppose that young men, domesticated at his table, and sanctioned
by his father's patronage, could be cloaking a hidden arm to stab him
to the heart.
Notwithstanding these numerous avocations, the hours seemed to move
on leaden pinions till the sun set, and he descried the moon's fair
cressent silvering the gilded doom of Saint Michael's church. Then
was the moment of his appointment with, he believed, the only bosom
which beat true to him, in that wide metropolis; the only tongue that
spoke to him without guile; the only hand that would venture to shield
his father from the professing friends, who, like those who slew his
great ancestor, the Prince of Orange; pressed on him with caresses, to
destroy him more securely.
On the answer which Wharton was to bring him from the too well-informed
oracle of all this evil, depended the success of the conspiracy, or
its failure! In short, in a few minutes, he might have the safety of
his father, and the preservation of Europe in his hand. He could not
disconnect these two ideas in his mind; and when they were united with
the magnanimous friendship of Wharton, hope in that union silenced
every argument to fear.
The friend in whom he trusted did not make the heart sick by delay. He
was mounting the parapet, at the moment Louis appeared on the terrace.
"Brother of my soul!" cried the latter, as their hands met; "to meet
you thus, labouring for me and mine; proving the nobleness of that
misjudged spirit!--I would endure again, all the pain your information
gave me last night, to purchase to my father and my uncle, conviction
of this unexampled friendship!"
"Root the conviction in your own heart, de Montemar, and I care not who
plucks at the branches."
Louis urged his friend to the history of his embassy; and Wharton told
him, he had seen the written memorandum of the whole scheme against
his father. He informed him, there were persons at the Austrian
court that were to accuse Ripperda to the king of Spain, of a plan
of self-aggrandizement as bold as it was dangerous. He was to be
represented as playing a double game at Vienna and at Madrid; and that
the interests of both nations were alternately to bend, according
to the veering of his own personal views. He was to be charged with
clandestine communications with France and Portugal; and of being the
secret instigator of the late attempt to poison his royal master. His
object in so nefarious an act, was supposed to be the certainty he
had of being dictator of the kingdom, while under the sceptre of a
minor. In short, every wild, preposterous, and sanguinary instigation
of ambition, was to be alleged against him. The charges were to be
supported at Madrid, by a powerful majority of grandees; and should the
scheme go on, there could be no doubt of the impeachment of Ripperda
under a cloud of false witnesses; and most probably, the perpetration
of some iniquitous sentence against his life. The signatures at the
bottom of this memorandum, were hidden from Wharton's view, when he was
allowed to read it.
"For," added he, "the possessor will reveal them to no eyes but your
own. However, I read enough in the body of the document, to see that
Charles and Elizabeth, and her kinsman of England, are deep in the
plot."
The suspense with which Louis listened to this perfidious
confederation, was almost insufferable.
"And this it is," exclaimed he, "to put our trust in
princes!--Ungrateful, treacherous Elizabeth!"
Wharton seized the moment of speechless indignation which followed
this agonized apostrophe; and pourtraying in vivid colours, the utter
selfishness of Charles and the house of Brunswick, he urged Louis, by
every consequent argument, to abjure the worthless cause; and to take
a powerful and noble revenge, by embracing that of legitimacy, in the
rights of the Electress in Germany, and those of James Stuart, in the
land of his maternal ancestors.--The reasoning of Wharton was forcible
and clear, full of energy and conviction, and an eloquence, that might
have charmed an angel from its orb, 'to list his sweet and honey'd
sentences.'
He urged, that the discovery of the plot to the King and Queen of
Spain, before it could be brought to bear against Ripperda, would
give him just the advantage of turning a full charged battery upon
the enemy who had planted it for his destruction.--In that instant of
proved fidelity to the royal pair, and in their proud shews of perfect
confidence in him, he might change their politics from the north to the
south pole.--A word from him to Philip, would revoke his guarantee to
the pragmatic sanction; the Electress's son would have a direct path to
the throne on the death of the Emperor; and a brave army of Spaniards
would put Philip in possession of Gibraltar. While this was transacting
on the continent, England itself might shrink under the foot of
Ripperda; for Wharton intimated, that by the armed assistance of some
powers, whose politics he had turned into the same direction, it would
be no difficult achievement to replace James Stuart on the throne of
his ancestors. "Here, Louis de Montemar", exclaimed the Duke, "is a
revenge worthy the descendant of heroes and of sovereigns! Though you
wear not crowns, you may dispense them; and Csar can do no more!"
Louis grasped the hand of his friend.--"Oh, Wharton! I am weary
of sovereigns, and crowns, and sceptres. They are the price of
men's souls; of all their earthly happiness, of all their future
felicity!--Talk not to me of embracing the cause of any one of them.
When I clasp the splendid nothings, they crumble into dust in my
hands."--
Louis walked forward with a rapid pace. His soul was tossed on the
billows of a tempestuous ocean, in the midst of which he saw his father
perishing.--He stopped abruptly. "But where is this document?--How can
I obtain it?"
"It is yours, on a condition; and with it the implement of your release
from Otteline!" "I care not for my own release, but for my father! my
betrayed, my virtuous father!--Name the condition."
Wharton did not answer immediately, but walked a few moments by the
side of his friend, with his eyes bent downwards; then, looking
suddenly up, while the bright moon shone full upon his varying
countenance, he gaily said:--
"Is there any thing it is possible for me to propose, that could move
you to precipitate yourself over that stone wall, as you did from the
rocks of Bamborough?"
"No;" replied Louis, with a wan and wintery smile; "nothing that you
would propose."
"Having met my novice at the Eleusinian mysteries," cried Wharton
laughing, "I marvel I should seem to question his initiation!--The way
is now plain before us.--Go with me to-night, when that blabbing duenna
in the sky is gone to bed, and you shall have the whole policy of
Austria in your bosom."
"Where?" said Louis, not understanding the Duke, and strangely doubtful
of his manner.
"That disclosure is beyond my credentials. But when you are there, the
awful secret of conspiracy will not be revealed in caverns, dungeons,
and darkness. You will find a place to take the grateful soul, and lap
it in Elysium!"
The pulse in Louis's temples beat hard; yet he was determined not to
anticipate, but make Wharton explain himself.
"I do not understand you; who is it I am to see?"
"A woman; a lovely, fond woman!"
The manner of his saying this, was a stroke, like that of an iron rod
on the heart of his friend; and he cast the hand from him, that clasped
his arm.
"What, for another leap?" cried the Duke; "but you are out of
practice, and may break more necks than your own!"
"And what is my resource?" desperately demanded Louis.
"A simple one; to smile upon a woman. A pleasant one; to be beloved by
one who can fix no bonds on you but those of love, while she bestows
herself upon you, and gives you the life and honour of your father!"
"With the loss of my own, and the perdition of my soul! Is this the
alternative I expected to hear from the lips of my only friend, in this
fearful extremity of my fate!"
Louis had covered his raging temples with his hand, and he hastened
forward with distracted swiftness.
"De Montemar! This is folly or deception," cried Wharton. "There
are virtues for every season of life; and I thought you had been
made sensible that it is the privilege of manhood to make all nature
subservient to his interest and his pleasure. What took you, night
after night, to the scenes in which I have met you? Anchorites are not
accustomed to pay those courts a second visit; and you are not the
better in my honest eyes, for preserving the cowl, when I know its vows
have been broken?"
Louis knew that he had deserved this inference; and he inwardly
reproached his father's policy, in thinking it wisdom to incur such
suspicion on his blameless life. How would the involuntary accusation
have been embittered, had he known that the Empress drew the same
conclusion! He would then have doubly felt, that his sacrifice to such
vile appearance, instead of propitiating his rivals, had dishonoured
him with his friends, and become an instrument in the hands of his
enemies. Humbled to the soul, he merely replied.
"Wharton, you injure me."
"It may be so; and I am sorry for it," answered the Duke, "though I
cannot guess how. I offer you the sublime duty of rescuing your father
from treason; and the enjoyment of a banquet, rifled from the sanctuary
of your deadliest foe! Can you be a man, and proof against such sweet
revenge?"
Louis strode on in perturbed silence. Wharton continued his arguments
with vehemence and subtle consistency, on the supposition that he must
admit his friend's repugnance to be sincere. Still, Louis did not
reply; but proofs of his contending soul convulsed the features his
agitated hand tried to conceal. The Duke, as well as his friend, had
much at stake in bringing this part of his negociation to bear. He
tried the effect of ridicule on the wretched and despairing Louis; and
to one of his arguments, he at last extorted a reply.
"I will not purchase even the life of my father, by my own conscious
guilt. If I am proof against my own heart, in so dear a cause, shall I
not be proof against the poor allurements of vanity and sense? And are
such arguments yours? Oh, Wharton! I cannot call that peculiarly manly,
which are the peculiar pursuits of the lowest of our species. Any man
may succumb to his appetites and his passions! You say most men do; and
that you, even you, sometimes find it policy and pastime to follow in
the track!" He paused, and then added with a piercing look, and a smile
of despair, "what, if the boy de Montemar has ambition to go beyond ye!"
"Yes; I know you do not want ambition," replied the Duke, with an
answering smile, "I remember, some dozen months ago, with that same
eagle glance, you likened yourself to Ammon's godlike son! He did not
reject the flaming brand that fired the palace of his enemies, nor the
lovely Thais that presented it!"
"Wharton," said Louis, looking on him with severity, "had Clytus been
such a counsellor, he would have deserved the javelin of his friend?"
"My breast is ready," cried the Duke, "if thou hast the heart to throw
it!"
"I would I could, and cut away the worser part of thine!" answered
Louis, "I have seen more of it to-night, than I wish to remember."
"But what message," returned Wharton, "am I to remember, to carry to
her, who is awaiting your slow appearance? Is she to give you herself,
your father's safety, and your own freedom? Or, do you reject all? For
all you must accept, or none; and then the scrupulous de Montemar,
may go wash his hands of the name he has consigned to infamy; and
beatify the paternal head he relinquishes to the block!"
This demand was made with scornful seriousness; with a ruthless
application to the feelings of a son. Louis felt the firm
collectiveness of a man determined to live or die by one line of
action. He turned on Wharton with a fixed eye.
"Tell her," returned he, "that father and son may perish together; that
their names may be followed by falsehood to the scaffold and the grave;
but I never will purchase exemption from any one of these evils, by the
prostitution of my heart and my conscience to vice in man or woman!"
Wharton grasped his arm.
"What superstition is this? What madness?--This message would undo you!"
"With whom, Wharton?"
"With the woman you scorn. Her revenge would exasperate your enemies!"
"Let it!" returned Louis, "since she has bereft me of my
friend.--Wharton, we are no more to each other!"
"De Montemar?"
"In my extremest need, when I threw myself on your breast for counsel
and for aid; when I believed you Heaven's delegated angel, to save
my father and myself; you would have betrayed him to the dishonour of
being bought by the guilt of his son; you would have betrayed me to
hell's deepest perdition!"
As Louis spoke with the stern calmness of a divorced heart, Wharton
became other than he had ever seen him. With the fires of resentment
flashing from his resplendent eyes, he too collected the force of his
soul in the mightiness of a last appeal. He spoke with rapidity for
many minutes. He repeated, and redoubled his arguments; and then he
added in a calmer voice:
"My heart is a man's heart, and therefore is sensible to this stroke
from ungrateful friendship. But you now know that I can shame your
superstition, by bearing insult upon insult, when my patience may
recall you to yourself!"
"I am recalled to myself," returned Louis; "my superstition is, to
depend on God alone for the preservation of my father. If he fall, God
has his wise purpose in the judgement, and I shall find resignation.
For you, Wharton--that I have loved so long and so steadily--there may
be a pang there--when he I trusted above all men, has proved himself my
direst enemy!"
"Your enemy, de Montemar? your direst enemy? The words have passed your
lips, were engendered in your heart, and my ears have heard them! It
is easier to hate, than to love; to discard a friend, than to accept a
mistress; to plunge into the gulph of ruin, than to avoid it through
a path of happiness! Madman! Did I not pity the folly I marvel at, I
would rouse you by a tale. But no more. When you next hear of, or see
Philip Wharton, you will understand the import of your own words.--You
shall know what he is, when he proclaims himself the enemy of Ripperda
and de Montemar!"
Louis stood immoveable, with his eyes on the ground, while Wharton
vehemently uttered this denunciation. He remained some time, like a
pillar transfixed in the earth, after the Duke had disappeared. The
first thing that recalled him to motion, was the profound stillness
around, after the sounds of that voice, which till now, was ever to him
the music of heaven. The horrible conviction of all that had passed,
pressed at once upon his soul; the dear and agonizing remembrance of
how he had loved him; and raising his arms to the dark heavens with a
fearful cry of expiring nature, he threw himself upon the ground.
The falling dew, and the howling wind raised him not from that bed of
lonely despair. And when he did leave the dismal scene of this last act
of his miseries, it was like the spectre of the man who had entered
it.
CHAP. XII.
Wharton left Vienna, the morning after his separation from Louis in the
garden of the chateau. From that day, Louis moved through his duties
like a man in a dream. He had dispatched a special courier to his
father, with as much of the conspiracy, as he had collected from his
now estranged friend; and he confessed how the whole might have been in
his possession, could he have brought his conscience to accord with the
condition.
Hoping that even this obscure intimation might be some beacon to
his father; himself went perturbedly on; racked with suspence, and
feeling alone and unarmed amidst a host of ambushed foes. Except when
obliged to go abroad on business, he shut himself within the walls of
his house; for he now doubted every man who approached him; and the
specious courtesies of women were yet more intolerable.
The Empress did not condescend to intimate how she had considered
his proposition respecting the ceremony of her daughter; but she
sent her chamberlain to inform him, that the Emperor had fixed the
day of her favourite's nuptials, when they should be solemnized in a
private manner. Louis loathed the very characters of Otteline's name;
and shuddered at any new bonds to a society, associated to him with
every disastrous remembrance. His soul was stricken; and the evils
which appeared in visionary approach before his father's path, and
his own, seemed too big for conflict. He felt he could have sustained
the fiercest fields of war; could have died with an upward eye, and
an exulting spirit on its honourable bed. But to be a hero under
the attacks of the coward breath of man; to stand before an obloquy
that threatened the annihilation of his father's glory, and his own
respected name; was more than he dared to contemplate: and in appalled
expectation, he mechanically prepared to obey the unwelcome behests of
Elizabeth.
He was giving his slow orders to a maitre d'hotel respecting
some arrangements for his future bride, when a letter was put into
his hands, which had come by a circuitous route from Sardinia; and
which he ought to have received a month or two ago. It was from Don
Ferdinand d'Osorio. Until the public reception of Ripperda at Vienna,
Don Ferdinand was ignorant where to address the cousin of his beloved
Alice; and to express, what he felt, his sense of the justice of her
appeal against his extorted bonds; and to acknowledge the delicacy with
which Louis had seconded her remonstrances. When he heard that the
Marquis de Montemar was in Germany with his father, he lost no time
in writing; and entrusted his letter to a Sardinian gentleman going
to Vienna. But the traveller took a wide tour; and did not bring the
letter to its destination until two months after its date.
Louis dismissed his servant, and breaking the seal, read as follows:--
"My dear de Montemar,
"I should be ashamed to confess the justice of all your remarks on my
conduct with regard to your sweet cousin, my ever-beloved Alice, could
I not at the same time assure you that I have obeyed her wishes to the
fullest extent, and followed your advice implicitly. I have written to
her, and to Mrs. Coningsby; and she is perfectly free: every bond is
relinquished, but that of the heart. If her's be as firm as mine, we
may confidently await the holy vows, which, I trust, will yet unite
us.
"You must have seen enough of my excellent father, to know that
he has one error amongst his many perfections; and that it is an
irreconcileable abhorrence of the Protestant religion. However,
though I should despair of ever bringing him to tolerate its tenets,
I have a hope of compassing his consent to my marriage with its
gentle professor. Marcella, my only, and very dear sister, (and
who was intended from her cradle for a nunnery,) must assist me in
this project. She loves me ardently; and her power with my father,
except on one point, is almost omnipotent. It is this point, on which
I ground my proceedings: she must obey him; and may gratify her
enthusiastic nature, by serving me against herself. Her doom, poor
girl! is rather a hard one, as it was absolutely fixed before she was
born. My father's youthful passions, (which are now hushed to such
monastic stillness!) were the cause of her dedication. I will tell
you the story; and then you may judge of my chance of success through
her means.
"When my father was a young man, his character was too much like my
own, self-willed and impetuous; and in affairs of love, as you will
see by the sequel, he was even more determined than his son. At an
early age, he acquired a great reputation in the army; and at the
conclusion of the war in Italy, went on a party of pleasure to Vienna;
then the gayest city in the world.
"During the reign of the Austrian monarchs in Spain, many of our
grandees intermarried with the German nobility. It so happened between
our family and that of the Austrian Sinzendorff's. My father, then
full of life and enterprize, went to the old Count Sinzendorff's. The
present Chancellor of that name was then young and thoughtless; and
boasted to his cousin, of the great beauty of his youngest sister;
who his family had chosen to sacrifice to the fortunes of the elder
branches, by consigning her to a nunnery at the age of nineteen.--My
father accompanied Sinzendorff to the convent, where they passed
some hours with the beautiful novice; for she had yet four months
of probation, before she was to pronounce the irrevocable vows.
Suffice it to say, a mutual passion was conceived between the two
cousins, and my father persuaded her to elope with him.--They fled
into Switzerland, where they were married. In the course of time,
absolution for the sacrilege was obtained from the Pope; but my father
could never obtain it from himself.--His wife's first and second
children died in the birth. They were both daughters. He believed it
a judgment on his crime, and tried to reconcile offended heaven, by
making a vow, that should his next infant be spared, and of the same
sex; and he live to the appointed period, he would dedicate it to a
monastic life, at the same age in which he seduced her mother from
the altar. The next child was myself. Two or three more infant deaths
intervened before the birth of Marcella. But from the hour in which
she saw the light, and continued to live, a golden crucifix was hung
to her neck, and she was always addressed by the name of the little
nun.
"As she grew in beauty and sweetness, my mother regretted the
determined immolation of her child; but my father would listen to
no pleadings, to spare such variety of excellence to the world. He
demanded the sacrifice for the appeasing of his conscience; and poor
Marcella, though educated with all the accomplishments of her sex,
and full of as many graces as ever charmed in woman, silently awaited
her gloomy destiny. I remember having often seen my father stand
impenetrable to my mother's reproaches for consigning all this youth
and loveliness to the cloister, and then he has calmly answered:--
"Antoinetta, I have covered the blameless offering with all these
garlands, to render her a more costly sacrifice at my hands; to make
my heart drop blood when she is led to the altar; and then, your sin
and mine, my erring wife, may find a veil!
"My mother doated on my sister, and she could not see the justice
of expiating her own offence, by the misery of her child.--In this
spirit, she too, made a vow; and that was, never to be separated from
her daughter, till her father's cruel dedication shut her from the
world. By a most unhappy fatality, the governess my mother engaged
for Marcella when a child, was the widow of one of the illustrious
cavaliers who came to the continent, with your James II. She was a
learned and a pious woman, and brought up my sister in all her own
principles.--My father led too busy a life, to investigate deeper
than the fruits; and those, he said were good. But a year ago, the
English lady died; and on her death-bed, she declared herself a
Protestant! In short, Marcella had been too long under her tuition,
to become a willing devotee to the monastic rites of the Romish
Church. A superstitious horror of this discovery prevented my father
questioning her on the subject; but he proposed her immediate removal
to a convent. My mother opposed her vow to his; not to suffer her
child to leave her, till the time of her being professed.--Marcella
cast herself on her knees, and implored, by every thing sacred in
earth and heaven, that her father would not compel her to take vows
against which her soul revolted. She engaged to live a life of
celibacy; and never to see any persons but her own family; if he would
spare her those dreadful oaths, and allow her to remain for ever with
her mother. But in the essential point, my mother and sister pleaded
in vain. He granted her continuance at home, till the year of her
noviciate; but that year must come, and it will commence next January.
"Being aware, from my father's pertinacity on these subjects, that
if my sister does not then resign herself to her fate, she will be
dragged to meet it, (though he would rather purchase her free consent
at any price;) I determined on trying to turn her sad destiny to my
happiness. When I pledged my faith to your dear cousin, I did it
under a belief that I could persuade Marcella to do that willingly,
which she knows she must do, even under violence. I want her to make
my father's sanction to my marriage with Alice, the condition of her
performing all his vows, without further hesitation!
"On my return from Lindisfarne, (without then venturing to open my
whole mind to her on the subject,) I prepared the way, by describing
the dear family at the pastorage, in such colours as to excite her
particular interest for the fair and tender Alice. My mother's
gratitude was eloquent towards Mr. Athelstone and Mrs. Coningsby; and
again and again she wished to see the latter and her daughters in
Spain, that she might repay them in some sort, for their cares of her
son.
"My father and I soon came to Sardinia on public affairs; but we
return to Spain in the autumn. I shall then unbosom myself to
Marcella; and, I doubt not, she will concede that to my happiness,
which, should she withhold it, would only leave me to misery, without
prolonging the time of her own liberty.
"At present she is leading an almost monastic life; and the difference
cannot be great, whether it be past in a real cell amongst the
Ursulines, and daily cheered by visits from her mother; or in a
cloistered apartment at home, which is fitted up with every similar
austerity, and has no advantage but the nominal distinction of being
in her father's house.
"I hope every thing from Marcella's free consent, and consequent
influence with my father; and, when it is given, dear de Montemar, (if
you are not too absorbed in politics and Imperial favour, to continue
your interest in the happiness of faithful love!) you shall hear again,
from your sincerely obliged friend,
"Sardinia.                         Ferdinand d'Osorio."
Louis closed the letter, with every warm wish for the happiness of
his endeared Alice; but while he joined the man she loved, in the
heartfelt orison, he could not but regret the strain of selfishness he
saw throughout his character. He hardly pitied the amiable Marcella,
in the destiny she appeared to deprecate, and to which her brother so
coolly rivetted her reluctant hands, while he pretended to deplore her
fate. In the state Louis was in, between man's perfidy and woman's
wiles, any refuge from the world, seemed a heaven to him. The passions
and opinions of youth are in extremes; all delight, or all misery;
all virtues, or all crimes; no happiness but in rapture; no grief but
in despair. But Louis's griefs were now heavy enough, not to need the
overcharging of fancy; and when he thought of all that he had suffered
since his last fearful meeting with Wharton in the garden, he could not
but exclaim,
"Oh, that I had wings like a dove, for then would I fly away, and be at
rest!"
He was scared from the world by its vices; and sometimes longed to
repose his wearied spirit in the grave. But he was now only entered
into the lists; the contest was only begun; and he must brace his
sinews to continue the combat, for which his ambitious soul had panted
while he lay in the peacefulness of his native home!
On the very morning, whose evening was to see him perform his extorted
vows, to her who had once been the object of d'Osorio's passion, two
couriers arrived from Spain. The one was Castanos, who came to Louis;
the other was from the Marquis de Castellor, and went direct to Count
Routemberg.
The volcano had burst; and all the power, and all the honours of
Ripperda were swept away! De Castellor was now in his seat; and when
Castanos came off; the Duke was stunned into stupor, overcome by the
illimitable ruin.
Of the particulars of the catastrophe, Louis did not hear, till he
could question Castanos; for the Spaniard, knowing the tidings of the
packet he brought, had presented it in silence and withdrew. Louis
opened it impatiently; and took out his father's letter. He could
hardly expect it to be an answer to his warning epistle, for the time
appeared too short for an interchange of messengers; but eager to know
the complexion of things in Spain, he broke the seal. The letter was
brief, and scarcely legible; but it was sufficient to announce the
completion of his worst fears: that his father was no more the minister
of Spain; that he was abandoned by the King; insulted by the nobles;
and outraged with every species of ingratitude by the people he had
served to his own overthrow!
The bolt was then fallen! And, every hand in which his father trusted,
had assisted to launch it!
Louis was transfixed with the letter in his hand. Now it was, that he
saw the world unmasked before him; now it was, that he saw the views of
life unveiled; now it was, that all creation seemed to pass from before
him with a frightful noise, and he stood alone in chaos. The smiling
face of man was blotted out; gratitude, virtue, were annihilated; and
life had no longer an object! What had his father been? All that was
noble and disinterested. What had he done for Spain? Redeemed her from
poverty, contempt, and suffering; to riches, honour, and happiness.
And what was his reward? He was cast, like the reprobate angel from on
high, and trampled upon by his conquerors, as though his actions had
been like him he resembled in his fall!
How long he sat in motionless, sightless gaze, upon the fatal letter,
he knew not; but he was aroused by the entrance of his secretary, who
informed him Count Sinzendorff awaited him in the next chamber.
Louis saw he was now called upon to breast the first wave that was
to break on him from the deluge which had overwhelmed his father. He
rallied his mental strength; and, looking upwards, to implore the
staying hand from above, he proceeded with the composure of inevitable
ruin, to the presence of the Chancellor. The virtuous statesman
advanced to meet him, while his countenance proclaimed that he knew
all, and sympathized with its victim.
Their conference was short; but it implied to Louis, that his delegated
reign, as well as that of his father, was at an end. Sinzendorff had
been in the Imperial cabinet, when Routemberg laid his dispatches
before the Emperor; and to spare the upright son of Ripperda, some
rude disclosure of their contents, the Chancellor took upon himself
to inform him, that he was to transfer his portfolio to the Count de
Monteleone, who had just arrived at Vienna.
On Louis thanking the minister for his generous interference,
Sinzendorff took his hand.
"I will always bear my testimony to the fair dealing of the son, and to
the disinterested conduct of the father, though we should never meet
again."
Even while the words were on the lips of the chancellor, a message
arrived from the Empress to Louis, to hasten his attendance at the
Altheim apartments.--He smiled gloomily, in answer to Sinzendorff's
smile of dubious meaning.
"I had forgotten!" said the chancellor, "you have yet a fair bond to
Vienna; and this need not be a parting day."
"It is a portentous day, of most unpropitious nuptials!" replied Louis,
hardly knowing what he uttered; "but every day, and every where, I must
be honoured in the approbation of Count Sinzendorff."
The hour was beyond the time in which he ought to have been in the
imperial boudoir, to await the hand of his intended bride. What change
in her wishes, his changed fortune might produce, he thought not of. In
a postscript to his father's letter, he had found hastily written:
"Events prove that you have done right with regard to the Empress's
friend, if she is now your wife." This approbation, was a new bond
on the sacrifice; and he threw himself into his carriage, to obey the
peremptory summons of Elizabeth!
All was solitude in the first three chambers of the Altheim apartments.
As he hurried forward with the desperate step of a man, who had lost
so much that the last surrender was a matter of no moment, he saw the
Empress in the fourth; but she sat alone. Louis bowed at the entrance,
and again as he drew near. She was pale as himself; and did not look up
while she addressed him.
"You are come, thus tardily, to ratify your vows? To redeem your
pledged honour?"
"I come to obey Your Majesty's commands," replied he.
"Your vows may be returned to you;" answered Elizabeth, "but the honour
that was never your's, cannot be redeemed." "Dare I say," replied
Louis, "that I do not understand Your Majesty?"
"And yet the words are plain," returned she, "they are to tell you,
that low as Ripperda has fallen, he never can reach the depths of his
son."
"Madam," exclaimed he, "I am now a ruined man! the malice of his
enemies has cast my fortunes, with my father, to the ground; but he
shall not be humbled in his son. Virtue is the soul of his being,
virtue is my inheritance; and I implore of Your Majesty to say, of what
I am accused? Who are my accusers?"
She looked up; and mistaking the ravages of anguish on his fine
countenance, for those of guilt, she shuddered with a loathing
sensation, and answered indignantly.
"How dare that false tongue profane the name of virtue, by connecting
it with that of your father and yourself?--The world teems with your
accusers; and he bears witness to their veracity, by not having
ventured one line to me in his defence."
She then steadily ennumerated the Duke's imputed treacheries. That it
was past a doubt, his clandestine coalition with the Duke of Wharton;
that their secret meetings had been traced; that he had commenced a
correspondence with James Stuart; and that, from what motives, his mad
ambition could alone tell; it was well known he was playing in Madrid
the counterpart of Wharton's political game at Vienna. In short, he
covertly abetted every machination against the Empire, and the house of
Brunswick:--"and," concluded the Empress, "I am constrained to believe,
that, to me and mine, his overthrow is as timely, as it is irrevocable."
This charge on his father transported Louis beyond the forms of
ceremony; and with all the eloquence of truth and filial piety, he
burst forth into a defence of his integrity, which, to any other
than the possessed ears of Elizabeth, must have carried resistless
conviction; but with an impetuosity equal to his own, she interrupted
him:--
"Cease!" cried she, "Hard, unblushing parricide of all thy father's
fame! Dissembling, cozening de Montemar! In every word, and look,
and gesture, I see the tempter of Ripperda's ruin! He was Honour's
self, till he brought the serpent to his bosom, in the shape of his
perfidious son. Shame to thee, young man, and think of the price for
which you sold him to Duke Wharton."
Louis was confounded by this charge upon himself, as the instigator of
his father's asserted treasons; but he did not shrink, or withdraw his
assured eye from the face of the Empress.
"That Wharton was my friend," said he, "I did not withhold from Your
Majesty; that my father was, and is, his implacable enemy, I have just
affirmed: and that it is not in the power of Duke Wharton, or of any
other man, to draw us from our allegiance to Spain, and our fidelity to
you--name our accusers, and I am ready to maintain it with my blood."
Elizabeth had now restrained the feelings, which some pleading
recollections of Ripperda had awakened, and with haughty composure, she
replied:--
"You may revenge the discovery of your falsehood, by the lives of your
accusers; but the times are past, when truth was proved by bloodshed.
Yet, as you demand it, I shall not refuse you knowledge of your crimes.
They are simple, but they are comprehensive.--First, your nightly
visitations to the Electress of Bavaria, under the disguise of the
Chevalier de Phaffenberg!--"
"It is false!" cried Louis, placing his hand on his heart, and looking
up to heaven; "by the eternal judgment, I swear it is false!"
Elizabeth raised her hands in horror.
"Matchless villain!" cried she.
Then frowning terribly, with a redoubling detestation in every feature,
she rapidly continued:--
"And have you the audacity to swear, you never visited her at all?
That you did not steal from her house by a secret passage, on the
night of the destruction of the opera-house? That you have not had
clandestine meetings with the arch-counsellor of her treasons? And that
this rebellious pair, have not stimulated your presumption, to draw my
daughter to disgrace her rank by listening to a passion from you?"
Louis was too much appalled by the two leading charges, to shew any
surprise at the third. Had Wharton then betrayed that they had met?
That the preserver of his mistress, had once entered her palace?--The
blood which mantled on his cheek at the accusation, faded before this
direful suspicion; and his eyes, dropping under the indignant beams
of the Empress, told her that in this instance at least, his face was
honest.
"You do not dare repeat the perjury!" cried she; "leave my presence."
"Not as a guilty man!" cried he, looking up with the bold desperation
of innocence; "I have now, nothing to gain or to lose with the Empress
of Germany, but my honour; and again I affirm, that under no name but
that of Louis de Montemar, did I ever enter the palace of the Electress
of Bavaria. I never did enter it but once, and that was on the night
Your Majesty mentions. I have also met the Duke of Wharton, by
accident, in the courts of this palace, and in various assemblies; and
by compulsive necessity, twice in the garden of the chateau:--but we
never meet again!" Here Louis stopped. For these charges had so struck
on his heart, (as he believed they could only have been inflicted
by the threatened vengeance of his friend;) that he forgot the one
respecting the Princess.
"You own that you have visited the Electress, and communed with her
emissary!" cried Elizabeth, "avow your object, and it will answer
to the point to which your effrontery has not yet spoken. Was it to
dethrone my husband, and make my daughter a prisoner to the Bavarian
Empress? It would have crowned the adventure, to have rewarded her
champion with the hand of a captive Princess!"
Stung to the soul, Louis threw himself at her feet, to proclaim his
innocence of all these inferences, before heaven and her. But she
started back, as from a viper in her path.
"Base hypocrite!" cried she, "I am not to be moved by subtilty.--I
know how you dedicated that attitude to the dishonour of your future
sovereign. But she is now rescued from your arts--this foot crushed
your pernicious resemblance, as the heaven you outrage, will one day do
yourself. You may grovel in the dust, but I will hear no more."
Louis rose calmly from his knee.
"Empress," said he, "I solicit for justice no more; but I owe it to
my honour, to declare, that my presence in the Bavarian palace was
occasioned by a service I had accidentally performed to one of its
inhabitants. My meetings with Duke Wharton were an attempt to penetrate
into a conspiracy which I knew was forming against my father; but
I failed in my purpose. The enemies of the Duke de Ripperda have
annihilated his political life, and plunged his son into the same abyss
of calumny; but I am not yet sunk to baseness, nor hypocrisy. It was
not to the Empress of Germany I knelt, but to the power of justice
in her person. But that is past; and I feel, that could birth give
dignity, my ancestors of Nassau reigned in this very palace! And, if
devotion to their successor, be a virtue in their posterity, mine have
been faithful to the Emperor, to the last article in the treaty; and I
have been devoted to Your Majesty, to the sacrifice of my happiness.
This we have done! But, young as I am, I have lived to see, that when
power is lost, birth is nothing; and virtue, nothing, but to the
possessor's heart!"
The face of Elizabeth blazed with resentment.
"And this is your answer to your daring passion for my daughter?"
"The Emperor knows, I never dared to love the Princess," replied Louis,
"and to the honour of his Imperial word, I refer Your Majesty."
Louis bowed with a backward step, as he was preparing to withdraw.
"Incomparable insolence!" exclaimed she; "stop, and know that he is
your accuser!" Louis smiled with so insufferable an air of scornful
superiority, that she was momentarily struck dumb; but violently
extricating her powers of speech, she sternly replied:--
"Every aim of that towering spirit is known to him and to me; but every
aim is crushed!"
"Human power cannot crush my aims!" rejoined Louis; "they are to
uphold my father's honour and my own truth. And while he deserves the
reverence of the world, what can prove that they are lost!"
The Empress's hand was on her beating forehead, but she turned, even
fiercely to his question.
"The position in which he now lies, by the determined falsehoods of
his son!" replied she, "return to him, covered with dishonour; return
to him, bearing the curse of the friend of his virtue--of the mother
of Maria Theresa! Return to him, spurned by the Countess Altheim; and
abhorred and stigmatized by all honest men!"
Elizabeth left the blameless victim of all this wrath, standing in
the middle of the floor. Every word she breathed, every anathema she
denounced, seemed urged by the quick revenge of Duke Wharton! All
justice, all fair inference was denied him! His father and himself were
alike shut out from the bosom of friendship; were alike betrayed by
them in whom they had most confidently trusted! The burthen was almost
too much for him to bear. And rushing from the apartment; he knew no
more of what he said or did, till he found himself thrown upon a chair,
and alone, in his own chamber.
CHAP. XIII.
The official transfers were soon made. Monteleone received the diploma
of Charg des Affaires. The Emperor and Empress refused the usual
forms of admitting the recalled minister to a parting audience; and
not a man, Spaniard, nor Austrian, appeared within the gates of the
Palais d'Espagne, to pay a farewell compliment, to the son of their
benefactor and friend.
The finger of royal disgrace was on him; and all fled the spot on which
it lay. Solitude was around his lately crowded courts; silence in every
room; and when business took him abroad, avoidance met him in every
passing countenance. The ladies, who had opened their houses to him,
now shut up their daughters till he had left the city; but few needed
the precaution; for with his fortunes had vanished the most powerful
charms, even of Louis de Montemar. This mortification, however, was
spared him; as in the lofty consciousness of his own integrity, and
as high a disdain of the injustice he had received, he went no where
to solicit compassion nor propitiate candour. But had he known their
present sentiments, the assurance that Countess Altheim breathed the
same, would have been sufficient in his eyes to transform the deed of
banishment to one of welcome liberty. In the midst of all this gloom of
misery, his freedom from her, shone like a star in the dark hemisphere,
that promised night was not to remain for ever.
When his lonely carriage passed the barrier, (for all his state
attendants were left to the new ambassador,) he threw himself back, and
exclaimed. "How did I enter you, proud, ungrateful city? Full of hope,
and enterprise, and honour! How do I quit you? Bereft by you of all!
Ruined, dishonoured, desolate!"
The barb was in his heart. It was there, in the image of Wharton;
and it corroded with a slow and deadly poison. Still as he journeyed
forward, and compared events with time, he could not but feel some
satisfaction, when he found by calculation, that had he been weak
enough to yield to the proposal he had rejected, and accepted the
discovery of the authors of this vast overthrow, by the surrender
of his innocence; it would still have been too late to prevent his
father's fall in Spain. The Empress had shewn herself too entirely
prejudiced, to have been affected by any document he could have
presented. And while he thought on this, with gratitude to heaven for
his firmness; he conceived a deeper horror of the friend, who might
have seduced him to such guilt, and left him no other payment than
unavailing remorse, and deserved infamy. In his own person, he was now
convinced of the truth of his father's charge against this once beloved
Wharton. That he could bereave, but not bestow! In the garden of the
Chateau, he had promised a preservation he could not have performed;
on the same spot he had threatened a vengeance he had now taken!
Louis attributed all Elizabeth's accusations to the resentment of his
treacherous friend; and by that act considered himself despoiled by
Wharton of all that was most dear to him.
"I will forget him!" cried he to himself, "my honoured father, I come
to thee, to stand by thee alone! To uphold and cheer thee! To uphold
and cheer myself, with the conviction that I yet possess thee! To glory
in the virtue that has given thee the fate of Aristides!"
In a pass of the Appenines, Louis's solitary vehicle was met by a
courier from Spain. He brought a credential from Martini, which
announced him as his brother Lorenzo, who had lately been received
by Ripperda into his household in the quality of a page. The young
man came full speed, to meet the recalled minister; and to hasten his
arrival at Madrid; where the Duke lay, in a state to hear no other
counsellor, to receive no other comfort.
Lorenzo got into the carriage with his master's son; and detailed the
particulars of his mission, as they proceeded rapidly to Genoa. Louis
listened to the narrative with unshrinking fortitude.
Immediately on Ripperda's return from Vienna, the King had published
an edict, that a revision of all sentences, and a review of all
transactions by judges, governors, collectors, and every other kind
of royal officers, should be subjected to the cognizance of the Duke
of Ripperda. This immense accession of authority put the individual
interest of every man in Spain into his hands; and made him no less
terrible in the city and provinces, than formidable to the grandees,
and an object of jealousy to the King's sons. In short, he was such a
minister, as never had been seen before; a kind of Vicar-general, whose
power wanted nothing of supreme sovereignty, but the permanency of a
throne.
Lorenzo observed, that his brother had owned to him, that, from the
Duke's free exercise of one branch of this extensive authority, he had
foreseen a rupture between his master and the majority of the Spanish
nobility. Since his return from Vienna, his manner to them, and to
society at large, was completely changed. He no longer conciliated, but
compelled. He summoned the greatest and most powerful of the grandees
before his tribunal, whether the appeal came from prince or peasant;
and did such strict justice, that none could reproach, though all
murmured: the great, for being made to feel there was a power above
their wills; and the little, that the laws of Spain should be dispensed
by a man who had been born out of her dominions. While his home policy
was good, and efficient; and his outward politics were only held in the
balance, by the tergiversation of Austria, there were yet men in the
cabinet who privately ridiculed his plans as a mere political romance.
And he found it so. For what is speculatively right, is generally
practically wrong. Men's probable actions are calculated by the law of
reason; but their performance is usually the result of caprice.
In the midst of the universal discontent excited by the agents of his
numerous rivals and enemies, the main mine was sprung, and Ripperda's
fortunes received their final blow. The King and Queen of Spain were
made to believe the most contradictory, preposterous, and terrible
things of his private intentions. And, in one hour, he received three
successive messages from the King, to inform him, that his offices in
the state, the army, and the commercial interests of his country, were
taken from him. That Grimaldo, the Marquis de Castellor, and the Count
de Paz, filled his places; and that a courier was dispatched to Vienna,
to recall his son.
Lorenzo related, that the intelligence of the first messenger, which
took from him the office of prime minister, was delivered in such a
manner as to excite so unguarded an indignation in the Duke, that
he extended his reproaches on his enemies, even to the King; and in
the tempest of his wrath, uttered things of His Majesty, the report
of which doubly incensed the Monarch and his Queen. This messenger
was Baptista Orendayn, the nephew of the Count de Paz. The new
ministers were well aware of his insidious powers to insult and to
betray, and they selected him to convey their triumph to the Duke.
Ripperda, having exhausted himself under the influence of the young
sycophant's irritating sympathy, remained in gloomy silence during the
communications of the two succeeding messengers. When they were all
departed from him, he sat for an hour motionless, in intense thought,
with his hands clasped in each other, and his eyes fixed on the floor.
Martini passed to and fro in the room, without notice from his master.
At last the Duke suddenly started up, as one out of a trance.
"I will go to the Queen!" cried he.
It was now about nine o'clock, in a fine autumnal evening. He directed
his carriage to the Buen Retiro. He arrived, but was refused
admittance. He returned to his palace, and called for his secretary;
but no secretary was to be found. Not one of the officers of any of his
late numerous offices were now in attendance. All were fled with the
stream of power; and nothing but amazed and alarmed family domestics,
were seen gliding about the galleries, in silence and dismay.
Castanos, however, presented himself; and by him Ripperda wrote to
his son and the Empress, and dispatched him to Vienna: but Monteleone
encountered him on the way. He soon found the old Spaniard had a price;
and having purchased the perusal of the packet, suffered the son's
hurried billet to pass; but the resistless appeal to Elizabeth he
committed to the flames.
While Ripperda was writing other letters, his fixed attention was at
last diverted, by an unusual sort of tumult in the square before his
palace. He was accustomed, at his return, or issuing from his gates,
to be hailed and lackied by the acclamations of the populace. His
largesses were abundant, and the uproar of vehement thanksgiving, was
ever on the watch from the venal multitude. But, for the purpose of the
time, the dole was now doubled at the porches of the new ministers:
and the same mob, who, four-and-twenty hours before had rent the air
with shouts of long live the great Duke Ripperda! now tore their
lungs with curses on his name, and threats of vengeance for the ruin of
Spain.
The madness of the people seemed to grow on their own violence; and
the fury with which they assailed his gates with flambeaux, clubs
and hatchets, left little doubt that they meant to fire the palace,
and massacre its inhabitants. Martini urged his master to withdraw
privately from the danger.
"What?" cried Ripperda, "fly like a coward and a criminal before the
ungrateful rabble of Madrid? Never; though their king were at their
head, to urge the murder of their benefactor. I am dispossessed, but am
not fallen; and that, myself will shew them."
As he spoke, he rushed towards the open balcony, which projected over
the great gate, and extended his arm to the people, in the act to
speak. The blazing lights in the apartment behind him, and the broad
glare from the torches beneath, shewed in a moment the noble figure of
the Duke, and his commanding gesture.
Struck with surprise, the dead silence of profound awe, for an instant
stilled the whole assembly. But before the big words of vehement
indignation could burst from the lips of Ripperda, a watchful emissary
of his enemies fired a carabine direct at the balcony. Aggression
once committed, every restraint of reverence and shame were cast
away; and others, near the assassin, echoed his cry of "death to the
heretic!"--Martini threw his arms around his master, and dragging him
within the balcony, forcibly shut the doors. The Duke turned on him a
look of unutterable meaning. "You would be more in fashion," cried
he, "if you stabbed your patron! Do it, Martini, and spare me from the
knives of that ungrateful mob!"
Martini urged his lord, on the only plea to which he would now listen;
to save himself for future vengeance. His carriage was brought round to
a private door, in a back street; and Ripperda was at last persuaded to
enter it. But there was a spy in the house, who informed his enemies of
what was done; and before the vehicle, which contained only the Duke
and Martini, could pass into the second street towards Segovia, it was
met by the howling populace, and surrounded. The windows and doors were
quickly beaten in; and Martini, who had hastily covered his livery with
one of his master's cloaks, was dragged out, amidst the imprecations
of his determined murderers. Ripperda would not tamely witness the
sacrifice of his faithful servant; and with a pistol, with which he
had armed himself, shot the man who had seized Martini, through the
head. He then snatched the fellow pistol from his belt, and fired it,
but without effect, upon the ruffians who threw themselves upon him.
He heard Martini groan under his feet, as he himself seemed to grapple
with a hundred miscreants, in the last struggles for his life.
But a shield was yet held over the head of Ripperda. The tumult
increased in the rear, with the clattering of horses; and, the cries of
the mob; as they fled in terror before the gleaming swords of several
horsemen, who pressed towards the carriage. Ripperda had already
received several flesh wounds, when the stroke of his deliverer's sabre
beat down the arm that held the last weapon that was aimed against him;
a huge rough hanger, in the hands of a pardoned galley-slave,--who
thus struck at the man whose chief offence was resistance to oppression!
His defenders sufficiently dispersed the mob, to allow their leader to
dismount; and advancing to Ripperda, who had extricated himself from
the writhing limbs of the wounded wretches beneath him; "Duke," said
he, "follow me, and these horsemen shall guard you to safety."
Ripperda, at the same moment, felt a hand on his garment; and, in
the next, Martini bruised and bleeding, had drawn himself from under
the shattered carriage, whither his enemies had cast him. He raised
himself, and stood by the side of his master. The horsemen drew around
the group; and galloping before it, made a clear way amongst the
flying populace, till they conducted Ripperda to the side of a plain
travelling carriage.
Their leader, in a suppressed voice, requested the fallen statesman to
enter it. Suspicion of some refined species of treachery glanced upon
his mind. By a feigned rescue, he might be betrayed to an interminable
captivity!
"To what asylum would that carriage convey me?" demanded he, in a tone
that intimated his doubts.
"To the honour of an open enemy," was the reply; "I am Duke Wharton!"
At this part of Lorenzo's narrative, a cry, unutterable in words, burst
from the engloomed but steadfast bosom of his auditor. It was the light
breaking upon chaos! Regardless of the presence of the Italian, he
fervently clasped his hands together, and inwardly exclaimed:--
"I thank thee, my God, for this!" Then covering his face, he gave way
to the balm of tears.
Lorenzo gazed on him with sympathy, and wept also; but it was under a
belief that the young Marquis was thus powerfully affected, by the
simple fact of his father's rescue. The amiable page knew not that
it was for the rescue of all his future fellowship with man. The sun
was again in the heavens to Louis, in the fidelity of Wharton; in the
generous revenge he had taken of both son and father.
Strange, inconsistent, noble, erring Wharton! The good was so blended
in thee with the ill, that the soul of affection hovered about thy
erratic steps, with the watchful tenacity of a guardian angel.
"Oh," cried Louis to himself, "the germs of the tree of life are in
that noble, disinterested heart! He has saved my father; and I may weep
upon his bosom again!"
The happy agitation of Louis was so great; so pre-eminently did
he prize the real character of the beings he loved, before their
appendages of fame or power; that it was with an upraised countenance,
and an open eye, he listened to the remainder of Lorenzo's narrative.
Ripperda no longer hesitated to step into the carriage of his
preserver. Wharton made the bruised Martini enter also; and
accompanying them himself, the voiture set off, escorted by his
servants.
The whole party remained silent for some minutes. Ripperda was the
first that broke the pause.
"Duke Wharton," said he, "you have at last accomplished your object!
The proudest man in Christendom has found no friend in his extremest
necessity, but you his bitterest enemy! This is not a time in which I
can express my sense of the obligation you have laid upon me. You have
saved my life; you must now save my honour. One of the treasons alleged
against me, is collusion with you. If I seek refuge at your lodgings,
I shall confirm the falsehood of my slanderers: and I will perish,
perish by their bullets or their daggers; rather than yield them the
advantage of witnessing one of their perjuries, by a dubious action of
my own!"
Wharton approved of this caution; and, observing that the Duke's
villa at Segovia, would now be as unsafe as his palace at Madrid; he
proposed to him the bold measure of proving his sincerity to the house
of Brunswick, by throwing himself at once on the protection of General
Stanhope, the British Ambassador in Spain. Ripperda saw the advantage
of this suggestion; and the carriage was turned towards the residence
of this gentleman, which was a mile out of the city, on the road to St.
Ildefonso.
On arriving there, the Ambassador was from home; but Ripperda did
not hesitate to assume the rights of hospitality at the house of the
representative of a sovereign, to whose legal accession to the throne
of England, he had obtained the acknowledgement of half Europe.
Wharton went in with his companions. And while some of the servants
were gone to arouze the medical attendants of the English Ambassador,
to attend on the wounds of his guest, the two Dukes remained in private
conference for half an hour. When Wharton withdrew, Martini, who sat
in the anti-room, remarked that his countenance was clouded and even
stern;--but he smiled when he passed him; and bade him take care of his
noble master, for in his fidelity rested the fate of "Csar and his
fortunes!"
General Stanhope arrived a few hours after the departure of the English
Duke, (whose name had not been mentioned in the house;) and was not
less surprised than perplexed at finding who had claimed his sanctuary.
The hurts of Ripperda, as well as those of his servant, had been found
sufficiently deep, to authorize the surgeons in recommending immediate
repose; but the Duke would not hear of any rest for himself, until he
had seen the Ambassador. When Stanhope entered to him, he found his
guest lying on a sofa, in a high state of fever, both from his wounds
and agitation. Ripperda rose at his appearance, and in the name of
honour, and the privileges of his station, claimed his protection from
the immediate attack of his political enemies.
What more passed between his master and the Ambassador, Lorenzo could
give no account; only, that General Stanhope re-ordered his carriage
as soon as he left the chamber of his guest, which was then within an
hour of day-break. He set off for Madrid, and did not return till the
morning was far advanced. He was then closeted with Ripperda for two
hours; and Martini heard the voice of his master very high. However, it
appeared, he was to remain unmolested in the house of the Ambassador;
though it was immediately surrounded by a Spanish Guard. The bustle of
these proceedings proclaimed the asylum of the Duke; and Lorenzo, who
had only arrived that day from the Segovian villa, (when, to his great
consternation he found the house at Madrid deserted by the servants,
and its bureaus ransacked by the police;) lost no time in seeking his
brother and persecuted master, in their reputed sanctuary.
The Duke saw him; and while he walked the room; for the perturbation of
his mind, would not permit him to take the repose his wounds demanded;
he told him to go instantly to meet his son.
"You will find him," said he, "some where between this and Vienna.
Describe to him what you have heard and seen. My pen would consume the
paper, should I attempt to write my injuries! Tell him, that my life
has been assailed by those who now sit in my seat!--Not by their own
coward hands:--They spirit up the rabble to do their bloody work,
that they may throw my murder on the indignation of the people! There,
however, my fortune baffled them. Now, they insult my protector: they
demand his promise, that I shall not escape; and when that is given,
they set guards on his house, as if he were a gaoler, and I a prisoner
for high-treason! But they venture not to charge it on me: their
own infamy is all they dare proclaim; to treat me like the worst of
criminals, before I am convicted, before I am accused!----Shew my son,
these things; and let him hasten to my support. Tell him, when he is by
my side, I will confront them face to face; I will let Spain, and all
Europe know, that though honour is banished from the world, it lives
and reigns in the bosom of William de Ripperda."
Louis listened to all these details, with various inward emotions; but
he was now braced to quell the smallest outward appearance of any. He
spoke little in return; but his step was firm, his eye clear, and his
port erect, as he gave his orders at the port of Genoa, for immediate
embarkation. A vessel was ready to sail; the wind fair, but boisterous;
and under a heavy gale, he launched on the ocean that was to convey him
to the land of his forefathers; that was to consign him to the dungeons
of Madrid.
CHAP. XIV.
Meanwhile the cabal against the ruined Ripperda raged with redoubled
fury in the Spanish cabinet. No appeals from him were suffered to reach
His Majesty, while he was accused of every political crime that could
criminate a minister; and amongst others, of bribery from the merchants
of Ostend; and this, Baptista Orendayn protested on oath, having seen
the golden caskets in the hands of his son. Charge after charge was
brought forward by the Spaniards. Baron Otho de Routemberg, (a brother
of the Austrian minister, and his Ambassador at Madrid) supported them
all by a shew of evidence; till, at last, the King was so far persuaded
of the attempt at poisoning him having originated with Ripperda, that
he privately summoned a committee of the Council of Castile, and laid
the proofs before their judgement.
With equal secrecy they consulted together, and declared it expedient
to commit the regicide to some stronger hold than that of the English
ambassador's house, till the full council could be assembled, and a
solemn trial be made of the offender.
General Stanhope afterwards learnt, that while the new ministers
affected great indignation at what they represented as Ripperda's
clandestine intelligence with the emissaries of James Stuart, they
were severally giving private audiences to Duke Wharton. Philip was
entirely in the dark, as to this avenue of their intelligence; for the
Duke's presence in Madrid was not generally known, though the Queen
herself was more than suspected of having admitted him to a conference
in the disguise of a priest. But Stanhope had proof given him, that
Wharton passed several hours alone with Grimaldo, on the evening of
his rescuing Ripperda from the populace; and that on the night of the
sitting of the committee of the Council of Castile, he was seen gliding
out of the chamber of the Queen's confessor; who immediately after,
went to Her Majesty; and thence carried a message from her to the King,
just as he was passing into the cabinet to decide on the judgement that
was denounced on Ripperda.
The sentence that was then determined on, and sanctioned by the royal
assent, was executed the following morning some hours before the usual
time of rising. While all was in profound tranquillity in the city, the
Chief Alcaid of the court got into a carriage equipped for travelling,
and with a strong escort set forth towards the British residence. A
double detachment of soldiers was already there, with orders to support
him in case of resistance. It happened that the house porter had
risen before his accustomed time; and supposing, from a stir he heard
without, that the usual guard was going to be relieved, he opened the
door to amuse himself with the ceremony. The Alcaid and his officers
seized the favourable moment, and entered the house without opposition.
Some of the soldiers secured the porter from creating an alarm; and the
rest filling the hall, fastened the door.
The Alcaid having learnt from the terrified domestic, in what part of
the residence the Duke de Ripperda slept, went with his Alquazils, and
a military guard, up stairs in the described direction. The tumult
they made in hurrying along the passages, awoke General Stanhope; who,
hastening out of his room to investigate the cause, met the officer
of justice in the lobby. A few words explained his errand; but the
brave Englishman would hardly hear it to the end. He had received the
King's word, that the Duke de Ripperda should remain unmolested in his
house, until he was demanded to public trial; and he declared, that on
the peril of his life, he would resist all illegal proceedings to the
contrary.
The Alcaid presented a letter from the Count de Paz, begging His
Excellency to read it at least, while he went forward to apprise the
ex-minister of the sentence against him. Stanhope, having no other
covering than his dressing gown, took the letter, and retired in angry
haste, to read it and hurry on his cloaths. Its contents were to this
effect; and they were addressed to him.
"That His Majesty, knowing the integrity of the British ambassador,
appealed also to his good understanding. His Excellency must be too
well acquainted with the Duke de Ripperda's delinquency, not to see the
fatal consequences to the royal authority, should His Majesty bear any
longer with the temerity of the Duke, in braving his sovereign with
propositions in the language of a prince, rather than of a subject; and
all from being in the fancied security of a foreign ambassador's house.
"Such a scandalous example, might hereafter induce some other minister
of His Majesty to transgress in a similar way, under the assurance of a
similar asylum; and so cover guilt from the royal justice, even within
the walls of the royal courts!
"These reflections ought to engage His Excellency to surrender the Duke
de Ripperda, on the first summons; and that summons is made in the name
of the King, who commands it to be imparted to the British ambassador,
that if he insists on the sanctuary of his house, he places the Duke
equally out of the reach of His Majesty's mercy, as of his justice. If
on a farther impartial inspection of his ministry, it should appear he
had not only betrayed the interests of the state, but had devised the
death of the King; when the delinquent was in the power of justice,
then His Majesty could either make him a great example in an exemplary
punishment; or, what was infinitely more precious in his sight, shew
the world as great an example in pardoning so formidable a criminal."
While Stanhope was reading these, and other arguments to persuade,
where force was already determined, the Alcaid and his guards
approached the door of the Duke's anti-chamber. On opening it rather
rudely, (for all now depended on dispatch,) Martini sprang from his
mattrass, and seeing the armed men by the dawning light, demanded what
they wanted?
"We must speak with your master," replied their leader.
Martini had now approached them; and recognising the office of the
Alcaid by his habit, when he glanced also on the drawn swords of his
attendants, he was at no loss to guess the purpose of their visit; but
placing himself before the entrance of the interior chamber, with all
the pride of its noble occupier elevating his own manner, he replied:
"My master is not accustomed to intrusion at an hour like this. You
must await his commands till noon."
"Seize that fellow," returned the Alcaid, motioning to his men. Two of
them obeyed; and Martini was held, pinioned between them, while the
Alcaid, followed by the rest, passed direct into the chamber. Since his
misfortunes, the Duke's sleep was peculiarly profound, and he now lay
in as composed a slumber, as if he slept in his tomb. But the Alcaid,
fearing resistance from the Ambassador, should he rejoin them before
Ripperda had surrendered himself, darted towards the bed; and drawing
back the curtains, roughly awoke the Duke. Ripperda started up in the
bed, and beheld it surrounded by gleaming sabres. Before he could
speak, the officer of Justice proclaimed his errand: that he arrested
him for high-treason, and came to carry him to the state-prison of
Segovia.
"It shall be my corpse!" cried the Duke, snatching a sword from the
unprepared hand of the soldier who stood nearest to him, and attempting
to rush from the bed.
But the Alcaid had ordered a concerted sign to be made to the men
below; and, while those present threw themselves upon the Duke, the
other guards hastened up stairs, and filled the chamber. Stanhope came
into the room at the same instant, and called loudly on the illegal
proceeding; on the breach of his privileges as an ambassador, on the
shameful violation of the claims of honour, and the sacred rights of
hospitality!
The Duke was now insensible, from a blow he had received on the
temple, in the scuffle. This sight redoubled the indignation, and the
threatenings of the brave Englishman; but the Alcaid drew forth his own
order, signed by the King, "to take Ripperda, dead or alive;" and then
the minister found himself obliged to resist no longer. However, though
he stood quiescent while the lifeless Duke was wrapped in the coverlid,
and carried to the carriage, he called all around to witness, that he
protested against a deed so contrary to the law of nations, and the
commonest bonds of faith between man and man.
In passing through the hall, (Martini having been hurried thither by
his sentinels,) when the faithful Italian saw his master in so lost a
condition, he broke from his guards, and with a dreadful malediction on
his murderers, rushed towards him. The soldiers attempted to beat him
back; but throwing himself almost upon their swords, his attachment so
affected General Stanhope, that he said to the Alcaid:
"If it be not against your positive orders, let me see, Sir, that
you have some regard to humanity, in respecting the fidelity of that
man.--Let him accompany his master."
The Alcaid replied, he had no orders, but what related to the person
of the Duke; and therefore, to oblige his Excellency, he would permit
Martini to attend his Master.
"Not to oblige me;" returned the English minister, "but to lessen the
account of outrages I shall immediately charge upon this court to my
own! Therefore, on the peril of your safety, pretend to augment that
sum, by your own authority alone!"
The Alcaid bowed to Stanhope; and ordered Martini to be placed in the
carriage with his master, between a soldier, and an officer of the
police. The vehicle then drove off at a rapid gallop, followed by the
Alcaid and a grand escort of armed cavalry, towards the dismal Alcazar
of Segovia.
CHAP. XV.
Stanhope's indignation was as vehement, as it was sincere, at what had
been done; and, to every one of the royal ministers, separately and
collectively, he spoke his mind with corresponding boldness. Indeed,
his remonstrances were so strong and what he urged in the Duke's
favour, so powerful; that, as it came repeatedly before the King,
they began to fear the issue.--Difficulties in substantiating their
various allegations against Ripperda, were starting up every hour,
and the charge of poisoning, was completely disproved. From all these
considerations, they saw the necessity of keeping the ruined minister
from any chance of gaining the royal ear; which, they augured, could
hardly be prevented, when his son should arrive; whose high character,
notwithstanding the aspersions of his enemies, was whispered about,
from the representations of Sinzendorff. Indeed, those who had seen
Louis, and knew the foibles of the Queen, were afraid, that should she
see him, she might transfer that notice to the son, personal jealousy
had alone withdrawn from the father. Impelled by these apprehensions,
they moved every engine to convict the Duke of heresy, before Louis
could arrive; and in that case, should the Inquisition once claim him
as their victim, they knew the bigotry of Philip would abandon his
former favourite without another question.
While these machinations were going on at Madrid, Ripperda found the
Alcazar at Segovia answer every purpose of his malignant rivals,
but that of subduing his spirit. They had placed him in charge of a
creature of their own. And though the noble prisoner lay for several
days in such extremity, that for as many nights his faithful servant
despaired of his ever seeing the light of another morning, yet no
physician was permitted to enter those dismal walls. A dungeon was his
chamber; and the coarsest fare, his support. The men, who would not
dare to administer poison or strangulation, calculated without remorse
on this way of ridding themselves of an obnoxious life. When they
thought him sufficiently reduced by sickness and bodily hardships, they
put his soul to the torture, by sending a well-tutored priest to extort
a confession of his crimes. The demand was backed by an insulting
assurance, that, on such a proof of penitence, he should be allowed the
indulgence of the state apartments, and the range of the garden for
exercise.
Ripperda rejected these insidious proffers, with indignation. Sometimes
the language of his Inquisitor provoked him beyond self-controul and,
between the delirium of illness, and the phrenzy of despair, he,
more than once, was left raving, or insensible, in the arms of his
servant. As time wore away, and no tidings of Louis or Lorenzo arrived,
his enemies took advantage of this circumstance; and on Martini
incautiously dropping a hint of the young Marquis's future revenge on
the injurers of his father, the priest intimated that Louis was in too
good an understanding with his own interests, to unite them again with
a discarded traitor, though he were his parent.
This imputation on his son was too much for the small remnant of
patience that remained to the Duke. He was now reduced to a maddening
state of mental irritation; to an exasperated hatred of human nature;
and denouncing Austria and Spain in one wide malediction, he fiercely
commanded their agent to leave his presence. The man, however, sat
unmoved in soul or in countenance, while Martini looked with anguish
on his master; as on a noble galley he had lately seen proudly stemming
its steady way through the raging sea, but now beheld bereft of rudder
and compass, and at the mercy of every wind.
The malignant priest waited for a momentary calm, and then threw out
some dark hints, that in a few days Ripperda would be removed to a
surer durance; and on a double charge of having secretly maintained the
principles of heresy in himself; and entrusted the interests of His
Catholic Majesty to his son, whom he knew to be a professed heretic.
The Duke listened to this in gloomy silence; but when the subtle agent
proceeded to say, that this son had offered his evidence to witness the
same, Ripperda started from his chair. He now knew no bounds to his
wrath; and he proclaimed it in such a manner, that the terrified priest
flew before him. Insult and outrage seemed to have given that bodily
vigour to Ripperda, which medicine and surgery had taken no pains to
restore.
"Revenge is within me, like a new principle of life!" cried he, to
Martini; "I will free myself. And then they shall feel the strength
that lies in this single arm!"
Martini learnt from the servants of the prison, that the priest's
denunciation was no vain threat; for preparations were silently making
for the Duke's removal to the Inquisition, as soon as the King could
be brought to sign the warrant. All knew that such a warrant was the
signal of death; and of such a death, that human nature shuddered at
the bare idea of its horrors. Martini hastened to his master with the
intelligence. He found him leaning over a map of the world, which
lay on the table before him. Ripperda attended to all he said, with
profound attention. When he had finished speaking, he commanded him
to withdraw for an hour; after which time, he would tell him his
resolution.
It was two hours, before the Duke called him in from the anti-chamber,
which was his usual station as his master's guard; and then he calmly
told him that it was his determination to effect his own escape, and
to take his revenge from the pillars of Hercules. As he spoke, he
pointed with his finger to the spot on the map which marked the Rock of
Gibraltar. Martini readily came into all his master's plans; and gladly
heard him discuss them, with all his former sobriety of manner, and
decision of command.
"But," asked the faithful servant, "should the Marquis visit this
prison when we are gone, how is he to know where to follow you?"
"My actions shall proclaim to him and to the world where to follow me!"
replied the Duke; "If he be the parricide these people represent, he
will then repent the poor part he has now taken; and see the policy,
if not the duty, of being true to the fortunes of such a father. But,
if these wretches have slandered him, and he be indeed my son,--then I
will make that England, which fostered him, what I would have made this
ungrateful, ruined country!"
Martini saw that a temporary mist clouded the mind of his master;
but that noble nature had been so smitten by universal ingratitude,
he did not wonder it should doubt every dubious appearance. He,
however, had seen enough of Louis, to admire and to love him; and he
zealously exerted himself to overthrow the suspicions against him which
occasionally arose in the mind of his father. Something influenced
by his reasoning, Ripperda employed the greatest part of the day in
writing a large packet for his son. He inclosed it under a cover to
the Marquis Santa Cruz, who had a villa in the neighbourhood. Martini
delivered it the same night into the hands of the Marchioness, her
husband being still in Sardinia; but she assured the faithful servant
of her care of its contents.
Ripperda's attention was next directed to put his plan of escape, in
train for execution. It was modelled by the difficult situation of
the Alcazar. This state prison stands on the summit of a huge rock,
overlooking the city of Segovia on one side; and on the other, which is
nearly perpendicular, and covered with matted underwood to a thickness
almost impenetrable, it precipitates down to a fosse, filled from the
river Atayada. The castle was erected by the Moors; and is fortified
according to their ancient mode. The large old square towers are bound
round their battlements with a heavy stone-work of chains, proclaiming
from afar the subjection in which the Moresco princes formerly held
the Spanish land. This once formidable fortress, like their banished
race, was, in many parts, in a state of decay; and, in others, totally
destroyed. Some of the buttresses were mouldering away; and, where
one of the towers had fallen, its ruins dammed up part of the ditch;
at least it raised a causeway under the water, so high that a person
acquainted with its direction, might pass over very safely, knee-deep
in the stream.
In a dungeon of the corresponding tower, on this side of the castle,
was the prison of Ripperda.
Martini prepared a couple of stout mules, and concealed them amongst
the thickets on the opposite side of the fosse. In that part, it was
little better than a morass, from the occasional overflowing of the
waters at the rainy seasons. He also procured the habits of muleteers,
for the Duke and himself; and a ladder of ropes, to descend from the
window of the prison to the top of the rock; whence they were to
scramble their way down its declivity to the edge of the ditch.
Every thing was prepared for the momentous attempt; but on the very
morning of the day fixed on for the escape, Ripperda was visited by
a Jesuit of rank; who came on a special commission from the Marquis
de Paz, to apprize him that the King had signed his warrant for the
Inquisition; and to mock him with the assurance, that nothing could now
save him from the extremest vengeance of the offended church, but a
full acknowledgement of all his heretical and political iniquities. The
gracious message then was, that in such a case he should be represented
to the Pope, and possibly might be pardoned.
The Jesuit expatiated on the curse of heaven, which now manifested
itself on the head of the Duke in every relation of his life. Whether
in its public or private circumstances, all bore the marks of
universal excommunication. His son had deserted him; and the fortunes
on which he leaned as on a rock, were now sinking in the ocean; or
becoming the prey of corsairs, to swell the iniquity of infidels
like himself. All this circumlocution only informed Ripperda of a
misfortune, unworthy of his attention at the present moment: the loss
of his Levant merchantmen; part, in the late heavy storms; and part,
taken by the pirates of Barbary.
To impose upon this new emissary, he had received him, lying on his
bed, where he affected to have sustained a relapse of his illness;
and, during the whole discourse kept a stern silence. At last, being
vehemently urged for some reply to the proposition respecting a
penitential appeal to the Pope, Ripperda raised himself on his arm; and
with eyes glaring on his visitor, like the roused lion from his lair,
he fiercely replied:--
"Tell your employers, that before they again lay hands on the Duke de
Ripperda, he will have made his appeal to a tribunal which shall make
them tremble! And for your arguments! I too, studied in the Jesuits'
college, and am not to be ensnared!"
The priest supposed the infuriated Duke anticipated his own death, and
meant the tribunal of heaven; and shaking his head, while he pronounced
the words "reprobate!" and "accursed!" he left the apartment.
Martini urged that nothing should delay their departure that night;
for, after the information which the Jesuit brought, he saw the
approach of a Familiar in every shadow that flitted across the
dungeon wall.
Ripperda sat a long time, absorbed in thought. He heard no word
of Martini's; he saw nothing of his busy arrangements for their
flight. The corsairs of Barbary, his own Moorish ancestors, and the
banishment of part of their race, while his own line remained great
lords in Spain; were all before his mind's eye, in fearful, prompting
apparition. His warlike progenitor, Don Valor de Ripperda, two hundred
years ago, had married the only daughter of the Moresco King of Granada.
His son, the renowned Don Ferdinand de Valor shook the Christian
kingdoms of Spain to their centre, when the dark policy of Philip II.
issued his edict to expel the Moorish descendants from their ancient
seats in Spain. Aben-Humeya was the name of the Granada princes. De
Valor resumed it, when he raised the rebel standard on the Alpuxara
mountains.
"Another Philip shall hear that name again!" cried Ripperda to
himself; and covering his face with his hands, to prevent any outward
circumstance disturbing the current of his meditations, he sat without
word or motion, till the dungeon became wrapped in total darkness, and
the hour of his attempt drew near.
Martini had furnished himself with gold from his master's villa in the
neighbourhood; which he had visited secretly by the Duke's directions,
through ways known only to himself; and to a treasury under ground,
which had escaped the scrutiny of the police, and was abundant in
jewels and ingots. The wealth, which Ripperda deemed necessary for his
expedition, was sewed into various parts of their muleteer garments.
Martini appeared from his little anti-room, with a lamp in his hand, as
the prison clock struck ten. It was a rough autumnal night; a bright
moon, at times shewed her head through the flying clouds; and at others
was totally obscured under a mass of billowy vapours, rolling over each
other, and descending till they touched the hills.
The goaler had locked his prisoners in, and retired to rest. The
sentinels were planted at their posts; each on the ramparts of the
curtain that ran between the towers. Ripperda roused himself from
his portentous trance, and arrayed his noble figure in the rugged
habiliments of the muleteer. In vain he dyed his visage with the
bista-nut; in vain he shrouded himself in the leathern jerkin,
unshapely boots, and huge Sierra-bonnet; still the grandeur of his air,
and the grace of his person, proclaimed the descendant of princes; and
he who was used to command, and be obeyed.
The light Italian looked what he assumed; a brisk, active muleteer,
full of life and merriment.
Their belts were filled with loaded pistols, which they covered from
observation by the fringes of their vests; a poniard was in each
well-guarded bosom; and a trusty sword by their sides. Being fully
equipped, Ripperda looked around him on the walls of his dungeon. It
was still in the verge of possibility that his son might seek his
father in that dismal chamber. He paused; and hastily wrote a few
lines, to say that parent still lived, and would yet proclaim himself
with honour to the world. He directed the brief letter to the Marquis
de Montemar, and left it on the table.
Martini threw up his hooked-rope; which catching on the iron stanchel
of the window, he drew himself by it to the top, and dislodged the bars
from their slight holding. A few days before, he had filed away their
firm adhesion to their sockets. Having made open way for his master,
he fastened the rope-ladder to the opposite side of the window, and
dropping it out, slid down its sides till he reached the bottom. Here
he drove its spiked extremity into the earth. By that time the Duke
had mounted by the same means to the window; and drawing up the rope
by which he had ascended, remained seated on the stone casement, till
Martini had fixed all right below. It was no sooner accomplished, than
Ripperda was on the top of the ladder, and in a few seconds by his side.
The sentinel was singing a sequedilla above; and its notes came to them
with the wailing blast. The moon was now full upon them, and Martini
putting out his head a little from the wall distinctly saw the musket
and waving feather of the soldier as he walked to and fro at his post.
Their garments, however, were dark; and they moved cautiously along
amongst the bushes at the bottom of the curtain, till they reached the
ruined tower whose fallen masses lessened the perpendicular of the
descent. Like the rest, it was covered with thicket; and they clambered
down from bush to bush and projecting roots of trees now no more, till
they arrived at the brink of the fosse.
Martini had tried the ford the night before; and plunging in, which
example Ripperda followed, both found a firm footing in the water.
They crossed in safety; and Martini, taking up a fragment of the ruin,
rolled the Duke's sumptuous garments round it, and also his own, and
sunk it in the ditch. This was to prevent the suspicion of their having
changed their usual dresses, when they fled. Martini then turned aside
to seek the mules. The moon again shone out from the black clouds.
"Fortune favours me!" cried Ripperda, as he looked up to her bright
orb, and to the frowning battlements he had left. "Thy ensign may light
me back to this castle in a different garb from that in which I leave
it! When Spain sees me again, it will not be as a benefactor."
He turned into the thickets to follow Martini, and was soon lost in the
darkness.
CHAP. XVI.
The second night after Louis had left the port of Genoa, the vessel
which contained him was blown to sea by the severity of the weather;
and drove about, contending with the tempest, far from the coasts of
Spain, for one and twenty days. Each succeeding day seemed an age,
to the heart of a son, impatient to console and cheer a suffering
parent under his undeserved misfortunes; and sleep seldom closed those
vigilant eyes that were ever watchful for a change in the wind; or
for some repose in the turbulent element, which bore him along with
unstemmable fury from the shores he sought.
Again and again he questioned Lorenzo on every particular of what had
occurred, propitious or adverse, during his father's administration;
and on what befel him after his most atrocious overthrow. Sometimes his
anxiety to join him became so uncontroulable, he was ready to throw
himself into the waves, to breast their torrent towards the Spanish
shores; at other times, he called upon himself to endure the hard trial
Providence had laid upon his filial patience; and to await its good
time of bringing him to the side of his father.
At last the storms changed their direction; and though equally
boisterous, blew the little vessel with velocity towards the Balearic
Isles. To persist in stretching for Barcelona would have been madness
in such desperate weather; the commander, therefore, determined to make
the nearest Spanish port. As the ship approached the coast, and Louis
for the first time beheld that land, which had so long been the bourn
of all his wishes; first, as the theatre of his father's fame, and
the stage where himself was to contend for the same deathless prize!
then as the spot that contained that father, stripped of every outward
honour, and excluded from all hope, but in the dutiful devotedness of
his son! He gazed on it in a strange tumult of mind. It was the land of
his forefathers; and with what views, with what feelings, was he first
to set his foot upon its shores!
Its high and abrupt outline cut the horizon between sea and sky, like
a superb citadel of mountains, guarding its rich Hesperian vales. When
he saw the golden clouds rolling from the sides of those stupendous
natural bulwarks, as the descending car of day plunged into the
refulgent main, he thought of his father's setting sun; of his last
beams gilding the country he loved; of that fair country, opening
before himself; as he had anticipated, luminous in glory, like the
unfolding gates of paradise! But even while he gazed, and mused, and
felt a pleased augury in the splendid show, the golden hues faded from
the ethereal amphitheatre; the clouds, darkening in their shapes,
collected around the headlands; and in grey and sombrous masses rested
on their tops, till a fierce and eddying wind from the south-east,
dispersed them in one wide and obscuring mist over the whole scene.
Louis drew a deep sigh, and turned from the side of the vessel.
Next morning it anchored in the bay of Valencia. The business of
disembarking and of resuming his journey by land, direct to Madrid,
prevented all particular reflection, till he got into the carriage.
Lorenzo deemed it prudent not to say, at any of the post-houses, or
towns he passed through, who was his companion; and, though Louis felt
he was stealing into the country of his ancestors like a stranger
and a spy; yet, by this discretion, they travelled rapidly towards
the capital of Castile, without any unusual impediment, or even the
knowledge that Ripperda had been removed from the protection of the
British ambassador.
Whether he were passing over plain or mountain, cultivated fields, or
barren tracts, all were the same to Louis, while his eye was fixed
alone on the one object of his journey. He entered the barriers of
Madrid at midnight; but nothing could prevent him driving immediately
through the city and the northern gate, to the British residence.
When the carriage drew up to the portico, another had just driven away;
and through the yet open door, Lorenzo saw the Ambassador passing
through the hall. In a moment he was out of the carriage, and Louis
followed him. The porter was asked by Lorenzo, to conduct the Marquis
de Montemar to his Excellency. General Stanhope had just entered his
saloon when Louis was announced. Stanhope started at the name, knowing
it was that of the son of Ripperda. Louis approached him; his hat was
in his hand; and with hardly articulate accents, instead of what he
meant to say, he could only utter the agitated words--
"My father----"
That countenance could never be once looked upon by an unprejudiced
eye, without making an immediate interest in the heart. Though now worn
and pallid, Stanhope felt its power. He saw all the son in its haggard
lines; he heard all the son, in those few indistinct sounds.
"You expect to find your father, here, Sir?" replied the General.
By the manner of this question, Louis apprehended something of what had
happened, and with inexpressible alarm, he replied:
"And where is my father?"
"To the eternal disgrace of the cabinet of Spain," returned the
minister, "its orders violated the sanctuary of my house; and by an
outrageous execution of a most unjust decree, tore him from his bed,
and immured him in the Alcazar of Segovia!"--
Louis did not stagger under the shock of this intelligence; he firmly
replied;
"I am to understand from this, he is in prison?--On what pretence?"
"Treason against the state," returned Stanhope; "but they cannot make
their charges good. Visible facts outweigh false swearing; and though
Duke Wharton has been their counsellor night and day, nothing can be
proved against your father, but that he once was a heretic, and that
you are the same."
"Duke Wharton?" repeated Louis.
"Yes;" rejoined the ambassador, "he made a shew of rescuing the Duke de
Ripperda from the fury of the populace; but it was only to betray him
to the ministry. He left him in my house, and then drove to Grimaldo,
to tell him where to find him."
Louis sunk into a seat; and remained, with his hands locked, and his
teeth fixed in aiguish death-like coldness, while the ambassador
continued his account of the affair.
He assured his agonized auditor, that notwithstanding the
circumspection of the present ministers, to conceal their
correspondence with the English Duke, he had ascertained the fact of
its having preceded the fall of Ripperda several months; and that it
was Wharton's task to draw Ripperda into all the situations, which had
been wrested to his disadvantage. In consequence of such manoeuvres,
it was represented to the King, that Ripperda had privately conferred
with Wharton in a pass of the Carinthian mountains; and that at some
other place, an affair of secrecy was discussed between them, at which
Richelieu the French ambassador was present. These things were told to
Stanhope by an authority he could not dispute, but must not mention;
and the same informant added, that whatever were the objects Ripperda
coalesced in with Wharton, the cause of James Stuart was not one; for,
it was in resentment of Ripperda's refusing to embrace his views there,
that Wharton betrayed his correspondence with the Duke, and alleged
against him treasons of other, and terrible tendencies.
Stanhope observed, that from some of the present ministers being
secretly inclined to the Stuart cause, he well understood why Duke
Wharton had abandoned all bonds of honour to maintain them in their
seats. But could he have found any signs of a changing principle in
Ripperda, it was not to be doubted that he would have preferred a
single auxiliary of such mental strength, to any combination of more
feeble powers. Before Stanhope thought proper to repeat to the fallen
minister, what had been confided to him respecting his pretended
deliverer; Ripperda had spoken of Wharton's conduct in his rescue,
as a deed of generosity that left him no words in which to express
his admiration. Stanhope then disclosed the relation of his secret
informant; and ended with denominating the alleged previous meetings,
as either falsehoods of his enemies, or, the confession of them, an
unexampled instance of perfidy in the English Duke. Ripperda, at first
listened incredulously to the charges against his deliverer; but when
the rencounter amongst the Carinthian mountains was mentioned, and some
other corroborating circumstances followed that disclosure, the Duke
abruptly exclaimed,
"It is all perfidy, for the facts are true!"
At this part of the narrative, Louis turned his powerful eyes upon the
ambassador. Stanhope thought he read their suspicions.
"Hear me to an end," continued he, "and you will find the whole
perfidy belongs to the Duke of Wharton."
Louis dropped his heavy eye-lids over those scathed eyes, which he
would have been glad to have closed in death; and bowed without a
word. General Stanhope then repeated to him, all that the impassioned
resentment of Ripperda had excited him to avow. He declared his ancient
and inexorable hatred of Wharton and his politics; he boasted that the
transaction to which the Duke de Richelieu was privy, had been one of
mutual vengeance; that he quarrelled with Wharton at the Cardinal's
table, and the same night took his revenge with the sword.
Louis put his hand upon his burning forehead.
"I failed of reaching his heart," said Ripperda, "but my sword went
so near it, we believed him slain. He was taken up for dead; and
Richelieu and the Cardinal conjured me to hush the affair. I obliged
them; and heard no more of him, till like my evil genius, he appeared
in the very mountains he speaks of; and under the darkness of night,
returned to me the dispatches, which, I doubt not, his own emissaries
had taken from my courier. I did not know it was him till several hours
after his departure. The mantle the supposed outlaw had worn, was then
brought to me; and I recognized it to be that of the Cardinal, in which
I saw him wrap the senseless, body. His blood was on it.--Stanhope,
we were enemies!--always mortal enemies. Think then, what must have
been the revulsion in my breast, when he I had assailed to such
extremity, rescued me from the murderous rabble, and brought me to the
unquestionable refuge of your house!"
Stanhope subscribed to the reasonableness of the Duke's first
impressions, as the immediate effect of such supposed generosity. But
since it was proved that Wharton was actuated by the reverse of a
generous motive; that he had busied himself in the secret counsels of
Ripperda's public enemies; and had gained the ear of the Queen, so
far as to influence the rejection of every letter from her once prime
favourite: and not satisfied with these treacheries, had even had
recourse to representing circumstances which contained no offence in
themselves, under colours so invidious, as to wear whatever treasonable
shape he chose they should assume.
"What," asked Stanhope of the Duke de Ripperda, "what are you to think
of such a man?"
"As the most accomplished villain that ever disgraced the name of man,"
cried the Duke.
And then, without further hesitation, he opened out the whole of
Wharton's converse with him, during the half hour they were alone
together in the British residence. It was to urge him to revenge
himself on his implacable foes in Spain and Austria, by immediately
embracing the Bavarian and Stuart claims. He argued, that should he
take this step, France and Prussia, three parts of Germany, and all
Italy, would contend for his guiding hand.
"In short, his persuasions were such," added Stanhope, "that your
father owned to me, did he not connect honour with revenge, he would
have been tempted to accept his offers; but, he said, he had determined
to die as he had lived, by his principles; and he rejected all. The
consequence was, the disappointed emissary of these double treasons,
immediately accused him of his own crimes. And, that he might never
meet a second chastisement from the man he had betrayed, it was he that
urged Grimaldo to hold your father in perpetual imprisonment."
The substance of Wharton's proffers to his father were so like those he
had made to himself; and their rejection having been followed up by the
very conduct he had threatened in the chateau garden,--"Ripperda and
de Montemar shall find what it is to have Wharton for an enemy!" Louis
could not doubt this treacherous vengeance being a fact; and crying
within his soul, against him who had perpetrated so black a revenge,
he started from his seat. The expression of his face was terrific; the
image of sweet humanity seemed blotted from it; and with a burning
eye, and a complexion of death, he turned from Stanhope; and totally
forgetful of his presence, took a pistol from his belt.
The Englishman grasped his arm.
"Marquis, what do you intend?"
Louis scarcely moved his head as he replied:--
"To seek Duke Wharton."
Stanhope laid his hand gently, but firmly on the pistol.
"Give me this useless weapon," said he, "the treacherous Duke is
already hidden from your vengeance. He passed last night in private
conference with the triumvirate; and this morning, at day-break, he
left Madrid, but in what direction he is gone, no one can guess."
Louis yielded his pistol to the demand of Stanhope, relaxing his
fingers from the iron grasp in which he held it, and trembling from
head to foot, he leaned on the sympathising representative of his
maternal country. At that moment the crime and inefficacy of bloodshed,
in avenging injuries like his, or any injuries, struck upon his soul.
The venerable form of Mr. Athelstone appeared before him, and turning
from the supporting arm of General Stanhope, he buried his face in his
hands, and stood immoveable, lost in the multitude and agonies of his
thoughts.
The ambassador left him to recover alone. When he re-entered he found
him walking up and down the room, with a composed step. Louis advanced
to his friendly host. "Will you pardon all that you have just seen of
my weakness, and assist me to join my father instantly?"
Anticipating this request, during his absence Stanhope had dispatched
two messengers to the Count de Grimaldo, (who he knew was not yet gone,
from council, though the hour was so late,) to obtain an order to the
warden of the Alcazar at Segovia, for the admission of the Marquis de
Montemar to the imprisoned Duke. To the first messenger the Count gave
a civil refusal; adding, that such permission would be a dangerous
instance of indulgence to so signal a criminal as the Duke de Ripperda;
and the enterprizing spirit of the son might be feared. Stanhope sent
his secretary back, with a strong remonstrance against the justice of
this refusal; adding, that should it be repeated, he must consider the
act as a personal insult to himself: it was hostile to every principle
of an Englishman; and, he had hoped, to every principle in civilized
man. "In England, (said he) law and equity war against crime, not
against nature. There, the criminal, under sentence of death for the
worst offences, is suffered to see those near and dear to him. Humanity
must bench with justice; or punishment itself becomes crime, and
degenerates into revenge. The Marquis de Montemar, though he bear a
Spanish title, has had a British education. He may be willing to avenge
himself of his father's enemies; but as neither plot nor treachery are
taught in a British school, trust his father's captivity to his honour,
and you cannot hold him in stronger bonds."
The Spanish minister did not deem it politic to repulse a second
request from the English Ambassador on such a subject, and with a
polite excuse for his former refusal, he dispatched the signed order
for the admission of Ripperda's son.
In the course of half an hour Louis was re-seated in his travelling
carriage, with four fresh horses, furnished from General Stanhope's
stables; and accompanied by Lorenzo, (having left his servants at the
ambassador's) he set forward to Segovia.
CHAP. XVII.
The sun had risen, when the equipage that contained Louis de Montemar,
ascended the mountainous heights of the Guadarama. From a rocky valley,
diverging down to the eastern horizon, and shaded with every umbrageous
tree and shrub of that luxuriant climate, a distant view of the
Escurial was visible. The rays of the ascending sun were bright upon
it: and the superb palace of the Spanish kings shone in its fullest
splendour.
Lorenzo looked round on Louis. His countenance was still the same as
when he entered the carriage; and the page did not venture to call his
attention to the magnificent view before him. League after league was
traversed. St. Ildefonso's gilded pinnacles next presented themselves
on the declivity of a beautiful hill. Its fountains and its ambrosial
vistas rivalled those of Versailles; in emulation of whose regal
elegancies, the grandson of Louis XIV. had caused it to be erected. But
here, again, Lorenzo was silent; and glittering domes, and sparkling
fountains, lowly cottages, and gliding rivulets; all were alike passed,
by the abstracted eye of Louis, without note or cognizance.
The chesnut woods of Antero de Herrares opened their enamelled glades
before the travellers. They crossed a marble bridge, whose pillared
arches and light ballustrades clasped the broadest arm of the river
Atayada, which here flowed in a deep and pellucid stream. A little
onward was a range of Ionic colonades of the same spotless material,
diverging on each side from a triple gate of gilded iron-work
surmounted by arches, whose classic architraves were wrought in Italy.
A golden eagle, the armorial ensign of the Ripperda family, crested the
centre arch. Within were the park and the deer, and the mansion rearing
its brilliant columns amidst the redundant groves of a Spanish autumn.
The orange, the citron, and the pomegranate, formed the luxuriant
avenue; and where fruit bloomed on the branches, the fragrance of the
blossom mingled with the breath of the countless flowers beneath, and
filled the air with perfume.
The same feeling which had chained the tongue of Lorenzo, while passing
indifferent objects, however note-worthy, now precipitated him to
speak, and he exclaimed:
"Here, my Lord, is the Duke's Segovian villa!--all the windows are shut
up; and not a soul stirring, where we were once so many, and so gay!"
Louis glanced on what might have been his home; and the flying horses
shot by those splendid gates, to find their owner in a prison! He did
not answer Lorenzo, not even with a sigh; but looked steadily forward,
till the dark towers of the Alcazar appeared over the intervening
woods. He read their name, in their blackness and their chains; but
he neither groaned nor shut his eyes on the dismal abode to which his
father was transferred.
After ascending a long and winding road, they passed through the oldest
quarter of the town of Segovia, still upon an ascent, till, on crossing
the rattling timbers of a draw-bridge, the carriage stopped beneath a
massy archway. Several sentinels drew around the vehicle, with demands
whence it came, and what was the object of the persons it contained.
Lorenzo, being most ready in the language of the questions, abruptly
answered:
"We bear an order from the Count Grimaldo to the warden of the
Alcazar, for admittance to the Duke de Ripperda."
An officer from the warden appeared, to receive and examine the
passport. Louis alighted, and presented the order. The deputy bowed
respectfully, when he read the name of the Marquis de Montemar, and
requested him to follow him "to the prison of the Duke."
"The prison of my father!" said he to himself.
"But what is in the sound of a word, when the fact is already present."
With unbreathing silence, and a heart into which all that was man
within him was summoned, he followed his conductor. They reached a
heavy door, studded with iron, and traversed with massy bars. The
deputy drew a huge key from his breast, and opened it.
As it grated horribly in the guards of the lock, and the damp and
dreariness of the passages struck on the shuddering senses of Lorenzo,
the affectionate youth exclaimed:
"Oh, my honoured Lord! Is it in such a place I find you!"
Louis turned at the exclamation, and looked on the faithful servant;
but no tear was in his eye, no sound on his lip.
The door was opened; and the deputy stood back, while the son of
the Duke entered the vestibule of the prison. The unoccupied pallet
of Martini lay in one corner of this miserable anti-room. Louis saw
nothing but the door that led to the interior apartment; and passing
through the vestibule with one step, though with an awful sense of his
father's fallen dignity, and of the dignity whose affliction even a son
must not break on too abruptly; he gently pushed forward the half-open
door, and found himself in a large and dripping dungeon. He started,
and gazed around; for all was horrible, but all was solitude. "Where
is my father?"
"In his bed," cried the deputy, who now entered, "He is ill."
Louis hastily, but with a light tread, passed across the pavement to
the mattrass, which lay behind a woollen curtain in a low vaulted
part of the cell. The officer, with less delicacy of attention to the
supposed slumbers of an invalid, followed him. Lorenzo glided in also;
and at the very moment in which the deputy had pressed before Louis,
to announce to the sleeping Ripperda, the arrival of his son, the
page's eye fell on a letter which lay on the table. In the instant the
officer's appalled ejaculation proclaimed that no Duke was in the bed,
Lorenzo saw it was directed to the Marquis de Montemar, and snatching
it up, put it in his breast.
"Then, where is he?" exclaimed Louis, throwing himself between the door
and the deputy, who was hastily moving towards it; "You pass not here,
till you tell me, to what deeper dungeon you have removed him; for no
power on earth shall keep me from my father."
The man stood still, and the consternation in his countenance, more
than his asseverations of total ignorance on the subject, convinced
Louis that whatever was become of his father, this person was innocent
of his fate. He therefore demanded to see the warden, declaring, while
he insisted on his demand, that the order he had presented, was from
the minister to admit him to the Duke where-ever he might be; and on
the authority of that order, he would force his way to his presence
against every opposition.
The officer affirmed, that the warden could know nothing of the Duke's
strange absence; for that he, the deputy, had himself secured the
doors on the prisoner and his servant the preceding night; and no one
else, not even the warden, possessed a duplicate key to that dungeon.
While he continued to speak with vehemence, and in manifest terror
of punishment for what had happened, the determined son of Ripperda
repeated his demands to have the warden summoned; for he would not
leave the spot till he was convinced that both officers were ignorant
of the cause of his father's disappearance.
The deputy being now suffered to go to the dungeon door, called a
sentinel from the end of the stone gallery, and briefly told the man to
remain with the Marquis till he should return. But as he withdrew, he
had the precaution to turn the key of the dungeon on those it contained.
The sentinel stood with fixed arms where his employer had left him, and
Lorenzo glided silently round the dismal apartment, prying into every
thing. Having found the letter, (which he yet kept carefully concealed,
till he could safely shew it to his master,) he thought he might
possibly discover some other memorandum from Martini to himself; and,
not doubting that the Duke and his brother had made their escape, he
left no nook or crevice unexplored.
Louis remained seated against the table, with his arms folded, and
gazing intently on the open window. But it was the gaze of concentrated
thought, not of observation. Indeed it could hardly have seemed
possible to him, that the Duke could have withdrawn himself through
that aperture. It was not only eighteen feet above the bottom of the
dungeon, but from the shadows in the depth of the wall, appeared a mere
crenille, too narrow for any man to pass through. These objections
would have occurred to Louis, against the supposition of this having
been the way of his father's escape; had the idea of an escape once
presented itself to his mind. But he repelled the first intimation
from the deputy of such a suspicion. "From what," said he, "should my
father fly? Justice must speak at last, and acquit him with honour!"
In his own person, he felt that he would sooner be condemned in the
face of day by an iniquitous sentence, than incur the stigma of
conscious guilt by flying from the trial it was his right to demand.
"No," cried he, "the Duke de Ripperda would not so desert himself!"
While he believed this, his heart died within him at the thought of his
father's endless captivity in some remote prison, where he might never
hear the voice of consolation, or see the face of a comforter; and
then the spectre of midnight murder suddenly presented itself. His eye
hastily scanned the flinty pavement, but there were no traces of blood;
all was clear, and all was orderly in the wretched apartment, without
any traces of struggle.
In the midst of these reflections, the throng of hurry and alarm was
heard in the gallery, the great key once more turned in its guards;
and the hinges grating roughly as the door was pushed open, a crowd
of soldiers, preceded by the warden and the deputy, poured into the
dungeon.
Louis stood to receive them. The warden, holding the order of the
Marquis de Montemar's admittance in his hand, in the disorder of his
consternation hastily advanced to him and exclaimed,
"Marquis, where is the Duke, your father?"
"That is my demand of you," replied Louis, pointing to the order; "the
Count Grimaldo expected I should find him here. Here he is not. And you
are answerable for his safety, and his appearance."
In glancing round the dungeon, from the floor to the cieling, the
warden's eye was quicker than the deputy's; and without attending to
the reply of Louis, he exclaimed, "He has escaped through the window!"
"Impossible!" cried the deputy, "he could not reach it."
"Who reached it to take out the bars?" returned his superior, "he is
gone, and by that way. Round, soldiers, to the ditch!"
Louis stood in wordless astonishment at this confirmation of what he
too had thought impossible, though the impossibility to him had rested
on the mind of the Duke, not on the means of escape: but when he saw
the men withdraw with fixed bayonets, to hunt his father's life, (for
he knew his resolution too well to believe, that after having once
chosen the alternative of flight, he would submit to be re-taken;) all
his father's danger rushed upon him; and conscious to no other impulse
than that of defending him, he turned impetuously to throw himself
before the soldiers.
The warden saw the movement, and guessed the intention. He was a man
of gigantic muscle, and seizing the arm of Louis, called aloud to bar
the egress.
"What violence is this?" demanded Louis, forcibly extricating himself
and rushing towards the door. But the sentinel without had thrust the
bolt into its guard.
"You must be my prisoner, Marquis," returned the warden, "until those
men have searched the neighbourhood.
"On your peril!" exclaimed Louis; "I demand to be released!--In the
name of your sovereign, and of your laws, I demand it!--You have no
right to imprison an unoffending man, who came hither under the safe
conduct of your minister's signet."
As he spoke, he heard the report of a carbine; and desperate with
apprehension for his father, he snatched his only remaining pistol
from his belt. "Open that door, warden," cried he, "or I will make a
passage through your heart!"
The wary Spaniard did not stop to answer, but striking aside the arm
that held the pistol, it went off; and the ball lodged in the opposite
wall. Louis then felt for his sword. His athletic opponent was on the
watch; and seizing him round the body.
"Marquis," cried he, "these outrages can only undo yourself. If the
Duke de Ripperda be found, he must be taken alive, at the risk of those
who seek him. Kill me, and you are no less a prisoner; for the door is
fastened, beyond your strength to burst."
Louis was alone with this powerful man; for Lorenzo, with the same
intentions as his master, had rushed out with the soldiers. While he
stood, apparently quiescent, in the clutch of his adversary, he still
held his hand on his sword. He discredited the pledge for Ripperda's
safety, and resolutely replied. "If my father have fallen, there shall
be life for life!"
And with the word, he suddenly wrenched himself from the warden's
grasp, and as suddenly drawing out his sword, stood with his back
against the door.--"I am here, till I know the issue of this search;
but I am not, a second time to be disarmed. Repeat to the sentinel
without, your command respecting my father's safety; and demand of him,
the cause of the firing of that carbine!"
The warden had no weapons, but his bodily strength; and finding that
the nerve of his young antagonist, when braced by despair, was equal
to his own; and seeing that desperation was in his eyes, and a sword
in his hand; he thought it prudent to comply; and he called to the
sentinel to dispatch a man round with the demands of the Marquis.
Never, since the hour of his birth, did Louis find himself in so
terrible a situation. He was hearkening to the distant voices of them,
he believed were his father's murderers, and he found it impossible
to get to his rescue! He was, himself, acting the part of a man of
violence, to one who was only performing his hard, but cruel duty! As
he stood, gloomily lost in the horror of the moment, another carbine
was fired, accompanied by shouts from the soldiers. He thought he heard
a groan follow the report, and that it issued from below the window.
Without a word, or almost a thought, he threw his sword from him, and
springing on the opposite wall, found that he had not climbed the
perpendicular cliffs of Lindisfarne in vain. The stones were rough;
and giving short but sufficient hold to his hand and foot, he gained
the deep recess of the window before he scarcely knew he had left the
ground. The act seemed but one spring, to the amazed warden. Louis had
no sooner reached the window, than he would have thrown himself from
the flinty butments upon the top of the precipice. Happily the voice of
Lorenzo, from the rock beneath, arrested him.
To descend on this side, by clambering, was impossible; the outer part
of the wall being worn inward in great and abrupt hollows, till that
part of the tower where the window was excavated, hung over the rock in
a shelving state.
"The Duke cannot be found!" cried Lorenzo.--"For his sake, and for
God's do not attempt quitting the dungeon by that window! The soldiers
have just shot away this rope-ladder, by which he must have escaped."
While he spoke, he lifted it from the ground. The soldiers had spied
it at a distance, hanging loose from the wall; and as they scrambled
through the matted brambles towards the point, one of them took aim,
and it fell. Lorenzo, had made his approach, before; to see what
farther evidence of Ripperda's flight might be found there; and while
the echoes rang with the men's shouts, at so poor an achievement; he
fortunately saved Louis further danger, by shewing him the trophy,
"But another carbine was fired?" demanded Louis.
"A soldier slipped his foot, and his piece went off," replied Lorenzo.
"Discard me, kill me; but believe me true!" cried the page, aware of
his master's surmises, and seeing his hand ready to leave its grasp;
"quit that perilous place, I conjure you. The pursuers are gone round,
to say the Duke has escaped beyond their recovery!"
Louis was satisfied; and turning towards the dungeon, the entering
soldiers doubly assured him; and dropping from the window, inward, he
sprung upon the floor.
The men gave a hurried account of their fruitless search.
"Marquis," said the warden, "you must excuse me, that I do not restore
a sword which has menaced an officer of the crown; but the door is
open, and you may now pass hence. My employers will properly notice the
violence of the son, when they have information of the flight of the
father."
"Sir," returned Louis, "if I have injured you, in my struggles for
the liberty that was my right, I regret it; and if you know either a
father's or a son's heart, you will not reject my apology."
"Soldiers, attend the Marquis de Montemar to the gates," coldly replied
the warden.
Louis doubted. He might yet be deceived. He knew not where to seek
his father. The enlargement that was now offered him, re-awakened
his suspicions; and without noticing the order of the warden, he
stood still. Lorenzo was more present to himself. He had entered
with a second groupe of soldiers; and putting his hand gently on his
master's arm, almost unconsciously drew him out of the dungeon. On the
threshold, he whispered:--
"If you are to succour the Duke, we must not linger here!"
The words were a talisman on the benumbed faculties of Louis; he
hastened forward, and threw himself into the carriage.
"Back to the British ambassador's," cried Lorenzo to the postilions.
The rapid vehicle once more passed over the draw-bridge and wheeled
down the declivity through the town. On a rising knoll, Louis caught
another glimpse of the dismal towers in which he had endured such
variety of mental agony, in the course of so few hours! He drew his
eyes from them, and the carriage plunged into the long avenue of aloes
which led to the wooded heights of Antero de Herrares.
Lorenzo pulled up the windows, and let drop the silken blinds. He then
put one hand in his bosom, and laid the other on his master's arm.
"My dear Lord," cried he, "here is a letter from your father!"
Louis started; "Lorenzo?" and snatched the letter that was held to him.
It was his father's hand-writing on the address! While he tore open
the seal, Lorenzo told him where he had found it. It was not necessary
to explain why he had concealed it until this moment. Louis read as
follows:--
"If my son have not abandoned me, he will probably visit my prison,
and find this. In such a case, he may go to the house of the noble
Spaniard who was his uncle's guest at Lindisfarne. He has a packet in
his possession, that will inform Louis de Montemar of the fate of his
father."
"William, Duke de Ripperda."
There was a thousand daggers in the few first words of this brief
epistle. If my son have not abandoned me. To be suspected by his
father of such parricide, was almost more than he could bear. He
clenched the letter against his bursting heart, and fell back in the
seat.
"My master! my dear master!" exclaimed the pitying Lorenzo, as he saw
the fearful changes in his countenance, and opened a window to give him
air. Louis unclosed his eye-lids; and those once cheering and radiant
eyes, which used to break from under them like the morning star from
the tender shades of night, turned on his faithful servant, bloodshot
and dimmed with bitterest anguish.
"What does my Lord say, in that cruel letter," demanded the
affectionate youth, "that can have affected you thus?"
Louis put the letter into his hands. It was not needful to point to
the lines which had barbed him so severely; and Lorenzo read them
with a bleeding heart, both for father and son. He remarked, that
outraged as the Duke had been by the ingratitude of all the world, the
extraordinary length of their voyage might have driven him to some
misconception regarding their detention.
"It is hard," continued he, "to be entirely just ourselves, when every
body about us treats us with injustice; and the Duke, though a great
and a good man, is yet a man; and must share some of our infirmities.
You, my Lord, will seek an opportunity to obey him immediately; and
then, all these too natural suspicions must be destroyed."
Louis looked at the affectionate speaker.
"Excellent Lorenzo!" said he, "my father has found one faithful in your
brother. If you too adhere to me, I shall not be quite alone in this
desert universe!--I may yet find my father," murmured he to himself,
"and die before him! My life, my life, is all I may now have, to prove
my soul's integrity!" Much of this, and more, of the sad wanderings of
a spirit overtasked, and wounded in its most susceptible nerve, passed
in the mind, and on the half-uttering lips of Louis.
"But where," asked Lorenzo, "are we to seek this friend of Lindisfarne?"
"It is the Marquis Santa Cruz," replied Louis; "General Stanhope will
probably tell me where to find him."
"The Marquis has a villa in the Val del Uzeda, between St. Ildefonso
and the Escurial," replied Lorenzo, "and there, I know, his family
usually resides, as the Marchioness is sometimes in attendance on the
Queen."
"Then," cried Louis, "direct the postillions to drive thither. If the
Marquis be there, I may yet see my father before another night englooms
me in this direful Spain!"
CHAP. XVIII.
It was noon, when Louis again passed the marble gates of the Palacio
del Atayada, the deserted mansion of his father; and after journeying
over many a league of Arcadian landscape abundant in the olive and the
vine; and waving with harvests, which the paternal policy of Ripperda
had spread over hill and dale, the heights of Uzeda re-opened to him
the distant and transverse vallies of St. Ildefonso and the Escurial.
His carriage turned into a cleft of the hills, overhung with every
species of umbrageous trees; and out of whose verdant sides innumerable
rills poured themselves over the refreshened earth, from the urns of
sculptured nymphs and river-gods reposing in the shade. In the bosom
of this green recess stood the villa of Santa Cruz. All around spoke of
elegance and taste. The carriage drove under the light portico; and the
servants, who thronged round, gave earnest of the hospitable temper of
the owner.
Lorenzo questioned them, whether their lord were at the villa. They
replied in the negative, but that his lady was there.
"Then I must see the Marchioness," returned Louis; and he sprang from
the carriage, the door of which a servant had already opened. Lorenzo
remained below for further orders, while his master was conducted up
stairs into a splendid saloon, whose capacious sides were hung with the
finest pictures of the Italian and Flemish schools. But no object could
displace from the vision of Louis, the dungeon which had contained his
father.
He had written his name with pencil upon a leaf which he tore from his
pocket-book, and sent it to the Marchioness. It was some time before
a reply was returned to him, or, indeed, any person re-appeared. His
anxiety became insufferable. He paced the room with impatience, and
a sickening heart. For he knew not but the delay of first one ten
minutes, and then of another, before he could follow the track he
expected to find in the packet he sought, might, by leaving his father
undefended in all the personal dangers of a pursuit, be the very means
of allowing him to be retaken.
In the midst of these harassing fears, the door opened, and a young
lady entered, who, by her air, could not be mistaken for other than
one of the noble members of the family, though her dress was that of a
religieuse. It was all of spotless white, with a long black rosary
hanging from her breast. Her face was mild and pale; but it was the
transparent hue of the virgin flower of spring, clad in her veiling
leaves. It was Marcella.
Her mother had received the name of the Marquis de Montemar in her
chamber. She was an invalid; but remembering the reception his family
had given to her son in Lindisfarne, she sent her daughter to bid him
welcome.
When Marcella entered, she drew back a moment, on beholding so
different a person from the one she had expected to see in the son of
the Duke de Ripperda. He had been reported by the ladies of Vienna as
"the glass of fashion, and the mold of form!" Her brother had described
him as gay and volant; full of the rich glow of health, and animated
with a joyous life, that made the sense ache to follow it through all
its wild excursiveness. The Spaniards, on returning from Vienna, spoke
of him as vain or proud, a coxcomb or a cynic, just as their envy
or their prejudices prevailed. But Sinzendorff, her revered uncle,
had written of him as one whom all the women loved, while he loved
only honour. His letters had given the Marchioness an account of the
young minister's entanglement and release from the woman who had laid
similar snares for her son; and he dwelt with encomium on his unshaken
firmness through every change of fortune. As Marcella passed from her
mother's chamber, these recollections crowded upon her; and all were
calculated to increase the timidity of her approach. She was going to
present herself, and alone, to an admired young man, proud in conscious
dignity, whose lustre calamity could not dim, and whose spirit was
exasperated by oppression!
But instead of this lofty Marquis de Montemar, gallant in attire, and
resplendent in manly beauty; stern in resentful virtue; and upholding
in his own high port, all the threatened honours of his race; she
beheld a youthful, and a fine form indeed, but in a neglected dress
covered with dust. The jewels of his hat were broken away; and its
disordered plumage darkly shaded his colourless cheek and eyes, whence
every ray of joy had fled. Beauty was there; but it was the beauty of
sadness; it was the crushed ruin of what might once have been bright
and aspiring.
Marcella wondered, for a moment, at the change which grief must have
made; and with a very different sentiment from that with which she
entered, she approached the son of Ripperda. She held a packet in her
hand. Louis's heart bounded towards it, and he hastily advanced.
"From my father, Madam!"
"It was left with my mother two nights ago, by the Duke de Ripperda's
servant;" replied she; "and he informed her, that the envelope directed
to my father, contained a letter for the Marquis de Montemar. My mother
would not detain it from you till she could present it herself; being
only now preparing to leave her chamber, and therefore she confided its
delivery to me."
As she spoke, she put the packet into his hand. By these words he
found he was in the presence of the Marquis Santa Cruz's daughter;
and, expressing his thanks, he begged permission to peruse it before
he quitted the house. She answered politely in the affirmative, and
immediately withdrew.
Louis had observed nothing of her face or figure, to distinguish her
again from the next stranger who might enter the room. The novelty of
her dress, however, could not escape even his possessed eye; and in
the moment he learnt who she was, he thought of Ferdinand and Alice,
and of their future union; of which her assumption of that garb seemed
a promise. But as soon as she disappeared, he forgot both, and every
accompanying circumstance, and even where he was, in his eagerness to
make himself master of the contents of the packet.
On breaking the seal, a letter at the top of a bundle of papers
presented itself. He seized it, and began to read it with avidity. It
was written by Ripperda under all the exasperation of his mind, when
he believed himself not merely the object of the world's ingratitude,
but abandoned by his own and only son. Yet he forebore to specify his
injuries; saying, that to name them, would be to stigmatize the whole
human race. He had hitherto lived for universal man:--his days should
terminate on a different principle. He would yet confound his enemies,
and astonish Europe. But it should not be by embracing revenge through
the treasons, whose arms were extended to receive and to avenge him.
He would maintain his integrity to the last; and from the heights of
Gibraltar assert the honour of a name, whose last glories might die
with him, but never should wane in his person till he set in the grave.
Louis would not think twice on the implied suspicions against himself,
which every sentence of the letter contained. They were bitterness to
his heart; but he knew his innocence. He now knew the point to which
his father was gone; and thither he determined to follow him.
The papers in the packet contained schedules of the vast properties of
the Duke, that were cast over the face of Spain, in landed estates,
immense manufactories, and countless avenues of merchandize.
"I bestow them all on my son;" was written by Ripperda on the envelope
which contained the catalogue; "they may give power and consequence
to the Marquis de Montemar, when he has forgotten that the Duke de
Ripperda was his father."
A memorandum of his territories in Spanish America was bound up with
the others; and brief directions added on each head, how his son was to
secure his rights in them all.
Louis ran over these lists and their explications, that he might not
leave a single word unnoted; but when he had finished, he closed up all
that related to pecuniary affairs, and laying them aside in the packet,
again turned to the letter. It alone would be his study and business,
till he should reach Gibraltar, and prove to his father, that by his
side, in poverty or disgrace, it was his determination to live or die.
He was yet leaning over the letter, perusing it a second time, when
he heard the door open behind him. He looked round, and saw the
daughter of Santa Cruz re-enter, supporting on her arm an elderly lady
of a noble air, who appeared an invalid. He guessed her to be the
Marchioness; and rising instantly, approached her. "Marquis," said
she, "I come, thus in my sick attire, to welcome the son of the Duke
de Ripperda, to the house of my husband. I know his respect for your
father; also his esteem of yourself; and whatever may have been the
misrepresentations of evil tongues, my brother the Count Sinzendorff
has not left the character of the Marquis de Montemar without an
advocate."
The Marchioness observed a brilliant flush shoot over the face of her
auditor, as he bowed his head to her last words. She added, in a still
more respectful tone, softened even to tenderness by the sentiment
of pity; "The machinations of these enemies have been too successful
against the Duke. Indeed, I doubt not, that packet has spared me the
pain of saying, you must seek your noble father in the Alcazar of
Segovia."
Louis briefly related the events of the last six hours; and presented
her the note to read, which his servant had found on the table in
the prison, and which had referred him to the Marquis Santa Cruz. The
Marchioness had seated herself, and placed her guest beside her. She
read the note; and looked with maternal sympathy upon the distressful
countenance of the duteous son to whom it addressed so cutting a
reproach. Her commiserating questions, and the knowledge she shewed
of all the virtues of his father; added to the information, that her
husband was hastening from Italy, to interest himself in his cause;
seemed to demand from Louis his fullest confidence. He revealed to
her the substance of what his father had written in the packet; and
declared his intention to follow him immediately to Gibraltar.
The Marchioness approved of his reunion with his father, but resisted
his quitting her house, till he had taken the repose she saw he so
much needed. Louis would have been unmoved in his resolve to commence
his journey that very night, had she not suggested, that, severely as
the Duke had been used before his flight, should he be retaken, his
treatment would be yet more rigorous; and, therefore, his son must
be careful not to be himself the guide to so fearful a catastrophe.
She assured Louis, that now ministers knew of his arrival, all his
movements would be watched; and that above all things, his pursuing the
direct route of his father, must be avoided. She urged, that a rash
step at this crisis, might be fatal; and, therefore, conjured him to
remain that night at least, under her roof; where he might consider
and reconder his future plans, and take the rest that was necessary to
support him through the trials he might yet have to sustain.
There was so much good sense and precaution in this counsel, that Louis
no longer found an argument to oppose it; and adopting her advice
of turning in a direction from Gibraltar, rather than towards it,
proposed going to Cadiz, and thence hiring a vessel to take him by sea
to the British fortress. This being sanctioned by her approbation, he
no longer hesitated to pass the remainder of the day, and the night,
under her friendly shelter; and while she retired with her daughter, he
followed a page to an apartment, where every comfort was provided, that
could refresh the weary traveller.
After she had withdrawn, the Marchioness would not permit her
daughter to quit the side of the couch on which she reclined; but
continued discoursing of the interesting son of the fugitive Duke, and
recapitulating all the kindnesses which his English relatives had shewn
to her darling Ferdinand in Lindisfarne.
"Marcella," said she, "we must repay part of that vast debt, to this
inestimable young man. Your brother has not exaggerated his merits.
For, never did I see exquisite beauty so unconsciously possessed; nor
heroic indifference to the world's idols, expressed with such noble
simplicity."
When Louis rejoined the kind hostess, his misfortunes and his manners
had so happily propitiated, she was seated with her meditative daughter
in the evening saloon; which opened to a small lake, surrounded by
aromatic groves. She rose to receive him.
Relieved from immediate alarm for his father's personal safety, by
knowing that his projected asylum was the one least likely to occur
to his pursuers, Louis's agitated mind had sunk into a kind of
torpid repose. He took the seat offered to him, by the Marchioness;
and listened to her conversation with soothed attention. There
was something in her figure and air, which so reminded him of the
cherishing mother of his youth, Mrs. Coningsby, that his harassed soul
seemed to have regained its home, while he drank in her sweet maternal
comfortings. She appeared to know by intuition the fittest medicine
for his spirit; but she only spoke from her own noble nature, and it
mingled direct with his. She expatiated on his father's character; on
the envy of his rivals; and dated his fall to their ambition alone. She
dwelt on the high reverence in which he was held by the King and Queen;
and affirmed, that justice must be done him, both by Sovereign and
people, when experience should have taught them how they had cast away
their benefactor.--
"Meanwhile," said she, "how glorious he is in suffering magnanimously
for his virtues!"
"So to suffer, is the Cross that makes our virtues Christian!" observed
Marcella in a low voice, hardly aware that she had uttered what was
passing in her thoughts.
The remark was so like what he would have expected from the lips of
his first christian teacher, that Louis turned towards the speaker.
He turned to look on her; recollecting that she was not merely the
daughter of the amiable woman who was so maternally solicitous about
him; but the disinterested sister, whose self-sacrifice was to empower
her brother to complete the happiness of Alice Coningsby. Though
she had been the first to welcome him to this hospitable refuge, in
most inhospitable Spain, he had noticed her so little, he could not
have recognised her in any other garb. He now perused her pensive
countenance. It was fair and meek, and touched with the tenderest
sensibility. Her eyes were hidden with their downward lashes; and the
shadow of her veil tempered the dazzling whiteness of her forehead,
while the dark and glossy tresses that braided its arching brows, gave
her the air of a youthful Madonna. Her soft white hand at that moment
pressing the cross to her bosom, completed the picture. Unconscious of
observation, she was then breathing an internal prayer for the Duke and
his son; and continuing her meditations on their fate, did not raise
her eyes from the floor.
Louis looked on her, but it was as he would have looked on a lovely
image of the consecrated being she resembled; and again he turned to
the voice of her mother.
The Marchioness finding him so composed, entered fully into all she
knew of the rise and progress of the conspiracy which had ruined his
father. She recounted the various perfidies of the inmates of the
Palais d'Espagne; which had been confided to her, in the exultation of
triumph, by Donna Laura. She narrated particulars in the correspondence
between de Patinos and his father, the Marquis de Castellor; and
gave instances of even deeper double-dealing in Baptista Orendayn,
the nephew of the Count de Paz. Indeed, she hoped, the Marquis,
her husband, would be able to prove, by what she could impart, that
Orendayn was concerned with a subborned band of ruffians who attacked
the Duke de Ripperda in the Appenines; and would certainly have
destroyed him there, but for the fortunate intervention of a stranger.
This assassination was the device of his Spanish rivals. And it was as
well known by the Marchioness's informants, that the attempt which was
made on the Duke in the porch of the Jesuits' college, was the work of
certain Austrians at the court of Vienna; and not at all arising from
the partizans of the Electress. The Bavarians had never gone farther
than to way-lay for the state papers; and under the leading of Count
Stalhberg, they had taken the dispatches from Castanos; which, being
examined by the party, were afterwards returned.
In recapitulating this host of jealous adversaries, she asserted that
none were so actively hostile to Ripperda as the Austrian junto; at the
head of which was Count Routemberg, whose darling policy was to place
eternal barriers between any future junction of the empire and Spain.
In his house the confederation was formed, that was to accomplish the
destruction of Ripperda and his plans; and by a secret management it
was supported and impelled by the Emperor himself.
While Louis listened to this information, which agreed so fatally with
Wharton's last conference in the garden of the chateau, he became more
and more bewildered on the motives of his false friend.
At last the Marchioness mentioned that name, which never could be heard
by him with indifference; his confidence, or his detestation must rest
upon it. He was thinking of the accumulated treachery of Wharton, when
she pronounced his name. He started as if it took him by surprise.
In her eagerness she did not observe his emotion, but dwelt on the
English Duke's clandestine interviews with Grimaldo, de Paz, and the
Queen; shewing their results in the King's inflexibility to Ripperda's
demands to be heard; and his subsequent warrant, to silence the injured
minister's appeal in the sealed dungeons of the Inquisition.
In the height of her representations, Louis, with a tremendous fire
in his before faded eye, grasped the arm of the Marchioness, and
desperately exclaimed,
"Cease that theme--or it will make me a murderer!"
His manner alarmed the Marchioness, and terrified Marcella. The former,
however, restrained herself, and mildly pressing down the hand that
clasped her's, detained him on his seat; while Marcella started from
her chair, and gazed upon his flashing countenance with dismay. His
terrific guilty words yet rung in her ears. For a moment his eye caught
the expression of her's; and he answered the horror in her face by the
exclamation,
"I loved, and trusted him--and he has betrayed my father!"
He turned away as he spoke, and walked to the other end of the room.
The eyes of the Marchioness and her daughter met with an anguish of
commiseration in each, neither of them could utter. Marcella looked
again at his agitated movements, as his back was towards her. His
words, "I loved, and trusted him--and he betrayed my father!" had smote
upon her filial heart; and tears gushing into her eyes, she glided from
his presence, to pray and weep in secret.
When Louis recovered himself, he scarcely remarked that Marcella had
withdrawn.
In hopes to sooth him, the Marchioness asked two or three questions
respecting Wharton. Twice he attempted to speak, before he could give
any voice to what he wished to say; at last he hastily articulated.
"Spare me on this subject. I would forget him, if God will grant me
that gracious oblivion; for that is the only way by which I can remain
guiltless of his blood!"
"Rash de Montemar!" cried the Marchioness, pitying while she reproved;
"were my holy daughter here, she would tell you, that if you have hope
of heaven's pardon for your own errors, you must forgive your enemies!"
An agonized smile gleamed on his convulsed lip.
"My own enemies, I could forgive, and load with benefits. There are
some, were they my enemies alone, I could love in spite of every
injury; and pray for them, as for the peace of my own soul. But when
they extend their malice to my father; when they betray his trusting
faith, and give him to the murderous gripe of them who lurk for his
honour and his life: they are his enemies, and I cannot forgive them."
"Yet, do not risk your life, which is now his sole comfort," cried she,
"Appeal to Heaven, and it will avenge you."
Again Louis walked from her. He felt that, inexorably as he now
believed he hated Wharton, and horrible as was the idea of meeting
him arm to arm; yet, even that would be more tolerable to him than to
invoke Almighty power for vengeance.
A sad confusion of right and wrong, struggled in his breast; but
the better principle prevailed; and, even while the pressure of new
convictions against Wharton, crowded upon him, he felt that the
bitterest pang of all, would be an assurance that by such guilt on
guilt, his false friend had forfeited the mercy of his God. In his
fiercest throes of resentment, he could yet say with the Divine Spirit,
"I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner; but rather that he should
turn from his wickedness and live!"
The Marchioness marked his unuttered emotion, and with self-blame at
the amplitude of her communications, apologised for her indiscretion,
and proposed his seeking composure in rest. He gladly acquiesced; while
he begged her, not to distress herself by regretting what she had said;
for it was necessary to his father's preservation and to his own, that
he should know all his enemies, and the extent of their malice.
It was now within an hour of midnight. On Louis entering his chamber,
he sent away Lorenzo; that he, at least, might enjoy the sleep that
fled his master's eyes. In a few minutes he was alone, in a magnificent
apartment, where every tranquillizing luxury invited to repose.
But the downy couch would then have been a bed of thorns to him. He
continued to walk the room from hour to hour, in perturbed meditation
on all that he had seen and heard through the day.
His spirit was on the wing to rush through every obstacle to his
father's feet; to labour day and night, to redeem the reputation
sacrificed by his flight; and to avenge himself on the slanderous
world, by some glorious assertion of the names of de Montemar and
Ripperda.
At last, his exhausted taper went out suddenly; and, being without the
means of replenishing its light, he threw himself on the bed to muse
till morning.
CHAP. XIX.
About an hour before sun-rise, the inhabitants of the villa were
aroused by the clattering of horses' hoofs upon the pavement around the
house, which was speedily followed by a loud knocking at the gates.
The Marchioness and her daughter, in their dressing-gowns, met in the
corridor between their rooms, with each a lamp in their hand. Alarm
was in the countenance of both; which was increased to indescribable
terror, when the chamberlain of the mansion appeared on the stairs,
and informed them, he had looked from his window to demand the cause
of such untimely disturbance; and the answer he received was from
the leader of the party, who said he came to arrest the Marquis de
Montemar, in the name of the King. Marcella's knees shook under her,
and a mist passed over her eyes; but it was only transitory; she heard
the steady orders of her mother, and rallied her own presence of mind
in the same instant.
"Pedro," said the Marchioness, "doubly barricade the doors; and let no
man enter, till I have spoken with the Marquis."
Pedro flew to obey his lady, and she proceeded along the gallery to the
apartment of her guest. Marcella did not follow her in, but sunk into
a seat, near the door of the chamber. The lock yielded to her mother's
hand. She saw her enter, and could distinctly hear her footsteps as
she cautiously approached the bed, and gently called on the name of de
Montemar, to awaken him. At last, she heard him start from the leaden
slumber, which had only recently fallen on his harassed faculties; and
with an exclamation of surprise at seeing the Marchioness leaning over
him at that hour, and in such evident agitation; he sprang from the bed.
The tumult at the outside of the house, strenuously demanding
admittance, and the replies from within to withhold it for a time,
explained the alarm to Louis, almost before his trembling hostess could
speak the words of his arrest. Being fortunately dressed, he stepped
forward with an immediate tranquillity succeeding his first appalled
thought, that, by this new detention, his father would yet be left to
his cruel suspicions. But he suddenly recollected, that Lorenzo might
seek him, if he could not; and that when his father knew how he was
detained, he could no longer doubt his filial duty. This passed through
his mind in a moment; and taking the agitated hand of the Marchioness,
he told her his wish respecting Lorenzo; and entreating her not to be
distressed at what could not essentially injure him, begged her to
order her servants to request the officers to be patient for a few
minutes only, when he would instantly put himself into their hands.
"Never!" cried she, "you are my husband's guest, and you shall not be
forced from his house during his absence. Ill should I repay the family
who fostered my son, were I to surrender their darling into the hands
of his enemies. I am aware they may break open my doors; but there is a
place in this villa they cannot discover. Come with me, and you shall
be safe, till the way is clear for your complete escape."
Surprised at this proposal, Louis did not interrupt her; but when she
paused, and put her arm on his, to draw him towards the offered asylum,
he earnestly thanked her, yet repeated that it was his fixed intention
to obey the arrest of the king.
"What?" cried she, "this is despair, beyond their hopes! They will
confine, perhaps torture you! They could not have obtained this
warrant from the King, had they not made him believe that you are
accessary to the crimes with which they charge your father. They
will try to compel you to confession; and, though you are blameless,
you will suffer the cruelest ordeal of transgression. They fear your
talents; and, if the laws refuse to be their emissary; when you are in
the solitude of a prison, how many means will present themselves, of
ridding them of what they fear!"
In great emotion, she followed up these representations with renewed
beseeching that he would accompany her to a temporary concealment.
"It is for my father's enemies to fly;" returned he, in a firm though
gentle tone; "they are guilty of treachery to the confidence of their
Sovereign, and flight may do them service. But I am innocent of offence
against this country; my father has been its benefactor. I will
therefore stay, to meet any trial they may devise, to impugn him in
my person. And, if my defence of his integrity fail with his unjust
judges; and, should I even fall in the attempt, honest men will form
a truer judgement; and, such hearts as yours, and those I left in
England, will still respect Ripperda and his son."
In despair at his resolution, the Marchioness reminded him, that the
father whom he so justly revered, acted on a different principle. He
was innocent, and menaced; and he fled.
"And there," returned Louis, "he gave the advantage to his enemies,
that sanctions the arrest of his son. He should have demanded open
trial. All Europe would have supported the demand; and in the face of
Europe he would have been acquitted. To this I would yet urge him. His
proud rivals will not dare suffer his return; and their cowardice
will, of itself, pronounce his triumph."
The Marchioness clung to him, as the uproar below increased, and she
thought by the extraordinary noise, that her gates were burst open.
"Alas!" cried she, "you know not the summary justice of this country!
The bow-string is yet amongst us,--and you will perish in prison,
unheard, unremembered!--Oh, de Montemar, in the name of all you love,
hasten with me!"
"In the name of all I love and honour, dearest Madam!" returned he,
straining her respected and clinging form to his grateful heart, "I
must remain, and abide the ways of Providence."
"Marcella!" cried the Marchioness, looking round, and seeing her
daughter, who had unconsciously started into the room on hearing the
augmented tumult below; "Marcella, come hither, and by your holy
eloquence conjure him to fly, and save these men the sin of murder!"
Marcella stood still, looking on the ground. Her mother continued her
entreaties to him, and then again implored her daughter.
"Speak to him, my heaven-devoted child! For that father's sake, conjure
him to abandon the ruinous project of abiding by the justice of his
enemies!"
Marcella's complexion was the hue of death, while she gaspingly
answered:
"I cannot urge the Marquis to depart from sentiments I so much honour."
Louis looked from the weeping Marchioness, who hung on him with
maternal tenderness, to the daughter, pale, and trembling, but firm in
the faith that nerved his soul.
"Madam," said he, "I thank you for this support," then turning to her
mother, "Revered lady," cried he, "remember me in your prayers, and I
shall not fear the malice of my enemies!" The words of her daughter
had put the Marchioness to silence, and she leaned upon the shoulder
of Louis, drowned in tears. At this moment the clamour of many feet
were heard upon the stairs, and a man bursting into the room, told
his mistress that Don Diego Cuellar, one of the Alcaids, had ordered
the gates to be forced; and, was not only in the house, but then
approaching the corridor. The Marchioness sobbed aloud, and exclaimed
in wild grief, "my son, my son!" As if it were Don Ferdinald she held
in her arms.
Louis supported her on his bosom, but did not hesitate to say to the
servant; "tell the officer, I am at his orders. I will descend to him
immediately."
But before the man could obey, Don Diego and his train were in the
corridor, and in the room. A threatening denunciation was in his
visage, as he advanced with his staff of office towards his prisoner.
Louis perceived the storm; and to spare the sensibility of his hostess
any shew of violence, he intercepted the thunder of the Alcaid, by
repeating the message he had sent by the servant.
"'Tis well, Sir," replied the officer, "but the resistance which has
been made, must be answered for before the council."
"I will answer for it, and all else that may be brought against me,
when I am before the council;" replied Louis, "but meanwhile, I request
of your courtesy as a Gentleman, to dismiss your guards till I can
sooth this lady."
The manner of his prisoner, sufficiently mollified the officer; and he
made a sign to his attendants to withdraw. The Marchioness then turned
to the Alcaid; and, to her fearful interrogatories, he informed her how
Louis had been traced to her house.
On his departure from the Alcazar, the warden thought it prudent to
send a person to observe his movements. This spy followed him to
the Val del Uzeda; and then, proceeding to St. Ildefonso, (where the
royal family were), apprised the ministers of the escape of Ripperda,
and where they might find his son. A council was convened; and it
determined that Louis should be arrested, and held in strict ward, till
information could be gained of the flight and views of his father.
"When that is ascertained," continued the Alcaid, "the enlargement of
the Marquis de Montemar will be brought into immediate consideration."
The Marchioness, being a little assured, drew Louis aside; and in a
low voice, entreated him to rely on the strenuous friendship of her
husband, and to depend upon seeing her in whatever prison he might be
confined. He expressed his gratitude in emphatic, but brief terms; and
begged her to continue her kindness, by writing what had happened, and
transmitting it by Lorenzo to his father.
Marcella stood all this while, leaning against the tapestry, in a
silent astonishment of thought and feeling.
Lorenzo had been the most active below, in keeping out the officers;
and, having extricated himself from them who had seized him in
consequence, he now rushed into the room, and in much agitation threw
himself at the feet of his master. Louis grasped the faithful hand that
clung to his, and answered the fervent vows to follow him into all
captivity, by an impressive whisper:--
"You must serve me here. The Marchioness will tell you how."
Then, advancing to the officer, he repeated, "Sir, I am ready."
Don Diego beckoned two guards, who immediately drew near their
prisoner. They attempted to lay their hands on the sword and pistols
with which his generous hostess had re-furnished him the preceding
night; but he repelled them, and demanded of the Alcaid, what was meant
by this indignity.
"To disarm you, Sir," replied the officer, "such are my orders. You
menaced the warden of the Alcazar, in the discharge of his duty; we are
to be protected in ours, and you must yield your weapons, or have them
forced from you."
"The laws require it of me, as your prisoner?"
"They do."
Louis said no more, but put his sword and pistols into the Alcaid's
hands.
"He has a poniard!" cried one of the attendants, (who was indeed the
spy which had watched his steps,) "I saw it in his vest, when he leaped
from the window in the dungeon."
Louis had forgotten this weapon, but did not demur in relinquishing it
also.
The Marchioness shuddered. "What," cried she, "he is to have no
defence? Merciless men!"
"The laws, and their honour, will defend me, Madam!" returned he,
putting her hands to his lips; "I fear no man, for I have injured none."
By a sign from the Alcaid, the soldiers then closed around him, and the
Marchioness sinking on the bosom of her daughter, did not see his last
grateful look as he was hurried from the room.
CHAP. XX.
A deeper dungeon than that which had confined the father, now received
the son. The light which discovered its dismal bounds to his solitary
eyes, came from a small grated aperture in the vaulted roof. Escape,
then, had he meditated such an expedient, was impossible.
But so far was that idea from presenting itself to his thoughts, he
never ceased lamenting that his injured father had been reduced to so
equivocal an alternative. He knew not how to reconcile the imprudence
of the act, with Ripperda's consummate wisdom; till, as he passed
hours in these lonely musings, the events of history occurred to his
memory; and he saw, that there may be times in the lives of the most
illustrious characters, when their good genius, or their good sense,
seems to desert them; the faculty of judgement is taken away; and
they obey the impulse of passion, with all the blind zeal of the most
inconsiderate of men. Some such alienation of his better reason, Louis
thought must have occurred in the experienced mind of Ripperda, before
he could have taken so condemning a step; for of neither his personal
courage, nor patriotic integrity, could this devoted son conceive a
suspicion. From infancy to manhood, he had but one impression of his
father, that--
"---- in his port divine
The image of his glorious Maker shone,
Truth, wisdom, rectitude severe and pure!"
And almost worshipping the human idol in his heart, as formed--
"For God only--his son, for God in him!"
He loved and honoured him without measure. On the night of his
arrival, he learnt that his prison was the castle of Madrid. But it was
not necessary for him to enquire how strict, or how apparently long,
was to be his confinement. Hour after hour, day after day, wore away;
and no person was suffered to approach him; no letter permitted to
reach his hand; and when he attempted to question his goaler, whether
the Marchioness Santa Cruz had visited his prison; or if tidings had
yet transpired of the Duke de Ripperda; his only answers were gloomy
denials of all communication.
Though his portmanteau had been brought to him, the writing materials
and money it contained, were taken out in his presence, and even his
books of devotion shared the same fate. Indeed, the latter seemed a
prize of some moment to the officer who superintended the search, for
when the little bible, which had been the gift of his Pastor uncle,
opened its title page to the eye of superstition, the alarmed fanatic
ordered it to be carried under a strong guard, to the grand inquisitor.
Remonstrance on this, or on any other head, was vain; and under a
suspense that increased to torture, three weeks dragged away their
anxious days. At times, he almost suspected that the Marchioness Santa
Cruz had forgotten him; then, that Lorenzo had arrived in Gibraltar,
and failed of convincing Ripperda of the truth of his son. Every
frightful apprehension of doubted honour; of absolute abandonment to
his enemies; and an endless captivity in this dreary dungeon, assailed
him in the gloom of his uncompanioned thoughts.
Every rigor of hard fare, and severe usage, was inexorably brought
upon him. His bed was on the flinty pavement; his food, the scanty
portion of a criminal. But the conscience of Louis was at rest; and
he soon found that "man does not live by bread alone!" Though his
gaolers seemed inclined to do so much wrong in their treatment of him,
he never repented that he had done rightly in submitting to the law
of his new country, by yielding himself to their power. But when he
writhed under the tyrannous grasp with which they held him, he could
not but remember, with many a yearning comparison, the country which
had fostered his infancy. There he had imbibed the mingled tides of
freedom and of equity, as from the breast of a mother. Here the proud
state that claimed him as her own offspring, met him with the injustice
of a malignant step-dame.
"Noble, regretted England!" cried he, "I had rather be a door-keeper in
thy courts, than a prince in this land of despotism!"
In these lingering weeks of anxious loneliness, every impetuous
passion, and daring wish; every motive and action, or his short
but eventful life, passed in review before him; his impatience to
plunge into the world, and the readiness with which he gave way
to its delusions. While reflection humbled him to the dust; the
consciousness of having, in all his transgressions, erred from mistake
or inconsideration, but never from wilfulness, raised his head to
that Being, whom the precepts of Mr. Athelstone had so often told
him to "Remember in the days of his youth; and in his extremity, he
should not be forgotten," These thoughts were heavenly visitants to
the young captive, who lay like Joseph in bonds, with Faith, and Hope,
and Innocence, his comforters. The cheering lamp which these immortal
sisters lit in his heart, illumined the dark eclipse with which the
recent treacheries of man had overshadowed it. Yet he never thought
of Wharton but with a horror that shook his soul. He durst not look
steadily on his image; for no light was there.
A fourth week commenced. It was the anniversary of that day in the
past autumn, when Santa Cruz took his leave of Lindisfarne; and Louis
stood gazing on his departing vessel, vehemently wishing to hang
upon its sails, and so be transported to his father and to action!
It was also the Sabbath-day! And the uncle, who a year ago had then
stood by his side, admonishing the intemperate desire; he, at this
dismal anniversary, was, even at that hour, in the little church of
Lindisfarne, beseeching Heaven's "pity on all prisoners and captives!"
unconscious he was then putting up a prayer for his own darling child!
The tears were not without balm, that filled the eyes of his nephew at
the recollection.
In the midst of these meditations, the dungeon door opened, and Santa
Cruz himself appeared on the threshold. Louis started from his seat,
and could have cried aloud:--"Then my God has remembered me!"
But tidings from his father were also in his thoughts, and he only
ejaculated that revered name.
Santa Cruz embraced him, with more agitation than his stately mien
might have announced.
"The Duke de Ripperda has not been heard of;" returned he, "he must
therefore be safe. By any other means than that of flight, I would his
son were equally secure from his enemies!"
Fearless for himself, Louis entered at once upon his father's case.
His first wish was to induce the Marquis to solicit the King to hear
the son in defence of the parent; or, if that were denied, to allow
Santa Cruz to present a written vindication of Ripperda's Austrian
ministry. He gave the Marquis a simple narrative of every transaction,
from the beginning of the business to the stage in which he left it at
his recall; and, in the course of the explanation, he could not avoid
noticing the destructive mystery into which the double conduct of Duke
Wharton had involved every proceeding, even to those in which he had no
explicable concern.
"You are already avenged of him," replied the Marquis, "General
Stanhope transmitted to his government all the Duke de Ripperda
reported to him of Wharton's secret practices in favour of the exiled
Sovereign. George of Brunswick has taken alarm at so deep a scheme; and
the consequence is, the confiscation of your enemy's estates, and a
reward offered for his apprehension."
Louis was planet-struck at this information. The words which Wharton
had spoken to him in the park of Bamborough, murmured in his ears,--"I
put my life in your hands!"
"And my father has accused him!--Has set that life at a price!--The
country in which we first met, is now no more to him than to me. He is
an out-law,--I, a prisoner!"
Louis was silent under these thoughts; a stricture was on his heart,
but he recovered himself, while Santa Cruz proceeded in his discourse.
He had been only a few days returned to Spain. The Marchioness lost no
time in informing him of all she knew relative to the fall of Ripperda,
and the arrest of his son; and, urged by her, as well as his own zeal,
he hastened to Madrid. He there investigated the affair. Among other
nefarious particulars respecting the overthrow of the ex-minister, he
learnt what was to have been its bloody consequence. The king was so
pressed by the British Ambassador on the outrageous seizure of his
guest; and some of the northern envoys openly pleading their conviction
of the Duke de Ripperda's general integrity; the Spanish ministers
feared to stem such an opposition of opinion, should they venture their
predecessor in a public trial; and aware of their inability to convict
him of treachery, peculation, and unlawful ambition, (the grounds of
his impeachment,) they had recourse to the Lettres de cachet of the
Inquisition.
"Did I believe that your father's reconciliation to the Romish Church
were hypocrisy," continued the Marquis, "I should be the first to
approve his sentence. But I know the spring of these accusations; and
that the penalty of imputed heresy would soon have been paid."
Santa Cruz did not stop at this observation, but candidly acknowledged
that if ever the flight of an innocent man from the bonds of his
country, were an act of compulsive prudence, it was in the case of
Ripperda. He added,
"It is not here, as in England, that the laws govern the prince.
Arbitrary power holds them in check; and, when once a man is seized, if
he cannot attain the grace of his judge, he has little dependance on
his justice."
The Marquis then informed Louis, that he had made personal applications
to the ministers and to the queen, to beg their interference with
Philip for his trial or enlargement. The ministers were inflexible;
and Isabella not less firm in her refusal. All that he could extract
from their clemency, (or rather from that of the queen alone,) was a
hard-wrung permission to visit Louis in his cell.
"Yet," said the Marquis, "my hopes do not stop there. One step in
humanity warrants the expectation of a second. I am in favour with Her
Majesty. I came to be, what you propose, the medium of your father's
vindication; and that will comprehend your own."
Impressed with the deepest gratitude, Louis confided to his
disinterested friend, the whole contents of the packet he had left in
the care of the Marchioness. According to his previous request, she
had entrusted her husband with the secret of Ripperda's asylum; and now
he acknowledged, that one object of his present visit, was to obtain
Louis's permission to confide it also to the Queen. He urged, that it
would flatter the peculiarities of her character, and might conciliate
her good offices for his liberty. Being at Gibraltar, Ripperda was
out of the reach of personal danger, even should the secret transpire
beyond herself; and, meanwhile, the measure might do every thing for
his son, and his son's final wishes in the assertion of his father's
fame.
"Should her influence be seriously aroused in your behalf," said
the Marquis, "you would find it resistless with the King, therefore
peremptory with his ministers."
Sensible as he was that his father's asylum was chosen with honour, and
that its divulgement could be productive of no possible harm, Louis
had every disposition to yield to this advice. But his eagerness to
adopt any honourable means of facilitating his release, ran before the
progressive hopes of his zealous friend, when he found that his father
was yet ignorant of his being in Spain.
He learnt from the Marquis, that as soon as he was taken from the Val
del Uzeda, a reserve guard had forcibly seized Lorenzo; and borne away
him also, to prison.
Soon after imparting the latter information, Santa Cruz rose to
retire; promising to use his endeavours for the enlargement of the
servant, as well as the master: and, bearing with him many respectful
acknowledgements to the Marchioness, he embraced the grateful son of
Ripperda, and bade him adieu.
END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
CHAP. I.
Some time elapsed before Louis saw the Marquis again; but when he
re-appeared, it was to appoint him an interview with a lady of the
court; and this ostensible confidant was no other than Her Majesty's
self.
Santa Cruz's representation of Louis's romantic honour with regard
to Countess Altheim, had excited Isabella's not less romantic taste
for adventure; and she resolved to try her personal effect upon him,
unaided by her rank. While she was considering this project, a person
arrived from Vienna, speaking every where of the confusion which had
taken place at that court, from an open declaration, on the part
of the Arch-Duchess Maria Theresa in favour of Francis Prince of
Lorraine. This news, by verifying one argument in the alleged innocence
of Louis de Montemar, gave a respectable colour, in her now mind,
to the really vain motive which prompted a clandestine reception of
the Duke de Ripperda's son. In mentioning her design to his zealous
friend, she hinted that such privacy was necessary; since the King
had followed the flight of Ripperda, with a sentence of perpetual
banishment. While unknown, she said, she could discourse more freely
to the young Marquis, on the circumstances of his father's conduct;
and, by remaining incognita, should she chuse the affair to end at that
conference, her implied interference would escape expectation, or blame.
Santa Cruz bowed to a command that promised so fair, notwithstanding
its professed doubts as to the issue; and, as it was to be kept a
profound secret, he pledged himself, and performed his word, not to
disclose her real quality to the object of her condescension.
While Louis exchanged his prison garments, for a court dress, the
Marquis told him, he must not ground his father's defence to the lady
he should see, on any argument of the Queen's precipitancy in politics.
Her Majesty's consciousness was sufficient. Louis thanked him for his
caution. And, no objection being made to the royal signet which Santa
Cruz carried, they passed through the prison; and, without opposition,
entered the carriage at its gates.
As they drove silently through the streets, the Marquis regarded the
countenance of his companion. It was no longer pallid and dejected.
His eyes were bent downwards in thought, but a bright colour was on
his cheek; and the refulgence of an inward, happy animation, illumed
every feature. Santa Cruz refrained from remarking on this change, so
favourable to his cause; though he did not the less wonder how it could
have taken place during the short interval since his first visit.
The fact was simple.--From that hour, hope had been his abundant
aliment. Yet, not an implicit hope in frail humanity. He had lately
learnt, to put no absolute trust in mortal power, nor any dependance on
man.--He had been made to know, that blinded judgements are often with
the one, and misguiding interests in the other; but he knew in whom he
trusted! and the expression of hope in his countenance, partook of the
sublime source whence it sprung.
When they arrived at Saint Ildefonso, vespers were concluded, and the
King retired with his confessor. This circumstance was what Isabella
anticipated, and determined her to name that hour for the appointed
interview. A few minutes after Santa Cruz had conducted Louis into her
pavilion, she ascended the steps. On hearing her foot on the pavement,
the Marquis hastened to meet her; and, as she stood in the portico, and
Louis remained in the room, he had an opportunity of taking cognizance
of the lady who was to report his suit to her royal mistress.
She seemed about forty; of a low stature, and slight figure; with
a countenance, whose acute lineaments, dark complexion, and quick,
penetrating eye, announced alacrity of intellect, with an equal
proportion of irritability and vindictiveness of mind. She conversed
a second with the Marquis, and preceded him into the pavilion. He
presented Louis to her, as the Marquis de Montemar; and named her to
him by the title of Duchess Tarrazona.
Louis bowed respectfully; while she, so far forgot her assumed
character, as to take no notice of his obeisance, though her rivetted
observation lost not a line of his face or deportment. He raised his
eyes from the share they usually took in his bow; but, encountering
the sharp and investigating gaze of her's, he looked down again, and
retreated a step back, with a second bow.--
"Marquis," said she, to Santa Cruz, "you may attend in the portico."
As she spoke, she turned into a secluded veranda; and waved her hand to
Louis, to follow her.--He obeyed.
For more than an hour, Santa Cruz walked to and fro under the long
double colonnade of the pavilion, before the Queen re-appeared on
the threshold. Louis remained in the saloon. She stood apart several
minutes, talking earnestly with the Marquis; and then withdrew,
unattended, across the garden.
Not a word passed between him and his charge, until they were out of
the confines of St. Ildefonso, and once more on the road to Madrid.
Louis's countenance, all this time was meditative and troubled:--Santa
Cruz at last said:--"The Duchess informs me, it shall not be her
fault, if your suit be not favourably conveyed to the Queen."
"She is very kind," replied Louis, "but very extraordinary.--And,
did you not assure me of her influence, I would rather avoid her
interference. She appears too peremptory, to be a favourite with
arbitrary power: and, though some of her discourse shewed a penetrating
judgement, and great vivacity in the interests of Spain; yet, the rest
was trifling; and absurdly foreign from our subject."
Santa Cruz warned his young friend to take things as he found them; and
to be as respectful to the Duchess, as to the royal presence itself. He
then enquired the particulars of what had passed.
Louis informed him, that so far from her Grace seeking information
relative to the Duke de Ripperda's political conduct at Vienna, she
continually interrupted the narration of those proceedings, with the
strangest questions respecting the nature of his intimacy with the
Empress.--And when she had received assurances and proofs, that it was
purely confidential; contracted in early life; and, though continued,
was ever in check to the interests of Spain; she repeated the same
interrogatories again and again, with all the art and abruptness of
consummate subtlety. At last, she demanded a minute description of the
Empress's person, saying with a smile.--
"Marquis, your next attendance at Saint Ildefonso may give you an
opportunity of judging between your Queen, and this boasted Elizabeth
of Germany!"
"Should you be admitted to such an audience," observed Santa Cruz, with
a smile, "you must not disappoint the expectations of the Duchess, in
giving the palm of beauty to her mistress."
"She will be fairest to me," returned Louis, "who turns the most
gracious eye on the truth of my father." "Hold that principle,"
rejoined his friend, "and I will not curb your sincerity."
From this day, the aspect of many countenances changed at Saint
Ildefonso. The Queen was engaged in frequent conferences with the
King; and the ministers, who severally used to make one in all the
royal consultations, were totally excluded from these. Philip kept a
strict silence on their subject; though his saddened physiognomy often
declared how they perplexed him. The Queen alone wore an unaltered
mien; yet the lynx eye of de Paz could often discern suspicion in
her prompt accordance at the Council; and some unknown triumph, in
the smile with which she bowed in devoted deference to the judgement
of her husband. What was the object of all this, and what would be
its end, were equally subjects of mystery and of apprehension to the
newly-seated ministers; but not one of them suspected for a moment,
that Ripperda, whom they had exiled, or his son, whom they had immured,
held any connexion with the changing scene.
In the course of a week after the interview in the pavilion, Santa
Cruz re-entered the state prison of Madrid, with the sign manual of
the King, for the release of the Marquis de Montemar, and his servant
Lorenzo d'Urbino. The young man was confined in a cell remote from his
master; in equal ignorance with him, that the same roof covered them.
Their re-union was joyous on the part of Louis, but full of overflowing
transport on the side of Lorenzo; for his gaolers had tortured him
with reports of his master's death; and assured him, that his own
imprisonment would shortly be ended by the same violent means.
The governor of the prison was enjoined to conceal the release of
the Marquis de Montemar from the ministers of the King, until Philip
himself should send permission to officially announce it.
Louis was to be admitted the following morning to a private audience
of the Queen. He was to go as a suppliant; and to pass from a dungeon,
to his first presentation at a court, where his father had taught him
to believe, he would one day be received as only second to royalty
itself!--But he thought not of these circumstances. He had gained one
great object, in obtaining the royal ear; and he looked with confidence
to the event of the interview.
Santa Cruz was not less sanguine; and, with almost parental pride in
the son of Ripperda, he conducted him to the palace, and led him into
the chamber of audience. Her Majesty was alone, and seated in a chair
of state. A magnificent dress shone through the large veil she had
thrown over her face and person. On Louis approaching her, and on his
being named, bending his knee to the ground, she rose, and threw up her
veil.
"Marquis de Montemar," said she, with a smile, and extending her hand;
"the Duchess Tarrazona has prevailed, and thus I promise my patronage
to her client!"
Louis had entered in some agitation, and knelt with more at the feet
of the Sovereign, who, he believed, held the honour and fate of his
father in her hand. He now recognised the Duchess in the Queen; and
every anxious doubt flying before the glad surprize, the sentiment of
his heart shone out in his complexion and eyes. She translated this
flush of hope, into a tribute to her charms; and graciously repeated
her smile when he put her hand to his lips.
"Who will you serve, de Montemar," said she, "Elizabeth and Countess
Altheim? or Isabella, and the Duchess Tarrazona? Chuse freely, for I
love not bondage."
Conscious complacency beamed in her looks, as she spoke.
"My duty, and my heart," replied he, "are alike at Your Majesty's feet."
His heart was in his words and his countenance. The devotion of
Ripperda had been reserved and stately; but in the animated answer of
his son, there was a youthful fervour, a chivalric gallantry; which,
being her soul's passion, subdued her at once to his interest. All her
pre-determined caution vanished before it. She looked towards Santa
Cruz.
"Give de Montemar your cross of the Amaranth," said she; "I will
replace it to-morrow. When he returns from Gibraltar, he may wear it
openly; now, it must be nearer the seat of truth."
Santa Cruz drew from his neck the purple ribbon, at which the brilliant
cross was suspended, and buckled it under the vest of his young friend.
Again Louis kissed the hand of the condescending Isabella; who
continued to regard his graceful person with increasing favour, while
she communicated the result of her mediation between him and the King.
So many baffled negociations for the restoration of Gibraltar had
worn out the patience of Philip; and, as the fortress was evidently
strengthening itself on the Spanish side, he had ordered similar lines
of intimidation to be constructed at San Roque. But this did not awe
the English, whose sovereign seemed on the eve of a quarrel with the
new ministers of Spain; and therefore, Isabella seized the occasion to
represent to her husband, the danger of allowing the British cabinet
the incalculable benefit of Ripperda's discoveries and counsels. In
pursuance of these arguments, she gradually gained her object with the
King; and now informed Louis that she had obtained the royal command
for him to go direct to Gibraltar, to lay before Ripperda all that was
alledged against him, to offer him a fair and open trial, or a general
amnesty; and which-ever he would prefer, should follow his election.
The trial was what Louis demanded.
"Grant my father that," said he, "and we ask no more."
"Bring him from Gibraltar," returned the Queen, "and nothing shall be
withheld, that can gratify the honourable ambition of his son."
She then told him, that as it was necessary to keep these preliminaries
from the knowledge of the ministry, he must neither visit the British
Ambassador, nor the Val del Uzeda, nor even allow his name, nor his
errand to be known, until he should have obtained the object of his
mission.
"When you return, it will be with a companion," added she, "to
whom, meanwhile, I pledge my restored confidence." She smiled, and
disappeared. Louis looked gratefully after her. The Marquis would not
trouble the hopes of his heart, by warning him that all this revered
goodness arose from the dreams of vanity; and that both father and son
must preserve its illusions, if they would continue in the favour she
so largely promised.
Louis gave his arm to his friend; and with heads too full of busy
thoughts, to give them immediate utterance, they repaired in silence to
Santa Cruz's residence in Madrid.
A few hours completed every preparation for Louis's journey to
Gibraltar; and the next morning, by day-break, accompanied by the
faithful Lorenzo, he set forth on his momentous pilgrimage.
CHAP. II.
Hope having drawn him from sad meditations, as he rapidly pursued his
way towards the south of Spain, he could not but obey the voice of
nature, which called on him from valley and from mountain, to behold
her vast and wonderous creations.
The royal province of Castile, traversed by rivers, and populous with
cities, conducted him to the extensive plains of La Mancha. Here the
palladian palaces north of the Guadiana, and avenued with glowing
vistas, were exchanged for heavy and sombre hamlets spread under the
shade of thick groves, and dark with the clusters of the black grape.
But in architecture alone, these villages were gloomy and uninviting.
It was the season of the vintage, and the whole scene teemed with
life and gaiety. Louis passed through it, enjoying with the sympathy
of benevolence, the happiness he saw. In front lay a mountainous
desart. Here he exchanged his vehicle for two stout mules used to the
precipitous road; and with Lorenzo, entered the new region.
They were now in the Sierra Morena, which separates La Mancha from the
Hesperian vales of Andalusia. The passes of the mountain were long,
winding, and melancholy; but the moment he crossed its high misty
ridge, Louis felt a difference in the atmosphere, amazing and grateful
in its contrast, as the luxuriant landscape before him, when opposed to
the frowning sterility behind.
"That is Andalusia!" exclaimed Lorenzo, pointing down to the fairest
piedmont of Spain. Louis knew there was not a rill or a hillock in
that ample province, which did not once owe tribute to his family; he
also knew how they had been lost; and with mingled feelings, he turned
to the careless voice of Lorenzo, remarking on the beauties of the view.
On one side, towards the east, extended the pastoral hills of Jaen,
backed by the snowy summits of the distant Sierra Nevada of Grenada;
the last retreat of the Moors, before their final expulsion from
Spain. Louis thought on the latter circumstance, as those storied
mountains stood bright in the glowing sky. He recollected, that
amongst these persecuted people, was Don Ferdinand de Valor, one of
his own progenitors; and that his attachment to the Moorish cause had
occasioned the first sequestration of the Ripperda territories to the
Spanish Kings. He did not utter his reflections; but deeply ruminating,
gave the reins to his mule, and slowly descended the heights.
With this humble equipage, and by the side of a single attendant, he
entered the principality of his fathers. Over those very hills and
vallies, where the heroes of his name had conducted armies to assist
or to repel the sovereigns of Spain, he was journeying to seek the
representative of all their honours, an exiled fugitive in a foreign
land!--But William de Ripperda was not less worthy of their blood! And
the last of their race, did not blush at the banishment of a parent,
whose crimes were his virtues.
"My noble, glorious father!" exclaimed he, inwardly, as he looked
upwards; that look conveyed his vow to heaven. To think only of that
father; to exult only in his virtue; to mourn only his affliction; and
to regard his weal or woe, as the only future objects of his own.
When he crossed the Guadalquivir, Lorenzo checked his mule.
"From this spot, to the banks of the Xenil;" said he, "a track of many
leagues, is the Marquisate of Montemar. The castle stands on a high
promontory, far to the west, on the latter river. I never shall forget
the joy of the country, when the Duke de Ripperda paid it a visit, on
his return from Vienna."
Louis looked on the silver flood, on each side of the noble bridge they
were crossing. He, then, was lord of that branch of the magnificent
Guadalquivir! The lands he saw bore his name; the people who tilled
them, owed him homage; and he was passing through all, a stranger, and
unknown!
He descended from the bridge into a sinuous track, between long
plantations of olives; under whose refreshing foliage, the low vines,
and the waving corn, were alternately spreading their clusters, or
their yellow tops to the sun. Here again, were the reaper, and the
joyous treaders of the wine-press. He listened to their jocund voices;
their guitars, castanets, and bounding steps; and he could not forbear
thinking, with some emotion of displeasure; how little did the memory
of him live in their hearts, whose paternal policies had secured to
them the fruits of their labour! As long as they were happy, it seemed
the same to them, whether their benefactor were on a throne or in a
prison!
But it was human nature, consistent with itself, which forgets the
Providence that blesses, in the enjoyment of his gifts. The friend of
man must, therefore, imitate his Creator; and pouring his good on those
who need it, the just and the unjust, look for gratitude in the world
to come.
The travellers again occupied a wheeled carriage, and pursued their
journey with rapidity. In some parts they traversed extensive forests,
sublime in sylvan grandeur; then they wound through the shady defiles
of intersecting hills, or passed through towns and villages, whose
light and airy architecture bore evidence of Moresco origin; all
around was a fair garden. But there was a bound; a wall of mountains
rose before them, shooting up into the azure heavens, in sharp and
menacing peaks.
Here they resumed their mules. The first part of the ascent was
gradual; and as Louis mounted the rugged acclivities, (sometimes on
foot, to scale the highest points, while his beast rested;) he saw,
winding along the less abrupt tracks, the shepherds of the plains,
driving their flocks to the recesses of the upland pastures. The
practice is the same in Scotland; and the similitude pleased one, who
had passed some of his happiest hours amongst the Highland hills.
But the image of him, who was then his dear and trusted companion, rose
with the remembrance. He saw him bounding down the breezy height; his
plaid streaming in the air; and his feathered bonnet in his hand, as
he whistled gaily, and waved him from afar. Louis closed his eyes,
to shut out the association with the scene; but it would not do. The
glad smile of perfect confidence still shone on the visionary lip; the
eyes of the persecuting phantom continued to sparkle with greeting
intelligence; and even his voice seemed to sound in his ear!--Louis
shuddered to the soul, and spurring his mule, dashed forward amongst
beetling rocks and caverned ruins. They had once been a magnificent
work of man. An aqueduct, built by the Romans; and its remains clasped
the mouth of the pass which leads to the interior of the mountains.
Hence it was called the Puerta de Ronda; as these were the peaks of
that name, which stretch their stony ramparts between the plains of
Andalusia and the borders of the sea. The Sierra de Ronda surpasses in
desolate grandeur, even the sublime wastes of the Morena mountains.
No vegitation crowned these vast colossal rocks; bare to the sun and
tempest, they looked like the huge altar of nature, to which avenging
Jove bound the consuming, but still immortal Prometheus. All around
was either acclivity or precipice; and from between two high pyramidal
craggs, Louis caught his first view of the Mediterranean.
A small fishing town was scattered about a little bay at the foot of
the mountain. Lorenzo proposed hiring a vessel there, to take them
immediately round to Gibraltar; and his master readily acquiesced in
a plan which would exempt him from the obstacles that might accrue,
should he enter the fortress by the Spanish lines. Louis was to remain
in the mountain, to watch the mules, and Lorenzo descend by a near
foot-path he had discovered cut in the precipice, to the sea shore.
Before they parted, a spot was fixed on amongst the rocks, as a place
of rendezvous.
When Lorenzo was gone, Louis bound the animals to the remains of an
old wooden cross, which had been erected to mark a place of murder;
and putting down their corn before them, on a spot where grass would
never grow; he ascended a higher promontory, to see whether he could
discern any part of the embattled heights of Gibraltar. But the
lofty crest he sought was not within the mountainous horizon. Broken
pinnacles of granite, shattered by the deluge; and fathomless abysms,
that made the eye giddy even to glance at, hemmed him around. As he
contemplated the hideous solitude, voices suddenly sounded near him.
It was not his intention to listen, but before he could move, he heard
the name of his father, pronounced in a rough, guttural tone. He paused
breathlessly. The speakers were invisible; and the last who spoke,
continued affirming to the other, that "the Duke de Ripperda was still
as able as he was willing, to reward all who did him service." "Prove
it to me," replied his comrade, "and you shall find me ready."
"Look at this purse of ducats!" replied the other, "he will load your
felucca with bags of the same, if you carry the merchandize he bargains
for!"
A low shelving cliff, and some broken rock, divided Louis from the
speakers. He saw the dark points of their Montero caps, under the
cragg; and vaulting from his more elevated situation, stood before
them. They were two strong-bodied men, with fierce, independent
countenances; and starting on their feet, they also stood resolutely,
and eyed the no less commanding, though youthful figure, which so
boldly advanced to them.
Louis saw by their wild garb they were smugglers, and of the Gustanos
tribe, the gypsies of Spain. Lorenzo had pointed out some of these
people to him in the Sierra Morena; and explained their daring lives,
with their outlawed condition. Some carried on their desperate
traffic on the high seas, and others, in wandering bands, vended their
forbidden merchandize over the face of the country. But they all called
themselves Seranos; being the generic name for the inhabitants of
these fastnesses of nature; and as such Louis addressed them.
"Brave Seranos!" cried he, as he approached them; "you speak of the
Duke de Ripperda, as if you had seen him lately. I am seeking him, and
any facility you may give me, shall not be unrewarded."
The men looked on each other; but the elder of the two, striking the
head of a huge hatchet into his belt, to shew he was in a condition not
to be trifled with; answered Louis, by demanding in his turn, how he
knew that they had any concern with the Duke de Ripperda.
"By accident. I stood by my mule, on the other side of the cliff; and
heard you discourse of the Duke, as if you had recently parted from
him. Was it at Gibraltar?"
"No."
"Where, then?"
"If you are an emissary of his enemies," replied the smuggler, "you had
best return to your mule. I am not the man to betray a friend."
The blunt honour of the outlaw bore its own evidence to Louis; and
without a second thought, he answered:--
"I am his son."
"It may be so;" replied the man, "but you are also a courtier; and
flesh and blood of that cast are rarely to be trusted. If you dare face
the truth, follow me. You will find a man behind that rock, who may
tell you what I will not."
"Who might I see there?"
"One that knows whether the Duke de Ripperda has a son."
"His name?" demanded Louis, who observed a strange, treacherous leer
in the wild countenance of the other man.
"Martini d'Urbino," returned his comrade.
Louis did not hesitate: "I follow you."
The smuggler led the way, down a circuitous ravine, to the mouth of a
cavern. Several mules were feeding near its entrance. Louis heard the
sound of boisterous jollity; and as he advanced, he discerned, in the
depth of the cave, many persons seated on the ground, under the light
of a huge iron lamp that hung from the roof.
Had he wished to recede, retreat would have been impossible. But
all thoughts of personal hazard were lost in the one eager desire
of learning some certain tidings of his father. The smugglers'
communications to each other, being uttered when they were ignorant
of being overheard, and, therefore, when they could have no intention
to deceive, had awakened doubts in him of Ripperda having reached
Gibraltar. Perhaps he had been overtaken by his enemies; and was now
secretly managing with these adventurous men, to effect his escape
from some second Alcazar in the bosom of the mountains! The minister's
silence to Santa Cruz, or even to the Queen, on such a re-capture,
was no argument against its probability; and impressed with these
apprehensions, Louis hurried onward, impatient to see Martini, and to
learn how he might yet reach his father.
At the mouth of the cavern he stopped. His guides drew close to him.
They saw no sign of intimidation in his face; and the former spokesman
stepping forward, announced to his comrades the arrival of a stranger,
who called himself the son of the Duke de Ripperda. Every man rose
at a moment, and with a murmur, and a clangor of heavy arms against
the rocky floor, that might have appalled more veteran nerves. Louis
comprehended his danger. His eye had ranged at a glance through the
crowd, and he saw no Martini. He recoiled a step, and placing his hand
on his sword, said in a firm voice:--
"Gentlemen! I am here, on the faith of that man. He brought me to meet
Martini d'Urbino, my father's servant; and I demand to see him."
The smuggler put his hand upon the arm of Louis.
"Signor, you have a stout heart. From that alone, I believe you to be
what you say. Enter the cavern, and you will find the man."
The smuggler turned, and said something in an unknown language to his
comrades. Louis regarded him with a dauntless, but stern brow; for
while he spoke, the men drew gradually around, though at some little
distance, muttering to each other, and fixing their eyes on their
prisoner. Such Louis believed himself to be. The only point that was
open for his advance was into the cave. All seemed vacancy there,
excepting the pendent lamp, which shewed the fragments of the yet
unfinished revel.
"Can my father be reduced to league with men like these?"
It was frenzy to suppose it; and if it were not so, Louis himself were
lost. He had gone too far to retreat; and with a step, which announced
the resolution with which he would defend his life, should it be
assailed, he went forward into the den.
The captain of the band followed him. He passed him, and was
immediately obscured in the deeper gloom of the interior rock. Louis
saw no human being in the wide range, though many might be hidden in
the shadowy depths of its farther excavations. He fixed himself with
his back against the side of the cavern; and with his hand on his
sword, stedfastly regarded the spot where the smuggler disappeared.
His comrades remained without, and evidently watched any egress
unsanctioned by their chief.
Louis heard the advance of hasty steps from the interior vaults. He
planted himself more firmly in his position, and half drew his weapon.
The smuggler emerged from the recesses with another person, and in
the instant of his appearance, pointed to Louis, and said to his
companion:--
"Do you know that cavalier?"
The twain were in the deepest shadow of the rock; hence Louis could not
distinguish, otherwise than by the voice, which of the two were his
conductor. But himself being on a spot where the light fell direct on
his face, the immediate response to the demand of the smuggler, was an
amazed cry:--
"It is the Marquis de Montemar!" "'Tis well!" rejoined the outlaw,
"else he must have slept without his ancestors."
The voice of him who had recognised Louis, was indeed Martini's; and
that faithful servant was the next moment at the feet of his master's
son.
The smuggler joined his comrades on the rock; and Louis immediately
enquired the fate of his father. To his astonishment, Martini informed
him that more than two months ago, that very man had conveyed the Duke
to the coast of Barbary.
"Had he been refused admission into Gibraltar?"
"No; he had never sought it."
"What was his object in going to Barbary?"
To this, Martini gave a confused and unsatisfactory reply. All that
Louis could gather from his agitated and sometimes contradictory
accounts, was, that after their escape from the Alcazar, and during
their progress towards the sea, his master never emerged from an
intense reverie, except to give orders; and then he only delivered
his commands and strait was profoundly silent again. It was not until
they reached the borders of the Mediterranean, that the object of his
meditation seemed explained. While Martini was foddering down his
weary mules, Ripperda entered the shed, accompanied by Roderigo the
smuggler. In few words, he declared his intention to embark that night
for Tangier; and asked Martini whether he chose to share his fortunes
in that land, or to return whence he came. Martini swore to live and
die with him; and the next sun rose upon Ripperda in the kingdom of the
Moors.
This intelligence confounded Louis; it was so contrary to his father's
written intention, and so totally inexplicable on any principle of
his former conduct. While Martini gave his hurried narration, he did
it with evident fear of saying too much; and yet he appeared hovering
on the point of saying more. Louis told him, there was something in
his manner that excited his suspicions. He feared he withheld some
communication, which, as the son of the Duke de Ripperda, he ought to
know. Martini's confusion encreased with the earnest remonstrance of
his young master; and, at last he confessed, that the Duke was engaged
in some projects, the consequences of which he dreaded, but he was
bound by oath not to betray.
"His Excellency," continued he, "has laid the same bonds on Rodrigo;
who, with other men of his trade, are sworn to serve him. My present
errand to Spain, was to bring away certain treasures he left at the
Castle de Montemar. They are now on the backs of the mules you saw
feeding without; and, by to-morrow night, they will be in Barbary."
Louis was lost in conjecture. "Are you sure, Martini, my father
received no insulting repulse from Gibraltar?"
"I am sure, he never made any application there."
"It is very extraordinary!--But you dare not satisfy me. I will know it
all from himself; and, whatever may be his reasons, his destiny shall
be mine."
Martini now acknowledged to Louis, that Ripperda's indignation was so
high against him, there could not be a hope of his admitting him to his
presence.
"Every day, my Lord," continued the faithful creature, "he names you
in his general maledictions on the ungrateful world; he names you in
terms, that I have often deprecated from you on my knees; and, as often
he has commanded me from his sight, till I knew how to distinguish
between loyalty and parricide."
"But I do not deserve his curse, Martini," replied Louis, "and I will
appear before him. He shall not want a comforter, and an honourable
confidant, while he has a son. You must engage this Rodrigo, to give me
a passage in his vessel."
Martini went out of the cavern to prevail on the smuggler to this
purpose, and Louis was left to his bewildering thoughts. That he saw
the usually festive spirits of the Italian so completely subdued,
redoubled the uneasiness with which he considered the vow that had been
exacted from him and the smugglers. Louis's open and honourable mind
shrunk from such ill-assorted mystery; till finding some condemnation
of his father in this repugnance, he reproached himself for having
conceived the nameless dread he felt creeping over him. He recalled his
injured parent's undeviating career of public virtue; he dwelt on the
magnanimous features of his character; and could find no argument in
either, to sanction his present inexpressible forebodings.
"Yet why," cried he, "does he take refuge with infidels; why associate
his honourable name with these desperate men?"
After he had settled with Rodrigo the terms of his voyage to the
opposite coast; he and Martini repaired to the rock he had appointed to
Lorenzo for their mutual rendezvous. Lorenzo was sitting by the mules,
anxiously awaiting the appearance of his master, when he descried
him on the heights with his companion. It was now deep twilight; but
the light was sufficient when the latter drew near, for Lorenzo to
recognise his brother; and the lively pleasure of their meeting, was
only checked by recollection of the calamitous situation of their
respective lords.
Lorenzo informed his master, he could not procure a boat to go round to
Gibraltar; the strait being too much infested with Barbary pirates,
for small vessels to put to sea. Martini sighed heavily, at this
information. Louis attributed it, to apprehension for the treasure he
had to convey, and made a remark to that purpose.
"No," replied the Italian, "Rodrigo carries a safe conduct;
nevertheless, I am Catholic enough, to wish every corsair at the bottom
of the sea!"
A few minutes communicated to Lorenzo, that his master's voyage was now
to be to Barbary, where the Duke de Ripperda was already arrived. The
faithful servant regarded all places alike, to which he was to follow
his Lord; and, having received his orders, he went apart with Martini,
to discuss, with freedom, the subjects most interesting to them both.
The night was balmy and serene; and Louis kept his station in the
open air. After their conference, the brothers drew near, and slept
by his side; but he watched and mused, and silently prayed to Him who
was above the stars. The moon arose. As he contemplated that lovely
planet; considering it as walking in beauty and loneliness, like the
youthful saint who had urged him to persist in the virtue that was his
principle, he could, almost, have bowed to the bright similitude. But,
when he recollected that, by the vague light of this very moon, the
secret depredator crept from his covert; and each deed that shuns the
ken of man, steals upon his slumbers, he shuddered; and turning from
its beams,--beheld the long shadow of a figure approaching him. It was
Rodrigo from the beach beneath. He came to say, that his men were on
board, the packages stowed, and all were ready to sail.
In the course of half an hour Louis found himself on board an out-law's
vessel, with the crescent of Mahommed flying from the mast. This, was
the "safe conduct" Martini spoke of; and was sufficient to protect him
from the corsairs. Their light galliots scudded by in every direction,
and hailed the smuggler as he passed; Rodrigo stood on the deck with a
turban on his head, replying, through a trumpet, in the barbarous slang
of rapine.
The dark blue sea, innocent of the guilty keels which shot across
its bosom, heaved its reflecting waves under the brilliant orbs of a
midnight African sky. All was tranquil; all in harmony with the first
fiat of its creator; excepting the breast of rapacious man; excepting
the heart of an anxious son, ruminating on conjectures, hopes, and
fears. He leaned on the railing of the deck, in a more wretched
state of mind, than he could have believed possible to be his, when
approaching the goal of his many prayers: the presence of his father.
There was something within him, that would not be satisfied with
his present companions; with his father having made such men his
confidential agents; and, in the midst of his troubled thoughts, he
often murmured to himself--
"Oh, why did he fly!"
The night continued bright, and the wind fair; and, having smoothly
passed Europa point, the little vessel turned into the strait between
the far-famed pillars of Hercules,--Calpe and Abyla. Louis gazed on
both; on the fortified heights of the one, on the barren cliffs of the
other. He thought on Gerizim and Ebal.--On one, rests the blessing; on
the other, the curse! "Chuse ye, between them!"
CHAP. III.
The next day, being a religious feast of the Moors, it was midnight
before the christian crew thought it safe to draw towards the shore.
They then ran their bark into an obscure creek, about a league from
the town of Tangier. A dull flame, which gleamed on the summit of the
rock, as if feeding on its surface, was the mariner's guide through the
intricate navigation. The cliffs were high and close; therefore all
was black darkness, excepting where this phosphoric beacon opened its
wandering fires.
A dead silence was maintained, during the working of the little ship
into its place of refuge; and, not until its bulging sides grated
against the point of landing, did Louis receive any intimation of
their being near the place of disembarkation. Martini pressed his arm,
and whispered--
"We must now go on shore; but continue silent, till we reach the
Hambra."
Rodrigo and the Italian jumped from the head of the vessel, upon the
land. Louis followed his conductor; leaving Lorenzo in the ship. For
nearly an hour, the cautious tread of their footsteps was all that
disturbed the profound stillness. They passed many low, flat-roofed
dwellings, whose inhabitants were shut in from even the light of the
stars, performing the last rites of their solemn feast. Such gloom was
in memory of the shadows which enveloped their prophet in his flight
from persecution; and to invade it by noise or intrusion, would have
been deemed sacrilege; and the blood of the transgressor must have
expiated his offence.
After their almost unbreathing passage along this populous road, they
struck into an avenue of date trees, and stopped before a building of
more spacious dimensions. Martini turned a key in a small arched door,
and gently opening it, they all passed through a short paved arcade,
into a court open to the sky, and dimly lighted under its pillared
aisles at the sides, with four painted lamps. A fountain in the centre
was discovered by the transient sparkling of its waters as they dashed
into a marble bason below.
Here silence was broken; and Martini told Louis, that although his
father was under that roof, he durst not introduce him immediately to
his presence. In the Duke's present exasperated state of mind, such an
abrupt entrance might destroy at once, every object of the interview;
and therefore he conjured him, to wait until His Excellency were at
least apprised of his arrival.
Louis had no resource but to remain where he was. He had too much
dependance on the honesty and discretion of Martini, to doubt his
prudence in this precaution. If the gloom around him were great, that
in his mind was of a deeper shade. He was alone; for the smuggler had
followed Martini. An hour elapsed in this irksome solitude. He listened
for the sound of a voice, or an approaching step; but the silence
continued unbroken. His suspense became intolerable; composure was no
longer in his power to assume. He paced the mosaic floor, with every
agitating conjecture; envying even the feelings of anticipated murder,
with which he awaited the first mysterious interview in the lonely
chateau of Phaffenberg. At last, the Italian and Rodrigo appeared at
the extremity of the court. The smuggler turned away through a dark
colonnade; and Martini advanced to Louis, who had darted towards him.
"Follow me, Signor; my Lord consents to see you."
It was a cold welcome; but Louis thought not of the words, since the
permission was granted. He hastened through the arcades, to a large
curtained door.--Martini drew it back, and Louis beheld the honoured
object of his long and filial pilgrimage. The Duke was standing with
his back to him, reading a scroll of paper. Nothing that was not purely
the son, was then in his labouring heart; and he was advancing to throw
himself at his father's feet, when Martini spoke:--
"My Lord! The Marquis de Montemar."
Ripperda turned his head.
"Let him wait my leisure," and, looking on the paper again, sternly
resumed his reading.
Louis stood.--The face of deadly paleness, the eye's livid flash, and
the deep, emaciated lines, furrowed with every trace of the burning
volcano within, filled him with a dismay, even more terrible than the
fierce estrangement this reception announced. But it was only for a
moment that his astounded faculties were transfixed by the direful
apprehension. He was his father still; his noble, injured, suffering
father! and, rushing forward, he flung himself on his knees before him,
and covered his face in his robe; for the hand he would have grasped
was withheld.
Ripperda's breast was locked.--
"What is it you require of me?" said he, "The minion of two Queens
must have some reason for bending thus low, to the man the one has
dishonoured, and the other betrayed!"
Louis looked up in that implacable countenance: He attempted to speak,
but no sound obeyed. He struggled for his father's hand, and wrung it
to his heart. Ripperda stood cold and collected.
"What would you yet seek of me? I have no longer fame, nor riches,
nor power to bestow. These were your idols! Deny it not! They were my
own! I found their food ashes. But the draught that turned my blood to
poison, was the desertion of my Son."
"Hear me, my father!" at last burst from the lips of de Montemar, as
he clung around that august, but torpid frame. No warmth glowed there,
but the gloomy flame of vengeance; no responsive throe whispered
there, that sympathy and forgiveness were within. The very stillness
with which he suffered, without returning or reproving this agonized
embrace, smote his son the more severely to the soul. Yet he thought
he saw more resentment, than the object of his lately conceived
apprehension, in the stern calmness of his father; and hoping to
prevail by reason, where reason yet reigned, in a less agitated voice,
he repeated.
"Hear me, and then condemn me! or believe me, and acquit me, before
the tribunal of Heaven and your own justice!"
Ripperda, with the same unmoved air, replied:
"Speak what you have to say; I will attend."
He pointed to a sofa, for Louis to sit. He obeyed; and his father
sat opposite to him, folded in his mantle. His eyes were bent to the
floor, except when he occasionally turned them in deep suspicion
upon the earnest narrator. Not one oral remark escaped him, till the
communication was brought to an end. He then looked up, and slowly
pronounced:
"Tis well; and the tale is marvellously told: But I have no connection
with its truth, or falsehood."
"Yes, my father!" returned Louis, "It contains your justification; the
acquittal of your son; and the atonement of your repentant sovereigns!"
"My justification is here!" exclaimed the Duke, proudly striking his
breast, and starting from his seat. "And for atonement! Heaven and
Earth cannot atone for my injuries. Tell your Queen, that William de
Ripperda was not born to quail to any man; nor, to hold his honours, by
flattery to a woman. I served the country of my ancestors for its own
sake; neither in homage to her, nor to the King. I devoted myself to
the prosperity and peace of the world. But they rejected peace: And,
they shall find a sword! All have spurned me! I am thrust out from
Europe. And, when I have found a land of refuge, they would ensnare
me to return! And, I will return! Return with desolation and death!
For Christendom, ungrateful Christendom, has sinned beyond my wish to
pardon."
"How am I to comprehend you, my father?"
"You cannot comprehend me. I would not be comprehended by a Spaniard!
You were once my son. And, you have satisfied me, you meant to be
loyal to me: But you cannot serve two masters."
"What master would oppose my serving my father? If you mean the King of
Spain, your own inexpugnable honour would not raise an arm against him;
and he will not, cannot, prevent me dedicating my life to you!"
"My honour, Louis! Christian Knights have honour! The King of Spain
has honour; his ministers, and those of Austria have a thousand
honours! But where were they all when my inexpugnable honour was
calumniated and betrayed? Where, when the man they durst not bring to
an open trial, was committed to the dungeons of the Inquisition, to be
silently, and securely, murdered?"
Louis acknowledged the justice of his father's indignation against the
ministry of Spain; yet enforced the Queen's persuasions for his return;
and dwelt on the glorious result of the public trial she had absolutely
promised him; and his own consequent satisfaction in pronouncing a
general forgiveness on the misguided people, who were still the objects
of his paternal love.
Ripperda walked the room during this discourse; and when it ended, gave
no other reply to its arguments, than pronouncing a brief and solemn
curse upon the whole land. Louis shuddered, as he gazed on the working
brow of that still noble countenance; and with a self-control, that
surprised even himself, commenced a new train of persuasions, to induce
his father to resume his first intention of passing over to Gibraltar.
He laid before him the advantages of seeking an asylum in England;
where he might live with honour in the bosom of his family; and under
the protection of a Government constituted to revere his virtues.
"But here," said he, "what can your free spirit expect in a land of
slaves?"
Ripperda drew near him. That mouth, on which the graces once played,
was distorted by a smile of such triumphant malice, that his son
recoiled.
"In the name of God, my father! what is it you intend?"
"I will tell you Louis;" returned he, "when I hear you repeat your oath
to adhere to your father against Earth and Heaven. Grapple with me,
my son, in this overthrow of our oppressors; and the name of Ripperda
shall redeem itself!"
The eyes of Ripperda shot terrific fires as he spoke; and Louis,
direfully convinced of his fears, answered with assumed calmness:--
"All that the laws of Earth and Heaven, and my own devoted heart,
dictate as duty to my father, I am ready to perform. To follow you
whithersoever you go; to abide with you, even in this worse than
wilderness, if it be your decisive will!"
Ripperda walked several times up and down the apartment. Several times
he glanced suspiciously towards his son; and stopped opposite to
him, as if he were going to speak; then turned away, and resumed his
perturbed pace. A consuming impatience inflamed every feature; and,
once or twice, he took out his watch, and looking at it, muttered to
himself.--At last, abruptly drawing near his son, he snatched the cross
of the Amaranth from his breast, and scornfully exclaimed.--
"If you would belong to me, forswear all of which this is the emblem."
Louis was dumb.--The Duke resumed with wild solemnity.
"One night in the Alcazar,--when my gaolers had left me no other light
than my injuries,--I bethought me who raised those walls!--In the black
darkness of my prison, I saw a host,--they who fell in the passes of
Grenada! And from that hour, the soul of Aben Humeya passed into my
breast. Yon is my ensign!" He pointed to a crescent, on a standard in
a far corner of the room. Louis still gazed on him without speaking;
but the apprehension in his mind was in his looks.
"Do not mistake me," rejoined the Duke, "my injuries have not made me
mad; but they have driven me to a desperation that will prove you to
the heart. Are you now willing to go, where I shall go; to lodge, where
I shall lodge? Shall my God, be your God? And my enemies, your enemies?
Or, am I cast out, like Ismael, to find my revenge on them who mock
me--alone?"
Louis had now subdued the effect of his fears, and rallied himself to
argue again with his father, as man with man. He could not penetrate
the whole of the threats he had heard; yet his rapid arguments
embraced every possible project of revenge. The Duke listened to him
with stoical apathy. But when the energetic pleader dwelt on the
heinousness of coalescing with the enemies of the Christian faith, in
any scheme of vengeance against its professors, Ripperda interrupted
him with a withering laugh.
"What, if I make their faith my own?"
"Impossible!" cried Louis, "you whose life has been a transcript of
your faith; noble and true! It is not in you, my father, to desert
a religion whose founder was perfectly holy, just, and merciful; to
embrace the creed of an impostor! One whose life was polluted with
every vice; and whose blasphemous doctrines sanctioned oppression, and
privileged murder! Oh, my father, it is not in you to become the very
thing that excites your vengeance."
As Louis continued a still more earnest appeal to his understanding and
his conscience, Ripperda suddenly stopped before him.
"You may spare your arguments, De Montemar; I know all you would say;
but it is my choice to be a Mussulman."
His son's tongue clove to the roof of his mouth; but he forced himself
to say: "Your choice to abjure the religion you believe? To cast from
you your God, and your redemption?"
"It is my choice to be revenged!" cried the Duke, gloomily striking his
sword; "we will talk of redemption hereafter."
"Oh my father, it may then be too late!"
"My soul on the issue!" returned he, with a second horrible smile; "you
are brave and daring, and will not shrink from the adventure. You will
buckle your life to your father's in the desperate leap!"
He grasped his son's arm as he spoke, and looked in his face with a
fierce resolution, which menaced some terrible judgement on the reply
he seemed to anticipate. A low monotonous cadence of many voices,
chanting a few dismal notes in regular rise and fall, broke the awful
pause. Ripperda dropped the arm he held, and calmly said:
"They come! In another hour, I shall be sealed an enemy of Christendom."
Louis comprehended all that was intended.
"By the Saviour you outrage in the dreadful intent!" cried he, "I
demand of you not to incur the deep perdition! By the honour and renown
you so richly possess, I conjure you not to consign all at once to such
universal infamy! By the memory of my mother, now in the heaven from
which you would seal your everlasting banishment,--I implore you to
remember that you are a Christian! That you are the Duke de Ripperda!
That you are my father."
With the last words, Louis sunk on his knees, and forcibly added: "my
life and your salvation hangs on this dreadful hour!"
All the passions of his nature were now in arms in the breast of
Ripperda. The boiling flood rushed to his brain, and pressed upon the
nerve that shook the seat of reason. He looked askance upon his son
with a horrible expression in his eyes. It spoke of suspicion, of
scorn, even of hate.
"De Montemar!" cried he "what would ye yet with one who reads you as
you are? What dare you expect from a father, who sees the desertion you
meditate? I will not be trifled with; for I cannot be deceived. Be with
me or against me! a Mussulman, or an enemy! For in this hour I forswear
all connection with the Christian world; all honour to the name of----."
But ere he could pronounce the fatal abjuration, an awful cry from his
son arrested the concluding words. It was the cry of a pleading angel,
at the bar of Eternal Judgment. With its piercing, beseeching appeal,
he stretched forth his arms to Heaven, supplicating its mercy to defend
his father from himself. At this juncture, the door opened, and Martini
announced the arrival of the sacred deputation. The Duke snatched his
hand from the grasp of his son; Louis seized his robe.
"Never will I leave you," cried he, "till you consent to quit these
enemies of your honour and of your soul!"
"Release me, on the peril of your life!" returned his father, with
a desperation equal to his own; but with a something added to
it, that made Martini draw a few steps nearer to the defenceless
Marquis.--Ripperda's fingers wandered over the hilt of a poniard that
was in his girdle.--
"Could my blood expiate the offence of Spain, and not pollute my
father's hand," cried Louis, "I would say, take the life you
gave.--Oh, at any sacrifice, but that of soul and spirit, leave this
accursed land!--If your freedom be pledged to these barbarians, give
them my youth and vigour in exchange.--Let them drink my blood.--Let
them, cover me with insults and oppression!--Only, do you fly;--fly,
my father, and save me from veiling my eyes in the dreadful day of
Judgement!"
Ripperda did not answer; for his possessed mind heard not what was
said.--He continued gazing on his son, with a terrible fixture of eye,
while he only appeared to listen; and in the moment the sounds ceased,
he burst into a tremendous laugh; and attempted, by a force, almost
preternatural to break from his clinging arms. But the filial heart
was stronger than the madness of revenge. Louis grasped his knees,
exclaiming, in the agony of his spirit--"Oh, God, be my advocate!"
At that moment a clenched hand fell on his forehead with the weight of
death. Louis felt no more, for the blow was in his soul. His nerveless
fingers relaxed their hold;--he fell prostrate;--and Ripperda rushed
from the apartment.
CHAP. IV.
When Louis awoke to recollection, he found himself lying on a mat, on
a stone floor, and in a dark apartment. A strange mingling of heavy
sounds murmured in his ear, as, with a confused sense of suffering and
of misery, he strove to recall past events. Such shades are of speedy
conjuration. Where he was, he could not guess; but he soon remembered
where he last knew consciousness: he too well remembered the last
scene which had met his eyes. Almost believing himself in some Moorish
dungeon, he turned his languid frame, in the resignation of utter
hopelessness. His hand touched a human face. He raised himself on his
arm, and found some one extended on the bare ground, near him, and, by
the hard breathing, in a profound sleep.
"Some unhappy wretch, like myself!" murmured he, and fell back upon his
bed. Whether he slumbered, or mused, he knew not; but he continued to
lie in a quiet, dreamy consciousness of irremedible misery.
A sound creaked in the darkness. He turned towards it and saw a door
opened at the extremity of the apartment by a shadowy figure, which
put its hand in for something that hung against the wall, and then
withdrew. A faint light glimmered from under the now open portal.
For some minutes, he could discern nothing distinctly; but the light
suddenly became vivid, and he had a clear, though transitory view of
the adjoining chamber. It seemed vaulted; and a number of men and women
were seated on the floor, round a heap of burning logs. Some smoked
segars; others spoke in whispers; some chanted low and dirge-like
tunes; while the rest silently applied to their flaggons, or fed the
fire with broken boughs. A high wind raged without; which, making its
way through the ill-contrived fastenings of this rugged abode, blew the
ashes and live embers over the wild group. Some had dropped asleep, and
lay in various attitudes, with their heads on their knees, or leaning
against the nearest substance for a pillow. The women, whose figures
were huge as their male companions, were apparently more robust, for
they did not seem to need the same restorer of nature. When all the
men were crouched down on their rocky bed, these beldames drew closely
around the fire; and bending over it, as if brooding incantation,
conversed with each other in low, grumbling tones. At last, they,
too, successively dozed over the dying embers, till the whole was
involved in total silence. The fire went perfectly out; and Louis'
over-strained nerves sunk into a kind of night-mare repose. About dawn
he was aroused by a stir in the next chamber. The noise had the same
effect upon his companion, who awoke with a deep sigh. The person rose,
and, leaving the vault, shut the door. All now was darkness; and the
lumbering bustle without, mingling with the voices of men and women,
gradually augmented to uproar; till, sinking by the same gradations,
every sound ceased, and the whole became profoundly still.
It was indifferent to Louis what passed; tumult, or silence; whether
he were still in the world, or committed to a living grave. He was
not himself; for the shock he had received had fevered his brain; and
he lay, as if the horrible past, and the inexplicable present, were
only parts of the same irksome dream. His eyes were closed, in this
carelessness of observation, when a ray gleamed through their lids. He
opened them instinctively, and saw the white light of day streaming
through the open door, and Lorenzo bending over him. His torpid
faculties aroused themselves at sight of the well-known countenance;
and the faithful servant as gladly made a response, which answered
the demand of where they were, though he could hardly speak for joy,
at seeing his master restored from the stupor, which had immediately
followed his recovery from the swoon in which Martini had committed him
to his arms in the felucca.
Lorenzo related, that, without a word of explanation, his brother had
ordered him to accompany the Marquis immediately back to the opposite
coast; and that, though Rodrigo's vessel could not so instantly return,
a comrade's boat was soon obtained, which landed them both at the place
of their former embarkation. The smugglers advised, and assisted him,
to carry his insensible charge up the mountain, to take a safe repose
in the cavern. There, they found their wives waiting to receive them.
But these women seemed to have nothing of the sex but the name. They
saw the pale, and scarcely breathing form of the Marquis de Montemar,
carried by them into the interior den, without a glance of pity. He
was a Grandee! one of those, whose family had held rule in Spain; and,
some day, he might be as ready as any of them, to drag to execution the
very men who now gave him shelter! This passed in the minds of these
women, as they joked on the great ladies who might then be weeping the
unexplained absence of the handsome Cavalier; and they exulted in the
idea, that not one female hand of the disdained gipsey tribe, would
condescend to smooth the pillow, or bestow a look, on the object of so
many courtly sighs.
As Lorenzo had marked these women, and their haughty rejection of their
husbands' orders, to administer to the comfort of their guest; he
feared their more active malice; and was not a little rejoiced when
their whole train parted in the morning on their various trafficks, and
he was left alone to convey his master from the cavern in the best way
he could. Finding him restored to sensibility and speech, he did not
venture to ask him the cause of his so terrible trance; for Martini had
warned him, neither to make such enquiries himself; nor to satisfy the
curiosity of persons in Spain, by recounting any part of the incidents
in the Sierra de Ronda, nor hinting at his transitory visit to the
opposite coast.
Louis listened, with a very few observations, to all that Lorenzo said.
As the fresh and balmy air of the morning breathed into the cavern,
his frame became braced; and, though still bewildered in his thoughts,
he rose; and walking out into the dell before the cave, dispatched his
companion to procure mules, for re-crossing the mountains. The animals
were soon on the rock: and, with an aimless mind, he commenced his
return to Madrid. A film was over every faculty, as he mechanically
pursued his journey. Lorenzo watched anxiously the rayless fixture of
his eye, which turned to no object, nor his ear to any sound, during
their rapid posting through the champaign country. But all his haste
was vain to check the fire that was preying on his master's veins; or
to arrive at Madrid, where alone he could expect relief or comfort.
In the Val de Penas Louis became too ill to proceed; and, happily, the
alarming symptoms seized him in sight of a monastery. Lorenzo, left
him in the carriage, and went forward alone to solicit the hospitality
of the Brotherhood. They were as eager to bestow, as he to ask, the
benevolence required; and Louis soon found assistance under their
charitable roof.
For three long weeks, he lingered between suffering and the grave. His
fever was on the nerves, and attended with delirium, and every other
prognostic of a speedy termination of his days. Lorenzo shared the
constant vigilance of the good Fathers, in watching by his side; and
at the commencement of the fourth week, the delirium left him. His
present recovery to recollection was not like that in the cave, dim and
distressing. He spoke with so much strength of voice, and clearness of
perception, that his affectionate attendant was transported with hope;
but the priest, who considered it as a last gleam from the departing
soul, (which often sheds its brightest beam on the earth it leaves for
ever,) bade the happy Lorenzo wait without for a few minutes, while he
discoursed, as became his faith, with the restored Marquis.
When he found himself obeyed, and that he was alone with his patient,
he cautiously apprised him of his approaching dissolution; and then as
piously exhorted him to dedicate the sane hour which had been granted
to him, in making his peace with God. "I have one act to perform,"
said he, "before I am called into the presence of my only father. Give
me writing materials."
The monk laid paper before him, but held the pen in his own hand.
"Dictate, and I will write, what, I trust will bring peace to your
soul."
"No," replied Louis, "my own hand alone must record what is on my soul.
And no eye, Lorenzo,"--he looked for that faithful servant, and finding
him absent, requested the monk to call him in. "He must be a witness,
with you Father, that the probably altered characters are mine."
Lorenzo was summoned, and the monk briefly told him the cause. He was
transfixed, till the gentle voice of his master addressed him.
"Lorenzo," said he, "your fidelity to me has been more that of a
brother than of a servant. I trust you with the charge of my last
testament, for I know you will execute it, as if my eye were then
looking upon you."
Lorenzo did not speak, but put to his lips the trembling hand that took
the pen from the friar.
Louis passed an hour in writing. Both witnesses sat at a distance;
Lorenzo, with his face bent down on his knees; and the priest,
marvelling within himself, at the firmness with which the dying
Marquis pursued his task. His eyes receded not once from the paper,
nor did his fingers relax, while, with determined truth, he related
all that had passed in the Hambra between him and his father; yet in
the dreadful confession, he pleaded his almost belief, that calamity
had disordered the senses of his unhappy parent. On these grounds, he
implored the Marquis Santa Cruz, (to whom the paper was addressed,)
not only to conceal this tale of shame from every hostile eye; but by
the friendship he once felt for both father and son, and by his vows
of Christian charity, to leave no means unexerted to re-call Ripperda
from his apostacy.
"If I deceive myself," continued this pious son, "in believing the
existence of that mental derangement, which would once have been my
most fearful deprecation, but since this direful crime is now my
fervent hope, many would tell me I must despair of his salvation. My
trust is in an higher judgement. In him who blessed me with such zeal
as your's, to be his minister to my erring parent; in him who promises
pardon to the penitent; and to whom all that seems impossible to man,
is as already done.
"In this faith I shall lay down my head in the grave, with perfect
confidence that a way is open by which the unhappy abjurer of his
Saviour's name, may yet be received to mercy. In the world to come, I
may hope to embrace my father, reconciled to his God and washed from
every worldly stain! Meanwhile, in this my last act, I recommend him
to your sacred exhortations:--To the prayers of my saint-like uncle of
Lindisfarne."
Here Louis paused, and a tear fell upon the paper. It was the first
that had moistened the burning surface of his eye, since the calamity
which had stretched him on that bed of death. It mingled with the ink
in writing the dear and honoured name.--He resumed.
"This paper must pass from your hands, my revered friend, to his. Let
those kindred eyes alone share the confidence of this sad narrative.
Let him know that his nephew, the child of his nurture, dies happy!
Happy in the hope that is, and that which is to come."
As he added an awful farewell to his beloved aunt and cousins, a crowd
of tender recollections thronged upon his soul. He hastily addressed
the packet to the Marquis Santa Cruz. Besides this comprehensive
letter, he wrote the few brief lines which comprised his will; and the
monk and Lorenzo having signed it, a seal was affixed to its cover. The
abbot was summoned to dispatch the one to Madrid; and Lorenzo received
the other, to convey to Lindisfarne, when his beloved master should be
no more.
This duty done, Louis sunk exhausted on his pillow. But the cord on his
heart was taken off. The benign image of his earliest friend, like the
vision of a ministering angel, had unloosed it; and a holy dew seemed
poured upon the desart of his soul. As he laid himself back on the bed
whence he expected never to rise again, he thought of the only hand
which he wished could have given him the last bread of life; the only
hand he could have wished might have closed his eyes, when temporal
life was fled. He wept at the distance which separated him from that
father of his moral being; he wept, that he must breathe his last sigh
on a stranger's bosom. But his spirit was resigned; and, as his tears
ceased to flow, he gently fell asleep.
CHAP. V.
During the confinement of Louis in the monastery of Val de Penas;
and while the Marquis Santa Cruz, and the Queen of Spain, were
alike wondering at no intelligence having arrived from him since
his departure from Madrid; news of various kinds created as various
perplexities in the cabinet of the King.
Two Spanish galleons had been taken by a fleet of Barbary corsairs. The
coasts of the Mediterranean were filled with pirates of every-sized
vessel, manoeuvred with a courage and a skill that baffled every art
to avoid them; and while this extraordinary accession to the Barbary
marine arose on the sea like an exhalation, a Moor, under the name of
Aben Humeya, as suddenly made his appearance in Morocco, carrying all
before him in the field and in the state. He possessed the confidence
of Abdallah, without a rival; and, after having discomfited that
monarch's rebellious kinsman Muley Hamet, was advancing at the head
of his victorious army to redeem to the Emperor the possession of
Ceuta:--the Gibraltar of the Spaniards on the African shore.
Hostilities were at this time hanging in the balance between Great
Britain and Spain, on account of Gibraltar; and to awe the replies
of the Britannic minister to its demanded restitution, an army of
twenty-five thousand men, (which were on their march to Italy to
effect a similar object on the duchies of Parma and Placentia,) were
ordered to fall back, and make demonstrations towards the British
fortress. Part of this army were in Valentia; and on a second courier
arriving from Ceuta with intelligence that Aben Humeya had concluded
a treaty defensive and offensive between the Moorish Emperor, and
the other Barbary Powers, King Philip saw the necessity of detaching
one division at least to the protection of his African dominions. He
appointed Santa Cruz to the command; but on some strange inconsistent
and perverse arguments of his ministers, when the Marquis appeared
for his last directions, His Majesty informed him, that a thousand
men were sufficient to raise the siege. If more were necessary, they
should be sent; but too formidable a body at first, would only increase
difficulties, by raising the consequence of a Barbarian chief in the
eyes of Christian Europe. Santa Cruz saw that the jealousy of the
ministers against himself was the origin of this damp on the first
vigorous proposal of the King; but determined to do his own duty at
least, he acquiesced, and withdrew from the royal presence. He made a
rapid journey to Val del Uzeda where he found his son just arrived
from Italy; and giving him orders to hold himself in readiness to
accompany any second detachment to Ceuta, he took a parental farewell
of his family, and returned to Madrid. In the same evening that
he alighted at his own hotel he received the packet from Louis de
Montemar, and had a long and distressing conversation with the friar,
who brought it.
The contents of the letter filled him with astonishment and trouble.
He had no need of further investigation, to conclude who was the Aben
Humeya, who was putting so new and menacing a face on every thing in
Barbary; and considering that circumstances demanded the disclosure
to the Queen, he hastened to the palace. A private audience was
immediately granted, and the letter of the dying son of the lost
Ripperda confided to Her Majesty.
Isabella read it with indignation. Ripperda's treasures had then
spread the Spanish seas with depredators; his domination had
concentrated the states of Barbary into one interest; his resentment
had turned their whole force against the power of Spain! She had but
one policy; to wrest this mighty Son of Vengeance from his passion and
his influence. And, having determined it as most prudent to conceal
the discovery from the King and his ministers, she gave her present
counsellor carte blanche, to reconcile Ripperda on any terms; and,
should his more worthy son be found alive, she commanded that he should
be made the agent with his father.
"But, should he be no more?" inquired the Marquis, with a sigh which
could hardly have been deeper for his own son.
"Then," replied she, "you must chuse another embassador. I will reward
him, according to his success with this formidable renegado." With
this commission, though without a hope of seeing the son of Ripperda
yet an inhabitant of this world, Santa Cruz took the convent in his
way to the plains of Valentia. When he alighted at the gate, the Abbot
met him; and answered to his fearful question, "That the Marquis de
Montemar not merely breathed, but he trusted was far advanced in his
recovery."
From the night in which the dispatch left him, the virulence of the
fever disappeared. He felt and bewailed himself as a man; and the fiend
which despair had locked within his bosom, fled with the genial flood.
He remained in a state of calm that astonished himself; while it amazed
all around, to see one who was a heretic, so evidently comforted by an
influence from on high.
Santa Cruz sent to inform him of his arrival, and was immediately
admitted to his cell. Lorenzo withdrew as the Marquis entered. Louis
was dressed in his usual cloaths, but from present weakness yet lay
on a couch. The window of his cell was open to admit the mountain air,
which blew fresh and cheeringly over his face. That face was not to be
described:--It spoke of heaven, and his whole form harmonized with the
celestial witness.
Santa Cruz stopped and gazed on him; while Louis, raising himself on
his arm, stretched his hand towards him with a smile that made the
veteran's head bow before the youthful saint. He advanced and embraced
him. Louis bent his face upon the Marquis's hand.
"You will live my son!" cried Santa Cruz, in a burst of manly
sensibility; "you will recover your father to his God, and to his
country!"
"I could wish to live for that purpose!" replied Louis, "but be it as
heaven wills. My prayers may be effected without my own agency."
When recovered from his emotion, the Marquis communicated his present
commission; and in recapitulating the tidings from Morocco, the
mantling colour on the hectic cheek of Louis shewed, that he too,
recognised his father in the new Aben Humeya. In narrating the rapid
successes of the apostate Duke, Santa Cruz dwelt on one circumstance,
which contained some antidote to the poison of the rest.
Muley Hamet, with a large army of disaffected Moors, had appeared on
the plain of Marmora, about half a day's journey from the capital
of Morocco. Aben Humeya assembled the household troops; and on the
same day the tidings arrived, marched to oppose him. His forces were
inferior in number to the enemy; but their leader gave them an example
of confidence, telling them they must strictly obey his orders, and on
his head he would assure them victory. Muley Hamet practised the usual
Moorish stratagems, which the discipline of his adversary so completely
baffled, that enraged with disappointment he dared a general
engagement in the very worst position he could have chosen. Aben Humeya
had drawn him into the declivities of the mountains, where the cavalry,
his principal strength, could not act; and sending a detachment to
block up the regress, by occupying the pass of Cedi Cassem, the rebel
Prince suffered a total defeat. Every soul might have been cut off,
but the new Mussulman had not yet forgotten the warfare of Christian
nations. He called to his men to remember that the misguided followers
of Muley Hamet were their brethren; and that after the signal
chastisement they had received, it was the victor's duty to suffer
the escape of the remnant. Aben Humeya pursued the same conciliatory
conduct in taking Tetuan and Arzilla from the power of the rebel; and
an offer of general pardon being spread amongst the refractory Moors,
the troops of Muley Hamet deserted to his adversary, and he fled to
the mountains.
"This consummate policy is the Duke de Ripperda's," said the Marquis;
"and the Duke in his sanest mind."
"I would draw another inference from such policy," rejoined his son,
"that whether his mind be in full health or disordered, this mercy is a
sure pledge, the Christian principle remains in his heart."
"There is no disordered intellect in these plans and executions;"
returned Santa Cruz, "but a stretch of capacity, and an extravagant
exertion of its power, which compels common minds to pause and wonder.
Genius, however, may often be mistaken for madness; for it frequently
acts so entirely under the influence of imagination, as to do things so
utterly irrational, that if it be not the effect of an absolute want
of reason, it is certainly that of a dereliction from reason, and
produces the consequences of madness."
Louis knew to whom this latter remark might have too well applied, and
with stifled emotion, he answered:--
"That conduct then, is most likely to be according to good judgement,
which is actuated by sober experience alone."
"That conduct," replied the Marquis, "which avoids the enthusiasm of
fancy and the passions, as he would the shoals and quicksands of the
sea! But there is something more required than sober experience. A well
regulated mind must sit in judgement upon that experience; and, my dear
de Montemar," continued he, pausing, and impressively pressing his
hand, "wisdom and virtue will be the issue."
Louis returned to the last act of his father upon the plains of
Marmora. It obliterated the phrenzied moment of their parting; and
opening his heart to a dawn of hope, he took the letter of the Queen,
which her own hand had addressed to the banished Ripperda, and putting
it in his bosom, told his veteran friend he was ready once again to
visit the African shores.
This re-animation was not transitory. Santa Cruz was to set off the
following morning towards his army; and having calculated the slower
progress of troops to the coast, and the usual delays in getting on
board the transports, a day was fixed for Louis joining him, without
any dangerous haste, at the place of embarkation.
Youth and inward vigour, with the bracing, life-inspiring air that is
breathed from the lips of a friend, restored Louis to such a strength,
that at the time appointed, he appeared on the quarter-deck of the
Trinidada, the vessel that was to bear Santa Cruz to the Mahommedan
shore.
Unconscious of the wound they probed, the officers of the General's
staff discoursed largely on the crusade to which they were going;
and descanted with unrestrained freedom on the Moorish leader. Some
affirmed him to be an Arab; others a brother of the Emperor, who was so
distinguished in their father's life-time, as to awaken the jealousy of
Abdallah; and on his accession, the Prince suddenly disappeared. Rumour
spoke of the bow-string; but hints being also spread, of a perpetual
imprisonment in the seven towers of Mequinez, it was afterwards
supposed that he had purchased liberty and honour by assuming a new
name, and fighting the battles of his brother.
Louis could not bear these guesses; nor the invectives, (to the justice
of which his own heart assented,) in which these young men indulged
against the renegadoes at the court of Abdallah. Sidi Ali, a Sicilian
apostate, and a celebrated engineer, was most especially the object of
their anathemas; as, from his skill, they expected some protraction in
the glory of repelling Aben Humeya from the walls of Ceuta. When these
discussions began, Louis usually retired to a distant corner on the
quarter deck, to commune with his own thoughts; and while his upright
mind armed itself in its own integrity, his body derived its wonted
vigour from the genial breezes of the sea.
On the night of the sixth day after they had set sail from the port of
Carthagena, the little fleet entered the bay of Ceuta; and, on a wave
smooth as glass, the troops stepped into boats which rowed them to the
perpendicular walls of the town. Here all was deep shadow. Louis saw
nothing through the universal blackness. Nor did he note the dreary
splashing of the boats in the fathomless water; nor did he feel the
chilling vapour which arose from its cold surface, withheld from
evaporation by the height and closeness of the outworks. He was in the
first pinnace; and had no thought, nor observation, but for the object
of their landing.
An archway, and a long flight of steps in the rock between two walls,
were the only egress on this side into the fortress. The boats crowded
to the spot, where their crews severally leaped on the narrow platform,
and ascended the stony ladder. A light heart was in every brave
breast; and plumed with anticipated victory, they seemed to fly. Louis
alone, whose whole soul was once as much on the wing for military
atchievements, moved with a slow, but a firm step; for, against whom
was the sword of his first field to be drawn?
On entering the fortress he fully understood how necessary was all this
silence in gaining the shore. Count de Blas the governor, informed
the Marquis Santa Cruz, that the Moors were in great force before the
town. That several skirmishes had taken place between the corps of
observation from the garrison, and the advanced posts of the Moresco
camp. The Spaniards had been beaten in with loss; and in short, so
universal a panic prevailed in the garrison, no confidence could be put
in its steadiness in case of an attack. The consequence was already
seen, in the audacity with which Aben Humeya was opening his trenches;
and until Santa Cruz arrived, De Blas was in nightly dread of an
attempt being made to storm the town. To prevent this, he suggested the
advantage of the new troops surprising the Moors by an immediate sally.
Prior to Aben Humeya having taken up this position, the Count continued
to say, he had reduced the whole of the rebellious Bashas to the
obedience of their Emperor. Their leader Muley Hamet, had extended
his flight from the hilly country, to the deserts of Taffilet; and
Abdallah, that very morning, had sent a deputation of his royal
brothers to invest Aben Humeya, with the dignity of Basha of Tetuan;
and to present him with a new banner, on which was embroidered:--
"Proceed! to exceed is no longer possible!"
Santa Cruz replied to the urgency of de Blas for an immediate
attack, that he had orders from his sovereign to act with peculiar
circumspection. He must communicate with the Moorish general; and to
do this with the necessary knowledge, he must have time to make his
military observations, and to estimate their relative strength.
In the course of these investigations, in the prosecution of which
Santa Cruz was always attended by Louis, the group of observation
mounted on a redoubt far to the front in the Spanish lines. The Marquis
contemplated with his glass the order, and scientific precision with
which the enemy's works were advancing. The Count de Blas stood near
him, and expatiated with much heat, on the probable effects of the new
discipline introduced into the Moorish army by its present chief.
"But these European tactics" cried he, "are engrafted on a true
barbarian soil. One flag of truce, that I ventured to dispatch merely
to gain time, was fired on in its return; and in attempting to
make good its retreat, a party of the enemy rushed from behind yon
epaulement to the left, and took the whole troop to a man. One who made
his escape, informed me, the proud Aben Humeya chose to take offence
at some want of official reverence in the Spanish officer's manner of
quitting the camp; and that the moment he was told of it, he ordered
him to be pursued and taken; and at the same time denounced a similar
fate on all who should henceforward presume to bear any Spanish flag
within reach of his lines."
While the Governor was speaking, a squadron of Moors turned that very
side-work, and presented themselves on the plain, glittering in all
the splendid array of the Basha's peculiar suite. In the midst of the
groupe, which immediately parted to short distances, Louis beheld an
august figure. De Blas instantly proclaimed it to be Aben Humeya. In
that clear atmosphere, no glass was necessary to note an object just
without the reach of musquet shot; and to observe this, Louis's whole
soul was in his eye.
At sight of the Basha, the acclamations of the Moors in the trenches
were loud and incessant. He was mounted on a black horse, whose rich
caparisons seemed to vie with the habit of its rider. The dress of
the new Mussulman was loose of blue and gold tissue over a yellow
caftan embroidered with gold. His belt, and the arms which stuck in
it, were studded with jewels; and a splendid cymetar hung at his side.
His turban was crested with a large jewelled crescent and heron plume.
And the bridle in his hand sparkled with brilliant studs; while the
magnificent housings of his horse, almost touched the ground. Aben
Humeya rode forward, and again the air was rent with shouts. He bowed
his head, and at the motion of his hand, the whole was respectfully
silent. A flourish of wind instruments succeeded, and his suite began
to play their evolutions before him, in all the various exercises of
the lance and dart.
Louis could not mistake the demeanor of his father. But all this
supremacy over the rest of mankind in personal dignity and grace,
seemed to his virtuous son, only a garment of mockery to the fallen
spirit within. It was horrible in his eyes, and he turned silently
from the vociferous observations of de Blas.
That same evening Santa Cruz ordered a flag of truce to be in readiness
for the Moorish camp at day-break. At the mention of so dangerous an
expedition, every motion was arrested amongst the class of officers
who were usually selected for that duty. None spoke. But Santa Cruz
neither addressed any, nor looked on any; for the forlorn hope on this
enterprize was already chosen.
When Louis came in the morning for his last orders, he found the
Governor with his General, remonstrating on the madness of exposing so
distinguished a young man as the Marquis de Montemar, in so perilous a
hazard. Santa Cruz repeated to his young friend, all the intimidating
representations of De Blas, who added there was not a man in the
garrison, who did not shrink from being his escort.
Louis bowed gratefully to the implied solicitude of the Count; but
answered the Marquis, by requesting to have the white flag delivered
to him, when he would go alone. To hamper him with cowards, Santa Cruz
thought would only invite danger; and he put the flag into his hand.
Louis left the gates, with no other companion than his courage and
his faith. Santa Cruz's anxious eye watched the desperate adventure.
The works were crowded in every part, to witness his progress and
reception. At a given spot, he halted to unfurl his white banner.
Again he shot forward, waving its staff before him, to be seen by the
Moorish out-posts as he advanced within their fire. A hundred turbans
emerged from the nearest trenches:--while a yell of such horrid import
burst from every mouth, that his horse started back on his haunches,
with a strange noise from its nostrils fully descriptive of surprize
and terror. Nothing, however checked its rider. He struck his spurs
into the animal, and resumed his onward speed at the moment the savage
cries from below were echoed by a thousand voices from the works
above;--a volley of musquetry was discharged, and Louis was lost in
the smoke, from the eyes of them who watched on the walls of Ceuta.
It cleared away; and the resolute bearer of the flag was yet seen
galloping towards the camp. Another volley succeeded, and the plain
was again obscured: vengeance alone occupied the breasts of the men
upon the Spanish lines. Their courage revived with their indignation;
and rushing without command from a salley port, they charged fiercely
towards the point of their revenge. At sight of this sortie, a similar
detachment issued from the gates of the camp. The horse of Louis was
transfixed by two balls; and lay struggling on the ground. He had
extricated himself from the dying animal, and was risen from its side,
just as the salley-port of Ceuta opened to rescue or avenge him. When
on foot, the broken ground in the plain concealed his advance to his
friends until he rejoined them, and mounted a horse presented to him by
his faithful Lorenzo.
This circumstance being discerned by Santa Cruz, who stood on the
redoubt, the sortie was recalled, and Louis, with the troop, re-entered
the garrison.
The implacable fury of this second breach of the received laws of war,
inflamed the Spaniards with the most vehement indignation. There was no
name, opprobrious to a man and a soldier, which they did not lavish on
the fierce Aben Humeya.
Louis withdrew to the quarters of Santa Cruz. His resolution was
taken; and he only awaited his sanction, to put it in execution that
very night. To go by stealth into the Moorish camp, and depend on
providence for conducting him to the presence of his father.
The Marquis would not hear him to an end. He regarded this last act,
of firing upon a single man, as so base a proof of Ripperda's apostacy
from honour as well as from religion, that he no longer retained a hope
of his return to duty:--
"No, de Montemar," said he, "we must now let that alone for ever. You
would only lose yourself, without recovering him."
"I should lose myself indeed," replied he, "were I to abandon the only
purpose for which I came to this country; the only purpose for which,
I believe my life is lengthened. He will not imbrue his hands in the
blood of his own son; and, who in that camp, will dare to touch the
man, of whom he will say--Let his life be protected!"
"This is delusion, de Montemar. He has abandoned his God. He has
trampled on his honour. And, with these facts, there is no reasonable
hope."
"My hope may be beyond reason; but it is not against it," replied
he. "Grant me the means to fulfil my resolution; and, I dare promise
myself, that you will, see me again."
"Never," returned Santa Cruz, "the blood of rashness shall never be on
my head. Leave me now, and we will discourse of more rational projects
to-morrow."
Louis obeyed. But that morrow might never occur to him. When he
withdrew it was to pursue his determination. That night, alone, and
unassisted, to seek the presence of his father.
CHAP. VI.
From his observations in passing the enemy's lines, he thought it
possible to throw himself into one of the trenches nearest their
position; and in the disguise of a Moor, return with the workmen into
the camp.
By means of his devoted Lorenzo, (who would have suffered the rack,
rather than betray the confidence of his master,) he procured the
accoutrements of a Moresco soldier, from a Jewish merchant in Ceuta.
The aspect of the night favoured his project; and he left the Spanish
fortress in company with the latest outpost. The growing shadows gave
him opportunity to glide from its neighbourhood unobserved; and having
his disguise previously hidden amongst the ruins of an old fort
midway between the Moorish and Spanish works, he covered himself with
the Moresco trowsers, haigue and turban; and arming his belt with the
accustomed number of knives and pistols, took his pic-axe in his hand,
and cautiously proceeded along the flank of the Moorish trenches, whose
line he discerned, by a pale and zig-zag gleam along the surface of the
ground. It was too faint to be noticeable at any distance, and arose
from the low lantherns within, by whose glow-worm light, when the sky
was obscured, the yet inexpert engineers performed their work.
When arrived near the verge of the excavations nearest the camp, he
listened breathlessly to the clash of cymbals, which announced an
exchange of workmen. Now was his moment. He slid down the bank into
the vacant fosse, and stood close in its angle, shrouded by complete
darkness. The lamps did not extend beyond the place of immediate
labour. He had hardly taken his station, when an iron gate opened into
the trench, the cymbals ceased, and an advance of numerous feet from
the camp sounded towards him. It was answered by a similar approach
from the lines. He drew himself closer into the angle, as the latter
passed him in enfilade; and observing that each man as he marched by a
particular officer, cried aloud, "Lahilla Lah!" and was then counted
by him, he saw the danger of being the last in the file; and stepping
in between the rapid step of one soldier in turning the angle, and
the halting approach of another, he repeated the expected response,
and moved forward unmolested. He entered the camp without impediment;
and the Moors parting to their different quarters, he turned quickly
in a direction which he thought from the description of the escaped
Spaniard, would bring him to the pavilion of its commander.
Excepting the words he had repeated as the parole of the night, and
of the meaning of which he was entirely ignorant, he knew not a word
of the Moresco tongue. The camp was partially lighted; and near the
Basha's quarters the lamps became thicker, until the platform around
his tent was one blaze of illumination.
Several Moorish officers were walking to and fro, as if waiting for
orders; and the ample circle in which the pavilion stood, was hemmed
round by the body guards of the Basha. These men were Negroes of huge
proportions, and equipped in the most formidable array of Barbaric
arms. They sat on the ground in the Moorish style, with each his hand
on his drawn cymetar.
Louis drew into the comparative obscurity of one of the tented streets
diverging from the platform; and, with a scrutinizing eye, revolved
how he should pass this excluding circle. While he looked from man
to man, the curtained entrance of the pavilion was drawn back by two
slaves, and a blaze of flambeaux issued forth. In the midst of it was a
military figure in a splendid Moorish dress. But it was not his father.
By one act, all the Negroes bent forward, and struck their foreheads
to the ground; even the officers made the same abasement to this
personage; who, graciously bowing his head, passed on, followed by a
procession of flambeaux. But still the light was glaring as noon-day,
around the tent. It was only by stratagem he could enter it, and his
life must be set on the hazard.
After watching nearly an hour, to afford opportunity for some
favourable accident to open him a way, without the desperate expedient
he revolved, he retreated through a cross passage of dark tents, that
led into the great illuminated avenue before the pavilion; and, having
wrapped his mother's picture, which he always wore round his neck, in
a silk handkerchief he had about him, he put it in his bosom, and then
boldly plunging from the darkened street into the full light of the
platform, moved direct to the curtained entrance.
In an instant a host of cymetars were at his breast. But he stood erect
before them all, and exclaiming
"Aben Humeya!"
took the handkerchief from his breast, and held it forth with a
commanding air towards the tent. He had not even repelled the weapons
with his hand, so firm did he stand in apparent inward dignity. It
awed the negroes, who stood for a moment gazing on each other; Louis
profited by their suspended faculties, and was passing on, when one in
the dress of an officer intercepted him. He addressed the intruder in
a barbarous attempt at the Moresco language, but really in a jargon,
comprised of every tongue on the Mediterranean shores; and saluting
Louis by the opprobrious appellation of slave, demanded, with other
viler epithets, how he presumed to violate that sacred threshold.
Louis saw the miserable soul of some base renegado of the Balearic
Isles, in this insolent attack; and answering him at once in Spanish,
warned him in laconic, but haughty language, to beware how he insulted
a man who came in the face of three hundred cymetars, to lay the spoil
of a brave Spaniard at the feet of Aben Humeya.
"Conduct me to his presence;" continued he, "or know, that he who can
speak Spanish like his native tongue, is not less able to prove a
Moorish sword his native weapon!"
The renegado eyed the speaker with a trembling suspicion. His head
might pay the forfeit, should he introduce an improper person into the
pavilion; and should his perverseness exclude one on whom the Basha
conferred confidence, he would incur equal jeopardy. He now wished he
had left the responsibility of this egress to the negroes; but he had
interposed, and must proceed.
"Your name?" said he.
"That the Basha will know when he sees me."
The officer feared to hesitate, and he preceded him to the first range
of the pavilion. Like the outer-court, it was lined with guards. The
renegado in a tone of some respect, told Louis he must stop in this
vestibule until his credentials in the handkerchief were delivered to
Aben Humeya. The alcaide of the guard, who carried it in, returned in a
few minutes with consternation in his countenance; and beckoning Louis
to follow him, passed through several chambers before they arrived at
the sacred inclosure; within whose sacred vestment none durst penetrate
without an especial summons from the Basha. The officer drew aside the
curtain, and pointing in silence to the door, Louis entered alone. The
Basha stood by a Moorish couch, directly under a lamp in the centre of
the place. A table was near him, on which lay a naked cymetar, and an
open casket containing the koran. He had the picture in his hand.
Louis's face was overshadowed by the dark folds of his turban; and as
he did not assume the usual position of all who (less than of equal
rank,) approached the august presence, the Basha fell back a step and
exclaimed!
"Who art thou, that darest so to approach Aben Humeya?"
Louis with clasped hands, bowed his head upon his breast, but could not
immediately answer. It was his Father's voice, and he had not ventured
his life in vain!
"Whence came this Christian spoil?" demanded Ripperda, "was it taken
from the living or the dead?" The voice was firm. But the tension
with which he grasped the picture, was sufficient assurance that an
exerted nerve was necessary to enable him to put the question with the
steadiness of one indifferent to the owner's fate.
"I took it from the living!" replied Louis, "To pass me into the
presence of him who gave me life."
An inarticulate sound burst from the lips of his father; he moved a few
hasty steps towards him; but as suddenly starting back;
"Presumptuous boy!" cried he, "what do you promise yourself by this
temerity? Are you not aware that the act which made me a Mussulman,
separated me from all former relations; and that in Louis de Montemar,
I can see no other than a Spanish spy?"
"No act of man," replied Louis, "can cut asunder the bands of nature;
can separate the unity of Son and Father, in the great objects of time
and eternity: And in that faith, I appear again before you, on a
second mission from your religion and your country."
"This told me a braver story!" returned Ripperda, sternly putting the
picture into the hand of his Son; "But speak your errand, that I may
dismiss the messenger."
Louis bore the taunt without reply; and with brevity, but energetic
persuasion, he repeated to his gloomily listening Father, the new
proposals from the Queen. They assured the banished Duke that the
decree of his exile was not merely recalled, and the King ready to
publicly declare the charges his enemies had alleged against him, to
be false; but His Majesty would grant him a general amnesty for his
present proceedings in Africa; and on his return to Spain, invest him
with a new and extraordinary trust at court, to the confusion of his
rivals, and the assertion of his character in the minds of all men. The
church too, should open its arms to receive him; for Isabella would
obtain an absolution from the Pope for the brief apostacy; while that
dark deed obliterated by penitence, might remain as totally unknown to
the world at large, as his son trusted, it would then be blotted out
from the book of God.
"Louis," replied the Duke, "have you known me so long by the best
proofs of man--his actions! and are yet to be told, that my religion
consists wholly of the prosperity of the country I serve? and that my
country is that which best knows the value of my services?"
"Then," returned his son, not wishing to comprehend the whole of this
speech; "that country is now Spain. Read the letter of Isabella, and
you will find the prayer of the nation in every line. She is, as a
Mother petitioning a beloved Son to spare his Brothers. Oh, my Father;
listen to the native magnanimity of your soul, rather than to this new
and unnatural pride; and resume at once the patriot and the Christian.
None, excepting the King and Queen, and the Marquis Santa Cruz, know
that Aben Humeya and Ripperda are the same; and having been spared that
open stigma, your religion and your country may yet be that of Spain."
Ripperda grasped the still un-read letter of the Queen; "De Montemar!"
said he, "and is it you that can think I would live under shelter of
any shrouded act? No; I have dared to be a Mussulman! To resume the
name of my Moorish ancestors; to tread in the unreceding steps of
Julian and de Valor. What I am, I am; and my banners, here, and in
Spain, shall proclaim to all the world, that Ripperda's injuries are in
the breast of Aben Humeya."
Again Louis urged him to read the last appeal of his former Sovereigns,
contained in the packet he held in his hand; and then trample on his
country and them, if vengeance must yet have place, with such ample
restitution.
"Restitution!" repeated the Duke, and broke the seal. He read the
letter, and threw it from him; but not with the same equanimity with
which he began the contents. In the offered pardon, and the promised
honours, all his imputed transgressions were recapitulated, to enhance
the merit of the amnesty; all the accusations of a vain woman's
jealousy, poured forth in extenuation of her share in his fall; and the
whole was wound up in a passion of reproaches, and entreaties, in which
the chains which had formerly bound him to her feet, were so apparent,
that his incensed spirit rose with every line; and he cast the letter
from him.
Louis trembled at this unexpected issue, from what he had hoped would
have made some softening impression on his Father's implacable revenge;
but with a firm voice, he asked, what was his reply to that petition
from a Queen and a woman?
Ripperda turned on him a penetrating and contemptuous look.
"Have you read that petition?"
"No, my Father; but I know it is to ratify all that I have assured you."
"I know not what it would ratify!" cried the Duke, stung by a sudden
recollection, and snatching up the letter, he tore it in pieces. "It
shall never be witness, that any one dared tamper with my honour; that
he who once commanded nations--But no more. I will answer this letter
to-morrow, on that field; and they who survive, may bear the writing to
their Queen."
"My Father!" exclaimed Louis.
"I have said it, young man," interrupted Ripperda in a voice of
thunder; "go, and tell them so--and it shall be finished."
"No;" returned Louis, "for in that field, you would have to meet your
own people, and your own son! You would drench your hands in the blood
you have so often sworn to cherish; you would give the last blow to the
name and race of Ripperda; and what will be your reward? The fetters of
a barbarian!"
The string had been touched, which vibrated to madness in the brain of
Ripperda. His apprehension became confused, and with terrific solemnity
he approached his son.
"Hitherto," said he, "I have heard you with patience! I read your
Queen's letter with patience; I received her General's flag of truce
with patience. But her letter was an insidious blazonry of all my false
accusers; and he who brought the flag of truce, whispered at my gates,
that Aben Humeya was a Spanish traitor. This is their truth, their
amnesty; this, my sheltered honour! And you appear the minister of such
an embassy! De Montemar," cried he grasping his arm; "are you aware to
what you move me? But I will not reason farther. Tell your Sovereign,
it is my will to be his enemy! That is my final answer."
Ripperda walked haughtily away: but Louis followed him, with all the
energy of a man determined to prevail. His father turned fiercely on
his filial eloquence.
"Silence," cried he, "my whole nature rejects the treacherous
influence. I am not to be betrayed a second time, by the arms which
once deserted me. You would sell me; but I am not to be bought. These
limbs shall never wither in a dungeon, closed by my own son! This head
shall never welter on a scaffold his hands have reared!"
His eye was fixed on the sword on the table. The expression was
portentous; and he moved towards it, muttering to himself the names
of de Paz and Wharton. Louis saw the urging demon; and clasping his
hands, while he tore his gaze from that ever revered face, he threw
himself between his father and the table.
"Parricide," cried Ripperda, "I am not at your mercy;" and with the
word, he made a stroke at the breast of his son. Louis seized the
frantic arm.
"Duke de Ripperda," said he, "I may fall by your slaves; but your own
hand shall not kill your son. If you indeed believe, that he who has
twice hazarded his life to recall you to your honour and your God, can
be leagued with falsehood to betray you, summon your guards to dispatch
me!"
Ripperda glared on him, as he firmly grasped the hand that held the
dagger. Louis's eyes were not less rivetted on those of his father.
"De Montemar," cried he, relaxing his hold on the weapon; "on the
perdition of us both, leave my presence; and see that we never meet
again. Your father is not what he was."
He struck his hand upon his burning forehead; and, trembling from head
to foot, sunk into a seat.
Louis observed him for a few minutes in silence; but his soul was then
prostrate before the only Being who could restore that noble mind; his
heart was at the feet of his father; and, falling on his knees beside
him, he put that now unarmed hand to his lips.
Ripperda had still enough of human tenderness to understand this
appeal; but his distempered imagination would not apprehend its truth;
and, starting from his position, he exclaimed:--
"Impossible! The world and your ingratitude have undone me. You are no
more a son to a rebel and a renegade. I, no more a father to him whose
treasons reduced me to this extremity!--Away, and by that path," added
he, pointing to a passage in the back of the pavilion.--"If we ever
meet again, you must finish your commission; or I blot from the earth
the dishonoured name of Ripperda!"
Louis was still on his knee, when his father hastily advanced to the
curtain and called aloud: A mute appeared; and the Basha, with an
instant recovery of composed dignity, commanded him to see that Moor,
(pointing to Louis,) to the outside of the camp towards the hill, and
leave him there.
Ripperda quitted the apartment as he spoke; and, with desolation in his
heart, Louis rose and followed his conductor.
CHAP. VII.
The Moorish slave passed without obstacle to the rear of the camp;
and, making his mute salam to his equally silent charge, quitted him
in a recess between the hills. Louis found his way back to the Spanish
lines, by keeping close to the sea-coast; and, throwing off his
disguise, proceeded close under the wall of Ceuta, till he arrived at
the draw-bridge, which he crossed at day-break.
He employed some hours in self collection before it was necessary to
inform the Marquis Santa Cruz of the interview he had sought in the
Moorish camp; and that the result destroyed his every hope of inducing
the unhappy renegade to forego his scheme of vengeance.
Santa Cruz too much respected the filial devotion of Louis, in what he
had done, to reprimand the rashness of the experiment.
"But there let it cease," said he. "You now owe a duty elsewhere,
and must preserve the loyalty of that name in yourself, which he so
determinately abandons."
"I shall attempt it," replied Louis, as he moved to leave the
apartment. "Allow me to serve in your army as a volunteer, and I will
do my best not to disgrace your confidence."
"De Montemar, I can never doubt you."
Louis sighed at the emphasis his veteran friend laid upon the word
you; and, with feelings which only a son in his situation can know, he
replied:--
"When my father has fallen from his proud height of virtue, who dare
think he stands?"
Santa Cruz understood the response; and, with a voice of parental
tenderness, made answer:
"He fell, because his virtue was proud. It is not so with you.
Therefore, let not the lowliness of a wounded spirit, mourning the
transgressions of others, lessen your faith in the power God has given
you to be, what you believed your Father was. Stand erect in your own
virtue, for it is the panoply of heaven; and do not allow infidelity,
even in the shape of a parent, to suppose it can bow a head so armed."
Louis kissed the hand that grasped his, in the zeal of the exhortation;
and without further observation withdrew.
During their conversation, and while the Marquis expressed his
satisfaction at finding that the alleged violation of the first
flag of truce was produced by the outrageous conduct of the Spanish
officer, and not a dishonourable breach of military law on the side
of Ripperda,--he explained to Louis, why the supposition of so base
an act had appeared fuller of despair in his eyes, than even the bold
derelictions of apostacy and treason. To a daring crime of the latter
complexion, a man may be impelled by a sudden passion; and though he
deserve the punishment of his offence, yet remorse may follow the
transgression, and he will as bravely acknowledge the justice of his
sentence, and, to the utmost, make restitution, as he had before
desperately incurred the penalty of the great moral law. But a mean,
over-reaching, treacherous action, proves cowardice of soul; and he
who performs it has never courage to look it in the face; or if it
be pressed upon him, still he crouches under his load of infamy, or
impudently affects ignorance of its existence, while he feels in his
own heart that he has not spirit to retrace his path to reputation by
confession and amendment. Hence, as desertion of honour is the vice of
cowards, it is hopeless in its nature; and society can offer no terms
to him who has so entirely abandoned himself.
Louis had no idea of military glory, when he volunteered his services
to the Spanish arms. His aim was to guard his father's head in the
day of battle; while he hoped to prove to Spain, and to the world,
(should it ever hear of him more,) that he behaved with fidelity to the
country to which that father had constrained him to swear allegiance.
Life's aspect was changed to him. He had hardly entered the morn of
his days; and the clouds were gathered over the opening prospect; at
least, all his dearest objects were snatched from his sight;--the lofty
consciousness of public duties, the race of glory, and the fame of
future ages!--Even at the starting post, he had reached the goal; and
his hardly-risen sun went instant down in darkness.--
"How many before me, and how many that come after me, have destinies
directly the reverse of mine! Nay, their day of brightness is even
lengthened like that of Joshua in the field of Gibeon, till all in
their heart be."
The draught was a bitter one, which Louis found in his cup of trial;
but he was resolved to drink it to the dregs;--"And there," cried he,
"I shall find it has some sweetness."
The observations he could not help making in passing through the
Moorish camp, shewed him the strength of the enemy; and from the
discipline and number of the troops, he did not doubt that the
slender garrison of Ceuta would be lost, should his father determine
on attacking it by storm. The fortifications were in so bad a state,
that Santa Cruz set all hands to work to bring them into order; and,
meanwhile, sent to the lines before San Roque for a reinforcement of
engineers, and as many troops as they could spare.
During these preparations, the Basha was seen visiting his works every
day, surrounded by a guard of horsemen; who, however, in contempt of
the Spaniards, amused themselves in scampering about, throwing the
gerid, and firing at each other in sport, between their own parallels.
It was evident that Ripperda wished to provoke Santa Cruz to a battle,
or to induce him to believe that such was his motive; for he ventured
insulting detachments, even under the fire of the Spanish forts. But
he had another point in view;--to seize the fortified town of Larach.
By retaining possession of that place, the Spaniards might command
the whole of the Atlantic coast of the empire of Morocco. Larach
on the Atlantic, and Ceuta on the Mediterranean, were now all that
remained to Philip in Africa; and the new Aben Humeya was aware, that
while the Moors were making these hostile demonstrations before the
one, the other would consider itself secure; and, therefore, the more
easily fall into his hands. A large body of men were marching from
Mequinez, to complete the army with which he meant to crush the whole
Spanish power, both in Morocco and Algiers; and this reinforcement,
by his orders, was now halted in the vallies of Benzeroel. On such
information, he quitted his camp; and leaving directions with Sidi Ali
how to proceed in his absence, proceeded to the head of this second
army, and to the surprise of Larach.
He was well acquainted with the character of the military governor, Don
Juan d'Orendayn; a vain and ignorant brother of the no less insolent
and vain Count de Paz, his most inveterate enemy at the Spanish court.
But it was not to revenge himself on any individual, that Ripperda
would have moved a single step. It was against the whole Spanish
nation he had sworn vengeance; and high or low, declared enemies, or
professing friends, all were alike to him:--They were Spaniards, and
he drew an unsparing sword.
All the revenge that he took personally on the kinsman of de Paz,
was to make his vanity the cause of his destruction; and sending a
renegade Jew into the town, the pretended deserter informed d'Orendayn,
that Aben Humeya was encamped with a few troops on the banks of the
river on his way to the siege of Ceuta. He added, the fears of these
raw recruits were so great, of Don Juan discovering they were in his
neighbourhood, they had drawn the line of their camp to a fictitious
length, to deceive him with regard to their numbers; and that Aben
Humeya, not being able to place any dependance on these timid men, was
under apprehensions like their own, till he could excite their courage
by mingling them with the veterans before Ceuta. The Jew found himself
believed; and was vehemently seconded by the younger officers in the
garrison, when he advised a sudden sally from Larach, and promised to
Don Juan the glory of making Aben Humeya his prisoner.
Cowardice and ambition contended in the breast of d'Orendayn. The same
day he dispatched a corps of observation, to ascertain the truth of the
deserter; and on its bearing witness that the pavilion of the Basha
stood in the midst of a line of tents, which could not contain more
than four or five hundred men; hesitation was at an end, and the eager
governor gave orders for a sortie that very night; when he hoped to
steal an easy victory.
Ripperda had disposed the strength of his army amongst the numerous
dells and recesses at the foot of the mountains. On one side of his
visible front, was a thick wood; on the other, a small branch of the
river Lecus. His cavalry was posted behind the wood; and his own little
camp, which consisted of six hundred of his best disciplined men,
lay on their arms within their lines. These were nothing more than a
range of hurdles; but so disposed, as to be a sufficient screen for the
assailed to form behind them.
D'Orendayn, believing the whole of the Basha's present force was
contained in that small boundary, came boldly forward with two-thirds
of his own garrison; and with a furious discharge of musquetry, fell
upon the Moorish camp. The night was bright, and seemed to favour the
exploit. After making a shew of some resistance; the attacked gave
ground, and soon after fled towards the mountain. The Spanish commander
blew a summons for the rest of the garrison to join him in the chace;
for he saw that victory over so inconsiderable a body, would yield him
little honour, unless he could secure the person of its formidable
leader. When the pursuers appeared to gain ground upon the fugitives
which surrounded the banner of Aben Humeya; and Orendayn thought he
had already countless rewards in his possession, for this masterly
atchievement; he was advanced into the ambuscade. The Basha, facing
suddenly round, cried aloud:--
"Lahillah Lah, Mahometh ressoul Allah!"
A thousand voices echoed the sound; showers of arrows poured from
the incumbent heights; and, from every opening in the hills, Moorish
infantry rushed upon the astonished victors, while the cavalry from the
wood charged them in the rear.
No Spaniard returned to tell the story. Larach received a Moorish
garrison; and the crescent of Mohammed was flying on its walls, when
a little row-boat, manned by a few Christian merchants who escaped
during the confusion in the town, made the best of its way to reach the
Spanish coast.
The acclamations which followed the return of Aben Humeya to his camp
before Ceuta, were heard in the Spanish fortress; and, soon after,
there was a rumor amongst the Jews in the town, of what had befallen
Larach.
Santa Cruz was confounded when he found the report true. He had
received so insufficient an accession to his force, that it appeared
mere mockery. No artillery was sent, for which he had particularly
dispatched his messenger; and he perceived a spirit of contradiction
to him, in all the orders which the war-minister gave out for the
prosecution of the African campaign. Besides this, the Count de Patinos
came direct from Seville, with a peremptory command from the Queen, for
Santa Cruz to join her there.
An exchange of brides between the royal heirs of Spain and Portugal
was the ostensible reason for the journey of the Court towards the
Spanish frontiers; but the real motive, was a desire of the King's to
view, with his own eyes, the lines he was planning at San Roque, to
shut out the fortress of Gibraltar from all communication with his
people; and to facilitate his operations on that place, in any future
siege. Previous to his visiting this scene of anticipated glory, he
became indisposed, and the court halted at Seville. His illness wore so
dangerous an aspect, Isabella became alarmed; and thought it prudent to
know personally from Santa Cruz, what was likely to be the persistance
of Ripperda, before she should disarm herself, by dispatching those
troops to Africa, which the death of Philip might render necessary to
the maintenance of her son's claims elsewhere.
The small detachment which had been granted, arrived under the command
of Don Joseph de Pinel;--Don Ferdinand d'Osorio was on his staff;
and the young soldier eagerly joined his father, where he longed to
obliterate the memory of his youthful follies, by a conduct worthy
of his hopes. In Lindisfarne, he had regarded the peculiar endowments
of Louis de Montemar with jealousy and dislike, till the ingenuous
character of their possessor compelled him to esteem the object of
his antipathy. But he only envied him, as far as he believed those
admirable qualities had made an impression on the heart his own wished
to attach. When Alice acknowledged her love, this jealousy was no more;
and with it vanished his dislike of her cousin.
During Ferdinand's stay at Val del Uzeda, his mother talked down the
night, in praise of the filial perseverance of the Marquis de Montemar;
in describing his ingenuous and elevated deportment; in imagining
all the various treasures of his yet more elevated mind. Her son
listened with no other feeling than that of emulation, to merit similar
encomiums; and Marcella, answered his enquiries respecting her opinion
of Louis, by a melancholy smile.
"Were I called hence;" said she, "and in my altered state, might chuse
my ministry, I would say, let me be guardian angel to that virtuous
young man!"
"Indeed!" replied Ferdinand, drawing his own inferences from the
innocent reply of his sister. She spoke it from the dictates of a
pure and pious heart; and did not blush when she answered his smiling
remark;--"That she had chosen a work of supererogation; for a virtuous
character needed no ministration: It was sufficient to itself."
"No Ferdinand," returned she, "virtue is not apathy. It feels under
the rack; it bleeds under the axe. But where the weakness of corrupted
nature would shrink and fly, it is steadfast, and combats, or sustains
to the end. Virtue is not an Heathen idol; a block, or a stone. It is a
Christian spirit in a human body; and comfort may wipe the drops from
its suffering brow."
Ferdinand was reproved, and did not venture again to sport with a
sentiment, which suited so well with the vestal state he still hoped
to induce her to make the price of his happiness with Alice. But there
his arguments failed. Marcella recapitulated the simple principles of
religious belief she had imbibed from her Protestant governess; and
shed tears, as she asserted the impossibility of her taking monastic
vows in a church, against the peculiar tenets of which her soul
revolted.
"I could resign my life for you, my dear brother," added she, "but for
nothing this world can produce, dare I sacrifice my conscience."
To providence, then, Ferdinand left his future destiny; and now only
striving to deserve its bounty, he resolved to make Louis de Montemar
the confidant and counsellor of his thoughts. He embraced him on the
African shore, with a grateful acknowledgement of his former generous
interference; and soon convinced Louis, that he held to his heart, the
still faithful lover of his dear Alice.
Before Santa Cruz quitted Ceuta, he held a council, in which he left
positive orders with the Count de Blas, that no sally should be
attempted, until he came back with the men and ammunition which were
necessary to make the first attack the decisive one. An hour passed
in private conference between him and the anxious son of Ripperda.
The Marquis alone, knew that Aben Humeya was other than a Moor; and,
therefore, the Marquis alone knew why the once gay De Montemar was
seldom seen to smile; and why, while he did his military duty with a
precision that neither admitted error, nor relaxation, the glow of
martial enthusiasm was extinguished in his countenance. But the hectic
of fevered diligence still kept its crimson on his cheek and at times
gave a lustre to his eyes of intolerable brightness.
Santa Cruz had hardly set sail, when a spirit, very different from that
of obedience to his commands, manifested itself amongst the heads of
the garrison. The Moors seemed more carelessly disposed in their camp,
revelling and exulting in the easy fall of Larach; and in consequence
of some observations on the unguarded state of their lines, Don Joseph
de Penil proposed attacking the Basha by surprise. The Counts de Blas
and de Patinos warmly assented to the enterprize; and the former
turned to Louis, saying he should lead the volunteers in the sortie.
He thanked the governor for the proposed distinction, but respectfully
reminded him of the Marquis's parting commands. Every lip was now
opened upon the absurdity of Santa Cruz attempting to curb events by
such ill-judged caution; and as de Penil persisted in pressing the
advantage of the present moment, he triumphantly called on Louis to
give the Marquis's reasons for such jealous prevention.
Louis calmly explained the incapability of Ceuta to defend itself,
should the sally be repulsed by the enemy. He gave his reasons for this
opinion, by enumerating all the wants and defects of the garrison; and
ended by repeating the positive charge of the Marquis Santa Cruz, that
no egress should be made from the Spanish lines, until his return with
sufficient means to render defeat almost impossible.
"De Montemar!" exclaimed de Blas, "these considerations are for grey
hairs. If you are ambitious to be a soldier, begin at the right end;
act before you think: and where can an enterprizing spirit have so fair
a field as against these insolent barbarians?"
"Courage," rejoined de Penil, glancing superciliously on Louis, "is an
essential quality in a soldier!"
"So essential," replied Louis, "that he cannot maintain obedience to
his commander without it."
"Some orders are safely obeyed!" said de Patinos with affected
carelessness. "A parade at Vienna, and a sortie from Ceuta are
different things!"
"When disobedience is a proof of courage and good discipline," returned
Louis, "I may have the honour to meet your approbation, Count de
Patinos. Meanwhile, I trust the Count de Blas, who is the governor of
this garrison, and on whose responsibility hangs its fate; I trust,
wherever he may chuse to place me, he will not doubt finding me at my
post."
De Patinos started angrily from his seat.--Louis rose also.
"Gentlemen," cried de Blas, "what is it you mean?"
"To shew I can revenge insult!" cried the haughty Count, touching his
sword, "if it be within the calculation of that philosopher to bid me
draw it." Louis boiled with rising passion; and with a countenance
whose lightning glances could hardly be restrained from giving the
defiance his better principles refused, he sternly answered:--
"Count de Patinos, I do not wear the King's sword, to draw it at the
prompting of every wordy spirit. If I have insulted you unprovoked, I
submit myself to the judgement of all present, and am ready to stand
your fire. But on the reverse, I mean not to assert that courage by a
private duel, which the public service will so soon put to the proof."
De Penil prevented an insolent retort from de Patinos; and de Blas
interfering with a real interest in the reconciliation of the two young
men, the haughty Spaniard grumbled out an enforced apology, and left
the room.
Don Joseph was conscious that he, too, had been guilty of impropriety
towards the Marquis de Montemar; but he was too proud to acknowledge
error to one so much his junior; and saw him retire to his quarters
with an admiration of his superior self command, which he would have
been glad to emulate, but had not generosity enough to praise.
Piqued into obstinacy, he urged de Blas to put the garrison into
immediate preparation for an attack upon the enemy's trenches; and with
the rising sun, the ground before the fortress was filled with Spanish
troops.
Nothing could have been more grateful to the views of Ripperda. He
knew the weakness of his opponent in numbers and artillery; and from a
forward eminence in his lines, with the aid of his glass, he counted
the Spanish columns as they defiled through their gates; and believing
them devoted to his sword, he turned to the Moors, whose thickening
ranks blackened the ground around them; and addressed them in a style
to arouse their fiercest passions. He described their former empire in
Spain; he recapitulated the various acts of injustice which banished
them that kingdom; he exposed the tyrannous animosity of the Spaniards
to the past and present generations of the Moors; and set forth the
shame of permitting so oppressive a race to maintain a foot of land in
Barbary.
The Moors answered his inflaming eloquence as he expected; and with
furious gesticulations and curses which rent the air, they demanded
to be led against their hereditary enemies. He mounted his horse;
and giving his orders of battle into the hands of his two leading
coadjutors, Sidi Ali, and the Hadge Adelmelek, marched out at the head
of his troops into the open field.
The Spaniards were led on, in two wretchedly appointed battalions, by
de Blas, and Don Joseph de Penil. Count de Patinos, in the arrogance
of his assumed contempt of Louis, volunteered his services at the head
of a small detachment of troops, which the governor considered the
elite of his cavalry. De Montemar, and Don Ferdinand commanded the
men who were to carry the trenches.
This first atchievement was speedily done. The workmen fled without
resistance; and even the soldiers in the parallels, when they had
discharged their fire, threw down their arms before the overwhelming
enemy, and begged quarter. But no time was granted to yield, or
to receive mercy. Every avenue from the Moorish camp poured forth
its troops; and at this moment they came rushing on like a storm.
They charged over their vanquished comrades; and over-leaping every
obstacle, fell upon the Spanish advance with a shock that broke its
line. The havock was as great as the surprise; and the way was soon
open to the attack of the second division. It made a halt, and stood
firm. Louis collected the fugitives from the first line, and formed
them behind their comrades, while the battle in front became close and
complex. The Infidels, contrary to their wonted custom, fought hand to
hand; and rallied two or three times, when any extraordinary press of
Spanish force compelled them to recede.
Aben Humeya shewed an eminent example of faith in his new creed. He
appeared to take no care of his person, but rode about under the
heaviest vollies, exhorting, and charging with his men; till at length,
after prodigious efforts, the Spaniards were obliged to give ground.
They retreated; but it was with a backward step; while the Moors,
crowding on them, horse and foot, broke the line in every direction. In
some places, the victors so mingled with the vanquished, that it rather
resembled an affray of single combatants, than a contest of regular
troops. The depth of de Montemar's little phalanx, was insufficient to
sustain the weight of the Basha's charge; it was penetrated and turned;
and in the moment of its defeat, the horse of Don Ferdinand was shot
and fell. A Moor raised his lance to dispatch its rider, when Louis
dashed between his friend and the infidel, and received the weapon on
his face. A random shot killed the lancer, while another gave the just
rescued Ferdinand a less mortal wound.
The Basha, after being twice unhorsed himself, cut off the squadron
under De Patinos; and the confusion among the Spaniards being redoubled
by Count de Blas falling at the same time, the panic-struck infantry
retreated pell mell into their outworks, hardly closing the gates on
the triumphant infidels at their heels. As Don Joseph de Penil galloped
towards the principal entrance, he passed Louis de Montemar, who, black
as a Moor with smoke and toil, stood by a held piece, which he had
brought to that spot, to cover the flight of the Spaniards; and was
firing it on the pursuers, with a quickness and effect, that cleared
the way to a considerable distance.
The enemy halted before this formidable barrier; for Louis's commands
and example soon made it a battery; and as the grape showered from it
on all sides, the fugitive Spaniards entered the fortress in safety.
Aben Humeya drew off his victorious troops; but it was only the recoil
of the tiger, to make his second spring decisive.
CHAP. VIII.
All was dismay within the Spanish lines. The Count de Blas died in the
arms of the men who were bearing him into the castle; and Don Joseph de
Penil was so severely wounded, that he dropped off his horse as soon
as it had cleared the draw-bridge into the fortress. Half the garrison
was slain or missing; and no officers of rank returned alive from the
field, but what were borne in on their cloaks,--sad, mangled victims of
the preceding rashness.
When De Penil's wounds were dressed, and he heard the state of his men,
he was driven to despair. He called for the Marquis de Montemar, as the
only person in whose steadiness to the last, he felt he could place any
confidence. All who approached him came trembling; and, from confusion
of mind, contradicted each other in every account of the garrison,
excepting the one, that its destruction was now inevitable!
When Louis obeyed the General's summons, he corroborated the
observations of De Penil's own senses; and told him that a contagious
fear unmanned every heart; and that the eyes of the soldiers
continually turned towards the sea, with a more evident wish for escape
than resistance. While Don Joseph listened to the consequences of his
own headstrong folly, and saw the bloody evidence of the courage he had
pretended to doubt, on the cheek of the brave narrator, he obeyed the
noble shame which coloured his own; and, having uttered a frank apology
for his former conduct, as frankly asked for his opinion on the present
crisis.
Louis did not hesitate to say, that he believed the Moors could not see
their advantage without attempting to storm the place.
"And they will take it to a certainty," replied De Penil. "In the
present disposition of the men there can be no resistance."
"Without resistance they are lost!" returned Louis. "There are no ships
for flight, and the Moors grant no terms in a surrender."
"Then every man must fight for his life!" cried De Penil. "I will
yet do my duty from this bed; and you, De Montemar, must act from my
authority."
Louis did not now demur. He was ready to do all in his power to stop
the torrent, whose sluice he would have prevented being broken down.
Without losing time in sending for those paralized officers, who
wandered from place to place at their wit's end, De Penil consulted
his young co-adjutor on every resource; and while he marvelled at so
comprehensive a judgment in so inexperienced a soldier, he adopted
so many of his suggestions, that dispositions were soon made for the
defence of Ceuta, of better promise than those which had placed it in
such extremity.
Louis wrote down the necessary arrangement; and when it was finished,
the wounded General was laid on a litter, and carried out along the
ramparts; where, after he had said a few words of encouragement to the
soldiers, Louis read aloud the different orders for the defence of the
garrison.
De Penil was too conscious of the evil his impatience had wrought, not
to do his utmost to prevent yet more disastrous consequences; and,
while he exhorted the men to stand to their guns, and never to leave
their ground but with their lives, he himself took an oath before them
never to surrender. He told them to obey the Marquis de Montemar as his
representative.
"But for his promptitude in mounting the battery which covered our
retreat, and his steadiness in maintaining it," added the General, "we
should not now have Ceuta to defend."
The soldiers knew this as well as their commander, and with a sincere
hurrah of obedience, followed their officers to their respective duties.
Exhausted, and almost fainting, De Penil ordered the litter to his
quarters; but he held himself up with assumed strength, till the walls
of his apartment permitted over-tasked nature to sink under the pain of
his wounds.
Louis's spirit rose with the summons for exertion. His calm
collectiveness in dispensing his commands, and instant apprehension
of what was most proper to be done, from objects of the greatest
importance to the minutest inquiry from the meanest workmen in the
lines, revived courage in the faintest heart, and inspired the brave
with an animation equal to his own. After he had seen every thing
prepared for the anticipated assault, he returned to De Penil, to
inform him of the favourable aspect his commands had produced.
Having found the General in a state of anxiety that looked for such
intelligence to enable him to seek the repose his condition needed, he
closed his communications with assurances of hope; and, leaving him to
rest, proceeded to the quarters of Don Ferdinand.
His wound was deep, but not dangerous; yet the alarm for his life had
been so great, before the extraction of the ball, that one of the
surgeons dispatched a messenger immediately across the strait, with
intelligence to Santa Cruz of the perilous state of his son, and the
jeopardy of the garrison.
When Louis found what had been done, he reprimanded the man for
presuming to send off any account, before the official reports of the
affair could be duly ascertained. The other surgeons assured the young
commander that his friend was not to be despaired of; and, with the
feelings of a brother for the son of the revered Santa Cruz, he entered
his apartment.
"De Montemar," cried Ferdinand, stretching out his hand to him, "dearer
lips than mine must thank you that I live."
Louis smiled as he used to do in his unclouded days of happiness:--"God
is good in yet giving life a value to me, by making me his instrument
to preserve my friend. While I may be such," added he, with a deeper
expression, and pressing Ferdinand's hand between his, "I feel the son
of Ripperda is not completely lost!"
Ferdinand did not understand all the reference of this almost
unconscious apostrophe; but supposing it arose from some free remarks
of the Count de Patinos which might have reached his ear, he replied
with earnestness:--"Il rit bien, qui rit le dernier! The sneers
which De Patinos dared venture against the Duke de Ripperda's escape
from his enemies, and the unsullied honour of De Montemar, were visited
on his head this day. I saw him fly before the negro guards of Aben
Humeya; and I have since been told, that he and his whole squadron
threw down their arms before the barbarian."
"That they may be his prisoners," replied Louis, "is too likely; but
whatever may be the Count de Patinos' ungenerous enmity against men who
never voluntarily gave him offence, I must exonerate him of the charge
of cowardice. I believe him brave; and all I have now to wish is, that
he may be treated according to his merits as a soldier, by the hands
into which he has fallen."
At nine o'clock, Louis went the round of his posts, and found all in
good order. The men were in spirits, though it was easy to discern,
even by the naked eye, that a threatening commotion continued along
the enemy's lines.
By his glass, earlier in the evening, he had observed the approach of
artillery, and some other signs which convinced him of the necessity
of Don Joseph's precaution. For his own part, he never retired under
cover the whole night, but kept his station on the best point of
observation,--a tower at the extremity of the outworks.
About the watch of the night, which is called by the Moors, Latumar,
being their fifth hour of prayer, the sky was involved in total
darkness; but the attentive ear of Louis heard a distant murmuring. It
was demonstrative of the approach he expected; and having persons near
him for the purpose, he dispatched them to the lines to order every one
to be prepared.
In less than a quarter of an hour after he had taken his own most
efficient station, the flash of cannon and of musquetry lit the plain
for a moment, like the splendour of day; and, in the next, the roaring
of the guns, and the smoke of the explosion, rocked the fortress to its
foundation, and involved the whole atmosphere in sulphureous clouds.
The ordnance on the walls of Ceuta were not silent; and the mutual
bombardment in the intermitting darkness, was rendered more terrific
by the savage cries of the besiegers mingling their horrid war-whoop
with the hissing of the musquetry, and the tremendous thunders of the
cannonade.
Where his father was in the midst of this dreadful contest, more
than once shot in direful question across the mind of Louis; but he
dismissed the paralyzing thought. He was there to defend the cause of
his country and the faith of his fathers; and he must not allow the
yearnings of his heart to unman his fidelity.
He flew from the bastion on which he stood, at the moment he heard a
cry of triumph from the scene below. In defiance of shells and raking
fires, these desperate barbarians had rushed on, and pointed their
guns till a breach was made. Louis ordered a rampart to be immediately
raised on the ruins, but the gabions were hardly rolled forward, and
the cannon planted, when a tumbrel blew up, and rendered the egress
wider and more accessible than before. The stone battlements shook
under his feet like an earthquake, while the fragments from the torn
rampart, the smoke, and the scorching powder, covered him with viewless
horror. There was not the pause of a moment between the explosion, the
dispersion of the smoke, and the most dreadful conflict of the day.
Aben Humeya had prepared for an escalade; and the very band which
planted the crescent on the towers of Larach, was the first who scaled
the walls of Ceuta. The contest at the breach was as sanguinary as it
was decisive. The Moors were twice repulsed with terrible slaughter;
and the more terrible the second time, as it was quickly known, by
the intrepid desperation of the assailants, that they were led on by
the Basha himself. Louis's unreceding arm had tumbled the leader of
the first division from his footing on the wall; and at his fall his
followers had given ground. On the second assault, he was contending
with the invincible devotedness of a man who knew that spot was the key
of the fortress, when his father's voice assailed his ear. A flash of
musketry shewed the jewelled chelengk in his turban, as he mounted the
farther ridge of the platform, slippery with blood, and called on his
men to support him. In another moment, two Biscayan grenadiers held
the Basha between their weapons and the pinnacle of the battlement.
A choice of death seemed the only alternative,--their swords, or
precipitation over the precipice. The Moors who pressed forward, were
cut to pieces by the Spaniards on the breach; and Louis saw nothing but
destruction to his father, when rushing towards the spot, in the moment
Ripperda's weapon shivered against those of his enemies, he threw
himself, sword in hand, between the Biscayans and their prey, franticly
exclaiming:
"The Basha is the governor's prisoner." But the strokes which were
levelled at Ripperda's breast were sheathed in his son's. Before the
Spaniards could check their arms, he was cut through the shoulder and
stabbed in his side; but the men recoiled on finding they had wounded
their leader; and in the instant, Sidi Ali mounting the height with a
fresh horde of triumphant Moors, they surrounded Aben Humeya, believing
the day won. But as Ali's hand planted the Ottoman standard amidst the
still grappling of foe to foe, and the anathemas of the Christian
against the ferocious curses of the Moor, the clouds of smoke rolled
away from the eastern point of the rampart, and the golden head of the
sun peered from the horizon. Its first ray shot direct upon the radiant
crest of Aben Humeya, and a rifle took aim. The ball struck; and, in
spite of a momentary exertion in its victim to spring forward, he
staggered and fell into the arms of his followers.
A woeful yell announced to the legions below, that some direful
disaster had happened. The cry was echoed from rank to rank with
shrieks and howlings; and a single blast of a trumpet immediately
succeeded. The breach was abandoned, as if by enchantment. The firing
sunk at once into a dead calm; and the flight of the Moors through the
yet hovering smoke, sounded in the darkness like the wings of many
birds brushing the sands before the sweep of some coming storm.
CHAP. IX.
The Queen's cabinet at Seville was employed on many projects besides
that of sealing the union between Portugal and Spain. The venerable
Grimaldo was just dead; and the affairs of state falling entirely into
the management of the Marquis de Castellor and the Count de Paz, she
affected a warm interest in the former, though she detested him in her
heart, not only as the most successful rival of her regretted Ripperda,
but because his talents were equal to his ambition. And what was more
provoking to a despotic woman, he made her feel that he could maintain
his ground by the same surreptitious art he had obtained it.
The Count de Paz was a man of a different complexion. Covetousness, and
an abject dependent on individual favour, tethered his vain-glorious
spirit to a boundary he panted to overleap, but everlastingly found it
a limit he could not pass. This man, Isabella used as her instrument,
and by his connivance, admitted a third person to their private
councils, who commanded him with the invincible power of a superior
demon.
In obedience to the Queen, and this her secret counsellor, he was to
influence the Marquis de Castellor to extort an act of aggression from
the French arms against the German Emperor.
Since the public betrothment of Maria Theresa to the Prince of
Lorraine, Isabella had become reconciled to Louis the Fifteenth; and
she now wanted to attack the grasping power of the rival Empire, by a
concerted act of open hostility. France was to invade Austria on the
side of Germany; while Spain, in consequence of the death of the Duke
of Parma, should resist the pretensions of the Emperor to that dutchy;
and, in support of the rights of Prince Carlos, (the late Duke's
kinsman, and Isabella's son,) overrun that part of Italy with Spanish
troops.
Her secret counsellor had already moved the cardinal minister of the
French King to thwart the establishment of the pragmatic sanction; and
through the Queen of Spain and De Paz, he had drawn from the treasury
of Philip a large subsidy to support the pretensions of Bavaria.
On the open rupture between Isabella and the Empress, the former was
not long at a loss how to revenge herself on the wide ambition of her
rival. Her midnight familiar whispered the means. He told her that
Gibraltar was not more the fortress of England than of Austria. Whoever
possessed that rock, commanded the Mediterranean, and bound all on its
banks to his feet. The interest of Austria and the House of Brunswick
were now the same. He therefore exhorted her to categorically demand
Gibraltar of the King of England; and to make her husband and his
council, see the wisdom of considering him the King of England who
would restore that gem to the Spanish crown.
One of the last acts of George the First was to reject this demand with
a positive refusal; and the following evening saw a tall, dark man,
of a noble mien, pass into the private cabinet of the King of Spain.
They were alone together for some time; and then the Queen and the
two ministers of state being introduced, a paper was signed in their
presence by Philip and the stranger, and the royal seals of Spain and
of Great Britain solemnly affixed to the deed.
Santa Cruz met this personage as he withdrew through the vestibule of
the King's apartment. He knew him, and stood with his hat in his hand
till he passed.
"Do not repeat what you have seen," whispered Isabella, who found the
Marquis gazing after him; "but now you read my riddle. A few months
may see you governor of Gibraltar!"
"The trenches of San Roque must first be opened in England!" replied
he, answering her gay smile with unusual gravity.
"No," was her reply; "there we spring a mine; and the best engineer in
Christendom has his hand on the match."
Santa Cruz understood enough of her meaning, not to make a second
observation in so public a passage; and bowing to her beckoning finger,
he followed her into her apartment.
He held in his hand the first official dispatches from Ceuta. The last
had not arrived. But the fugitive merchants from Larach were then in
the palace, with their calamitous account of the fall of that fortress.
The Queen was enraged at these determined acts of hostility in the man
to whom she had condescended to humble herself as a suppliant; and
vehemently arraigning the insolence that durst disdain her returning
favour, she preceded Santa Cruz to the chamber of her royal husband.
On the King's being told the fate of Larach; and learning, by the
discomfiture of Don Joseph de Penil, how nearly Ceuta had shared the
same disaster, he issued his orders that the troops just called off
from the lines of San Roque, should be employed without delay in a
final vindication of the Christian name in the plains of Barbary.
These forces had been intended by Isabella and her secret counsellor,
to make a descent on the British shore; and there, as Santa Cruz had
guessed, assert the rights of him who had purchased the support of
Philip by a written pledge for the restitution of Gibraltar. But at
this moment resentment obliterated every promise; and, in the rage of
revenge against the man who had disdained her, more as a woman than
a queen, she at once announced to her husband, that it was his own
rebellious subject, the Duke de Ripperda, who, under the assumed name
of Aben Humeya, but as a real apostate and a traitor, waged war in
Africa against his King and his God.
Philip's amazement was creditable to his heart; and, when
unquestionably convinced, his indignation against the Duke's irreligion
superseded the expected resentment for his rebellion. He summoned his
council; and in full assembly of the ministers and grandees, degraded
the Duke de Ripperda from all his honours, hereditary and by creation;
confiscated his estates; and ordered the arms of his family to be
obliterated from the Spanish college of arms.
With the feelings of an ancient Spanish nobleman, Santa Cruz saw the
rapidity of this act of disgrace. Not in consideration of the degraded
Duke; for in becoming an infidel, he had sunk himself below the
power of man to cast him lower; but compassion for his blameless and
exemplary son, filled the heart of Santa Cruz with honourable sympathy.
The Queen turned on him at the moment, and observing the expression of
his countenance, said with a taunting surprise;--
"Marquis, you pity this renegade!"
"Madam," replied he, "I respect the Marquis de Montemar."
Isabella drew towards the King.
"Your Majesty will grant an exception in behalf of that young man? He
covered the retreat of de Penil into Ceuta, and merits some exemption
from the universal stigma on his father."
"We may consider that hereafter," replied the King, "meanwhile let the
edict be published."
The messenger from the surgeon at Ceuta, who dispatched him during the
panic immediately succeeding the return of the unfortunate sortie,
went direct to the Marquis Santa Cruz's house in Seville. The Marquis
was from home, but the man delivered his credentials to the servants;
and with the eagerness of a first bringer of news, gave an exaggerated
account of the defeat of Don Joseph, the death of de Blas, and the
wounded state of Don Ferdinand d'Osorio. He closed his report of the
latter, by saying, he was rescued by the intrepid interference of the
Marquis de Montemar, from sharing the fate of the governor; but as the
Moorish sabres were generally venomed, little hope could be cherished
of his ultimate recovery.
On Santa Cruz's return from the palace, he found his wife and daughter
in speechless agony, listening to this narrative of despair. He sent
the man from the room; and by reading the dispatch which the official
messenger had brought, he succeeded in convincing them that the Moors
did not poison their weapons, and that the life of his son was in no
present danger. The Marchioness however, insisted on accompanying her
husband to Ceuta; and Marcella, in a passion of tears, implored her
father to permit her to be her mother's attendant.
Dreading that despairing love had precipitated the vehement nature of
her brother, upon the swords of his enemies, Marcella now reproached
herself for having so decisively, and therefore she thought cruelly,
rejected his suit. In the paroxysm of her grief and her remorse, she
threw herself at her father's feet; and to his astonishment, informed
him of Ferdinand's love for the cousin of the Marquis de Montemar;
declaring at the same time, her own resolution no longer to oppose his
wishes of her passing her life a professed nun; provided her vows might
be simply confined to celibacy, and a secluded state; and Ferdinand be
allowed to marry the English lady. The Marquis was confounded, and
looked at his wife.
"It is too true;" was her reply to his enquiring eyes; "Ferdinand loves
Alice Coningsby; and my invaluable child would make herself the price
of her brothers happiness."
"Marcella," replied Santa Cruz, turning with solemnity to his daughter;
"this is not what I expected from you. You dishonour your father and
your brother, by your petition. You may accompany your mother to his
sick couch; and for the rest, should he recover, I hope he will find a
fitter oblation to his blind passions, than a sister's and a parent's
conscience."
Marcella rose humbled from her knees; and in speechless sorrow left the
apartment. The Marquis looked after her and sighed; and the Marchioness
taking his hand, pressed it to her lips, wet with her drowning tears,
and exclaimed;--"Better that we had never met, than that the purest
offspring of our heaven-sanctified union, should be consigned to a
living tomb! Oh, Santa Cruz, why is she to be our victim!"
CHAP. X.
Santa Cruz did not wait for the tedious embarkation of the troops,
now under orders for Africa; but set forward immediately, accompanied
by his wife and daughter; who both assumed the privileged habits of
Sisters of Mercy, in this their pilgrimage to a land of war and
suffering.
When he arrived at Ceuta, he was ignorant of the attempt at storming
the place. The courier with that intelligence, had been taken by an
Algerine row-boat, and carried into Oran.
By this capture, Ripperda became acquainted with all that had passed
in the rescued fortress; for the messenger was sent in irons to him:
and the dastardly communicativeness of the man was too clear an
interpreter of the brief account in the dispatches.
The Basha's wounds being aslant, and in the muscles of his breast, were
slight and easy of cure; but that on his mind was not to be healed,
when on awaking from his swoon, he found himself thrown across a camel,
and in full retreat from the fortress he believed in his hands. He was
no sooner within his own entrenchments, than both officers and men felt
the weight of his disappointment. He summoned their several commanders
into his pavilion, and accused them of cowardice, for having made so
unnecessary, and therefore shameful a flight.
Adelmelek pleaded two reasons for this conduct. Their Basha's supposed
mortal wound; and its befalling him in the moment of sun-rise, seemed
so signal a judgement on the Moors for their breach of the prophet's
ordinance, in pursuing the warfare into the sabbath morn, that with
one consent they made the only expiation in their power, by abandoning
the scene of their impiety.
Enraged at the subtlety of this apology, in which Ripperda saw that the
jealousy of the Hadge was at the bottom of this retreat, he turned on
him with derision, and bade him take that excuse to the Emperor, and
see whether he most respected the enlargement of his empire, or the
superstition of a coward.
"Aben Humeya," replied the Hadge, regarding him with equal scorn; "If
I am to be your messenger, one truth at least you shall learn of me
before I set out on my journey! It is impossible for a bad Christian to
become a good Mussulman. Devout men are no changelings. He has little
of the spirit of religion, who finds an insurmountable stumbling-block
in any dispute about the letter; and in my opinion, the man who more
than once alters his faith, may shew himself a consummate hypocrite,
but he persuades no one to doubt the nothingness of his religion."
"Your head, proud bigot, shall answer for this insult!" exclaimed
Ripperda, starting from the cushion on which he lay.
"The event of this siege," replied the Hadge, "will determine the fate
of yours!" and with a threatening countenance, he left the apartment.
Nothing awed, by what he called this insolence in a man whose talents
he despised, Ripperda was the more incited to shew his contempt of
superstition; and the moment he withdrew, his reproaches to the
officers were augmented in severity and reproof. He punished the
soldiers in a more exemplary way; and published a proclamation,
declaring that he would put to death any officer, let his rank be what
it would, who should henceforth presume at any time to disobey his
orders, or to desert his post on any pretence whatever. He finished by
pronouncing himself, as the leader of the Mohammedan armies in Barbary,
the best interpreter of the prophet's laws; and that while he bore the
standard of Mecca, the sabbaths of Jews, Mussulmen, or Christians,
should be alike free to the progress of his arms.
The rigor of these threats, and this last assertion, so contrary to the
customs of their faith, filled the Moors with terror and amazement: but
the full effects of the manifesto were to be seen hereafter.
While these punishments and intimidations were going on, the courier
taken at Oran, was brought to the camp before Ceuta. The Basha was
now convalescent; and while the reading of the dispatches inspired
his coadjutor Sidi Ali, with renewed confidence in the reduction of
the fortress, it doubly exasperated the passions of Ripperda, when he
gathered from the report the dangerous state of his son.
The courier was commanded into his presence; and on examining him it
was found that three parts of the garrison had fallen in the sortie and
the defence of the town; that the Count de Blas was dead of his wounds;
the commander, de Penil, incapable of service; and that the young
Marquis de Montemar, whose gallant exertions filled so great a part in
the dispatches, was in such extremity when the messenger came off, that
it was impossible he could now be alive.
Ripperda was no stranger to the voice that rushed between him and his
assailants in the breach; but it passed by him as the wind. Vengeance
was then all that possessed his soul! But now that voice was hushed for
ever. In his first field his son had perished,--and perished against
whom?
He sprang on his feet as the horrible images pressed upon his brain.
Regardless of who were present, he snatched up his sword:--
"I am alone!" cried he, "the last! the last! But I will yet uproot
thee, murderous Spain, that dost thus riot in my vitals!"
The prisoner and the attendants all fled from before the terrible
enunciation of his eyes. Sidi Ali alone had courage to remain and seize
the aimless weapon.
"Aben Humeya!" said he, "what unmans you thus, before the eyes of
slaves?"
"Were I less a man," cried Ripperda, turning his burning eye-balls upon
him; "I could bear it. But now the curse has found me!"
CHAP. XI.
When Santa Cruz landed at Ceuta, he proceeded direct to the quarters
of Don Joseph de Penil, and was told there of the attempt to storm the
fortress, and its miraculous defence by the inexperienced but intrepid
son of Ripperda. Don Joseph's wounds were in a mending state; and from
him he learnt, that his son was also on the recovery; but less hopes
durst be encouraged for the Marquis de Montemar.
"The worst wound is in his heart!" remarked Santa Cruz. For it could
no longer be disguised from de Penil and the whole garrison, that Aben
Humeya, the direful cause of all this bloodshed, was, though now an
apostate and a rebel, once the great Duke de Ripperda, the universally
honoured father of this noble young man!
His public attainder, and disgraced name at Seville, had made the
circumstance known to all there; and the new army spread it at once
through the lines of Ceuta.
But there was a kind hand which warded off a blow which might have been
fatal to his blameless son. Don Ferdinand and Louis de Montemar lay in
their wounds under the same roof; and by the same gentle ministry they
were attended.
The Marchioness and her daughter found no difference in their hearts
between the sufferers; for if the one had the claims of a brother and
a son upon their tenderness, the other had purchased the life of that
dear relative by the exposure of his own; and the bonds of gratitude
were not less sacred than those of kindred.
Marcella sought to cheer her brother, by assuring him that her
prejudices against a monastic life should no longer stand between him
and his happiness, if that compliance with her father's wishes could
obtain his consent to Ferdinand's union with the cousin of his friend.
But she did not withhold from her brother, the Marquis's remark on the
sacrifice she offered to make in his behalf.
"However," continued she, "our aunt, the abbess of the Ursalines,
is too charitable to force my conscience to more than the vow and
the seclusion; and I trust that Heaven will not see any crime in a
Protestant nun, worshipping in spirit and in truth, by the side of
sisters from whom the cloud of error has not yet been raised!"
Ferdinand gazed upon his sister while she spoke. Was the fabled
Iphigenia of Tauris half so fair, or the virgin daughter of Jephthah
so full of youthful loveliness, as she who now talked, with such sweet
smiles, of immolating herself for him? She was indeed the victim, clad
in the lilly and the rose; and the fragrance of the flowers, and the
morning dew of their leaves, breathed and sparkled from her lips, as
she pursued her disinterested theme. Bodily suffering, and hours of
solitary reflection, had opened to Ferdinand a clear view of his former
injustice in seeking happiness at the expence of his sister's liberty;
and, abhorring such utter selfishness, he was ashamed to acknowledge
its late power over him, even by disavowing its continuance; and with a
deep blush, and deeper sigh, he pressed her hand without a word.
But in Marcella's separated heart, the vow of abjuration from the
world was already registered. She had now but one duty;--to wait with
her lamp trimmed, while she ministered to all who needed her deeds of
charity; and, as a Sister of Mercy, whose garb she wore, she daily
attended her mother to the couch of the preserver of her brother.
The Marchioness's eager disposition was always too hasty in imparting
the evil as well as the good; and, therefore, her more considerate
daughter implored her, and every body who entered the room of the
Marquis de Montemar, not to breathe a word of the sentence which Philip
had passed upon the name of his father. From an instinct in her own
bosom, she knew that injuries are easier to be borne than disgrace;
and she guarded every approach to his ear with the watchfulness of an
attendant spirit.
As her own hand frequently administered the cordials to the
silently-suffering patient, his eyes thanked her, though his lips
seldom moved. His wounds were numerous and excruciating; and, from the
opium his surgeons mixed with every potion, he was almost always in a
seeming stupor. But neither his mental perceptions, nor the annotations
of his heart shared the lulling faculty. His shrouded vision discerned
the solicitude that hovered over him. He heard the tender voice that
gave directions for his comfort; he felt the soft touch of the hand
that smoothed his pillow; and his own spirit mingled in the prayer
which the holy accents of Marcella murmured over his apparently
unobserving form, when she gave place to the persons whose medical
balsams were less healing than the balm of her presence alone.
"It is the presence of virtue!" said he to himself, "and that is the
ministering angel of heaven."
Lorenzo had shared his master's dangers and his wounds, as he had
shared his sorrows and his prison. He had followed him from rampart to
rampart, stood by him on the breach; and sunk under the same sweep of
balls which had levelled both to the earth. As soon as he was able to
leave his chamber, he prevailed on his attendants to take him to that
of his master; for he had been told of the news which had astonished
the garrison;--that the exiled Ripperda was the man, who, under a
Moorish name, now made Spain tremble; and that the impotent revenge
of the Spanish court was to deprive him of a title he had already
abandoned.
It was during the absence of the Marchioness and Marcella at matin
prayers, that Lorenzo was borne to Louis's apartment. Ignorant that any
thing which the whole garrison knew, could have been withheld from him
who had most concern in it, Lorenzo, after his first felicitations on
finding his master declared out of danger, began to accuse the Spanish
government for not sparing the honours of Ripperda to the meritorious
son, though it had found it necessary to withdraw them from the
rebellion of the father. Louis started.--
"Explain yourself, Lorenzo."
Lorenzo was seized with a trembling that almost amounted to fainting,
when he found that he had intimated what his master's friends had
deemed it prudent to conceal. Louis regarded him with grateful pity,
while he armed himself to hear whatever was then to be told.
"Do not hesitate to speak all you know," continued he; "I have suffered
too much to shrink now. My heart has armour, Lorenzo, that the world
guesses not."
Lorenzo burst into tears; but he instantly told him all. Louis pressed
his hand; and, bidding him return to his room and take care of himself;
the faithful creature, with a full heart, permitted the servants to
carry him from the apartment; and when the door was closed on every
body, Louis laid himself back upon his couch. That was his hour of
agony; all that was yet within him of the world, mingled with the pang
of filial anguish, and agitated his spirit even unto death.
Ferdinand came into the room, leaning on his sister; and taking his
seat by the side of his friend's bed, gently touched him:--"Do you
sleep, De Montemar?" said he. "Here is a fresh northern breeze in this
sultry climate! Open your eyes and receive the genial visitant!"
Louis did not open his eyes, but he sighed heavily, and half muttered
in a smothered voice: "When shall I meet a genial visitant again! Oh,
Ferdinand," added he, turning his face upon the hand of his friend,
"better had it been for me, had I never been born!"
Marcella was retiring at the first exclamation; but, at the second, she
paused and drew near.
"De Montemar," said Ferdinand, "what can prompt you who are so
universally honoured, to such a sentiment?"
"My father's universal infamy," replied Louis. "He is now judged before
men and angels; and where shall I hide my head!"
"In the bosom of him who pierces the heart to purify it!" replied
Marcella, as she sunk on her knees beside him. "He only who wilfully
offends that gracious Being, may cry: Better for me had I never been
born! If God have already judged your erring father before men and
angels, and given that once illustrious name to universal infamy,
receive that as a mercy; as a punishment here, that it may be remitted
hereafter."
Louis looked up from his thorny pillow. He took her hand, and pressed
it with grateful fervour to his lips.--
"You, you, holy Marcella!" cried he, "are the genial visitant I saw
not,--are the messenger from heaven that speaks peace to my soul! Pray
for me I beseech you; but, above all, pray for my misguided father. May
he be redeemed; and for disgrace,--trampling, overwhelming disgrace,
let it come!"
The speech was begun to her, but ended in an address to heaven, without
farther consciousness of who were present.
Ferdinand and his sister comprehended that some person had betrayed to
him the secret they had so carefully concealed; and both apprehended
the effects of so sudden a blow upon a mind whose keen sense of honour
seemed one with his being.
When the Marquis Santa Cruz learnt what had passed, he went to the
couch of his young friend; and dismissing every person, discoursed with
him alone, for more than an hour. The Marchioness met him in the room
of her son, and with maternal anxiety, enquired the result of his visit.
"I found him," replied Santa Cruz, "in a silence, which he had never
broken since my son and daughter left him; but when I spoke to him, he
answered me firmly. And then I discovered that it was not so much the
publication of his father's dishonour, which had so affected him, as
the conviction that such public degradation, by still farther incensing
the Duke, was the seal of his estrangement from his religion and his
country." "He is now an outcast!" cried he, "and driven to despair, he
will believe he is banished from the face of heaven and the Christian
world for ever!"
"Oh, my father," cried Marcella, "is there not one who teaches us where
all comfort is written? And in those sacred pages we are told, that
he who was cast out into the desert for mocking the promise of his God,
yet found an angel in the wilderness to save him from perishing."
"Louis de Montemar is no stranger to the volume which is your study,
my child;" gently answered her father; "and I soon learnt, that though
human nature shrunk under the stroke, there was a spirit within him
that sustained and cheered him with a better hope."
"My father," said Marcella, laying her trembling hand on the arm of
the Marquis, "can his faith be wrong, who is so supported?" Santa
Cruz shook off that appealing touch. A deep thoughtfulness passed over
his brow. It was troubled, but it was not severe; and he left the room
without answering her.
CHAP. XII.
It was some time after this conference, before the army from the
Peninsula were all arrived and disembarked at Ceuta. Santa Cruz had
made himself master of every information respecting the condition of
the enemy; and found that a large reinforcement of troops was daily
expected from the interior provinces. He wished to bring Ripperda to
a general battle, before this accession of cavalry should give the
Moors so great an advantage; for his own columns were very slenderly
supported by horse.
The whole strength of the Ceuta army did not amount to more than
twenty-five thousand men; but they were fresh and in spirits; while the
forces under the Basha, were not merely reduced to almost as scanty a
number, but they were in despair at the contempt their leader shewed to
the laws of their prophet. Ten thousand Arabs had lately arrived, to
strengthen the division under Sidi Ali; and were disposed on the side
of the mountain, to cover the camp. Some other general was to bring
up the hordes from the interior; who were coming forward with savage
eagerness, to assist their brethren in driving the Spaniards into the
sea.
Santa Cruz did not disturb the progress of Louis de Montemar's
recovery, with any communication of these designs; but proceeded
without any apparent extraordinary motion in the garrison, to draw out
his troops and prepare for the general attack. His position was fully
taken one morning before it was light; and falling in the darkness upon
the advanced posts of the Moors, the infidels in the trenches were cut
off to a man before a gun was fired.
Martini was the first who brought his master intelligence of this
assault; for the Moors had conceived so sullen a horror of their
leader, that uncertain what to do, many of them would rather have
suffered a total surprise of their camp; than saved themselves by
yielding to the impious Aben Humeya an opportunity of establishing
his power with the Emperor. But a few minutes shewed the irresistible
ascendancy of boldness and decision, over pusillanimity and wavering.
When Ripperda knew the peril of his camp; and issued from his tent
in full military array, the awfulness of his heroic countenance, and
the splendor of his arms, eclipsed all remembrance of his tyranny in
some; and others dreading the resentment of so formidable a man, threw
themselves forward to receive his commands.
He ordered the gates of the camp to be thrown open before his horse;
and he and his battalions, soon occupied the space between the
entrenchments, and the rapid advance of the Spaniards; who were now
nearly within the range of his first line of batteries.
The cannon began their summons of death. The rays of the morning,
and the flashing of guns traversed each other in the passing shadows
and rolling smoke of the contest. During deep night, Santa Cruz had
detached a body of infantry with a few field-pieces, to file off to the
left; and by forming in a pass at the bottom of the hill, between Ali's
camp and the Basha's, cut off the former from coming to the support of
his colleague.
Before Aben Humeya marched out into the field, he dispatched two
messengers; the one to Sidi Ali with his commands, that he should come
forward and attack the Spaniards in flank; and the other to Adelmelek,
who was bringing up the columns from the interior, to hasten onward,
and confirm the anticipated victory.
His orders being issued, the Basha bore down upon the charging enemy
with a shock as terrific as his own; and with so decisive a weight of
cavalry, that the Spaniards gave ground. While the Moors pursued this
advantage, a report reached their leader that Ali was intercepted in
the hills. With the quickness of lightning, he detached a resolute body
of troops to cut off, in their turn, the division of Spaniards which
had been sent on this dangerous enterprize.
The eyes of Santa Cruz were not less alert in viewing the manoeuvres
of his enemy; and at the very moment he was looking around to see whom
he could entrust with the important commission of opposing this force,
to his astonishment he beheld Louis de Montemar at his side. He had
heard the roll of cannon, and required no other summons. He was now
mounted, and in arms, as if in perfect vigour, from his hardly closed
wounds. Without asking a question, the Marquis ordered him to take the
command of a certain body of cavalry; and lead them towards the hill,
to the attack of the detachment dispatched from the Moorish camp.
Louis obeyed; and performed his commission so completely, that the
Moors were obliged to fall back, and shelter their flying squadrons
behind the nearest batteries. But part of the troops which had
previously been sent to watch the motions of Sidi Ali, seeing the way
clear, joined the chase; and so left a passage for the enemy. Profiting
by the oversight, Ali rushed from his lines; and taking the pursuing
Christians in the rear, the shouts of the Moors, reanimated their
fugitive brethren in front, who turned like a host of tigers at bay;
and all at once Louis found himself between two fires.
But it was not the object of Sidi Ali to waste his time in the
extirpation of a part, when the whole was near, to yield a mightier
revenge to the conqueror. He advanced with rapidity and good order,
to the support of the Basha; whose left flank, where he had thrown
himself in person, was already turned by the furious onset of the
Spaniards. Seeing the approaching squadrons of Ali, Aben Humeya rallied
his receding men; and precipitating himself and a chosen cohort upon
the most effective engine of the enemy, (which was one of the Moorish
batteries turned upon themselves,) he retook it, and discharged it on
its late masters. The fresh troops of Ali came on with shouts like
thunder; and the Christians, who expected nothing less than this new
attack, supported the charge only for a while. Aben Humeya brought up
a kind of flying battery of his own construction; and his adversaries
being thrown into confusion by its incessant fire, turned to fly. The
Basha left the fugitives to Ali, and moved to the centre, which was now
hardly pressed by Santa Cruz himself.
Until now, the Spanish leader had not exposed his own person; but when
he found that part of his army assuming the same retrograde motion
with the left wing, he saw the necessity of shewing his own personal
courage, and fighting man to man.
Here was the shock and the tug of the day. Aben Humeya and Santa Cruz,
were alike seen in every part of the field, as if their bodies, as well
as their minds, had the property of omnipresence. Blood streamed on
every side; and the terrific screams of the wounded horses, mingling
with the groans of the dying; and the yells or shouts of the victors;
the braying of the trumpets, the rolling of the drums; and the roaring
of the guns, shook the earth, and seemed to tear the heavens. The
echoes were tremendous from the caves and summits of the overhanging
mountains; and to the crazed imagination of fear, the Genius of Spain
and of Barbary appeared to hang in the clouds of battle, and to clash
their dreadful arms, in horror of the equal fight.
But in the moment of loudest acclaim in the centre, while the helmeted
turban of the Basha shone resplendent in anticipated victory, and
his watchmen looked from his towers in the camp, for the approach of
Adelmelek, a howl of dismay issued from the left; and the thronging
squadrons of half Ali's division spiked themselves upon the points of
the Spanish line.
Louis had no sooner seen that the Sidi had passed, and driven this
wing of the Spaniards from their ground, than recalling his own
squadrons, and marching behind the rolling smoke to the right, he came
in van of their flying comrades; and making a hasty chevaux de frize
of his pikes, he permitted the fugitives to pass through and form
behind, while the enemy's horse found their fate on his iron rampart.
Field-pieces were rapidly brought forward to confirm this stand; and
the leader of the Arabs falling by the first explosion, the Moors
turned and fled towards their lines.
The centre and the right flank deserved the confidence of their leader;
but the star of Ripperda was now on its last horizon. The Moors fought
with desperation for empire,--for paradise! He performed prodigies of
valour! The fabled exploits of romance were no longer marvellous to
them who beheld Aben Humeya; but the Spanish numbers and discipline
overpowered it all.
Louis saw that, on that field, his father's power in Africa, and
perhaps himself, would on that day perish. Through the flashes of
musquetry and of cannon shot, he saw that father moving in every
direction, with the consummate generalship of a practised soldier,
with a determined resolution that merited a better cause. Louis was
desperate and devoted as himself; and though actuated by different
principles, and exposing their lives on adverse sides, they seemed
actuated by the same spirit, to conquer or to die.
The Moorish entrenchments were forced in every point, the ditch filled
with the slain, the camp set on fire that no delay might be made for
plunder; and the infidels who survived, flying in every direction,
without a leader, and without a refuge.
The slaughter was as tremendous as the discomfiture was signal and
conclusive.
At the entrance of the mountainous track between the base of Abyla and
the hills of Tetuan, the pursuing army was encountered by an ambuscade
from Adelmelek's division. The envious Moor had disobeyed Aben Humeya's
orders to join him in the field. He waited apart for the defeat of the
Basha; but to ensure his own favour with the Emperor, he planted a
powerful detachment to cover the retreat of any who might escape the
horrors of the day. While the Spaniards were briskly engaged with this
ambuscade, the fugitives retreated safely into the mountains; and the
army of Adelmelek drawing behind some batteries he had prepared, Santa
Cruz's orders to abandon the dangerous pursuit were at last obeyed; and
the infuriate conquerors, drunk with blood and vengeance, returned in
broken ranks to the rescued town of Ceuta.
Louis, who had accompanied the general chase, with no other sense but a
breathless eagerness to know the fate of his father, galloped over the
death-strewn earth with his eyes wandering all around, while his sword
waved without aim over his unhelmeted head. The plumed crescent of Aben
Humeya was no more to be seen. Even his standards had long disappeared
from the field; and with the returning squadrons, the horse of De
Montemar also quitted the pursuit.
The officers of cavalry alighted at the pavilion of Santa Cruz, where
all of distinction in the army were assembled to congratulate the
general on his victory. Louis entered mechanically with the rest. He
was pale as a spectre; and the blood on his garments bore witness that
he had not left his chamber that morning on a vain errand. His presence
of mind had saved the day at its first commencement; and his undaunted
arm had twice turned the Moorish scymetars from the head of his
general. On his entrance, therefore, his brave compeers parted before
him; and the oldest veterans present did not think themselves degraded
in bowing their heads before the youthful hero.
When the eyes of Santa Cruz met his advancing figure, the bleeding
image of Ripperda rose upon his recollection. He had seen him borne
lifeless from the burning camp.
"He was his father!" cried the Marquis to himself, as he looked on the
brave and devoted son; and stepping forward, he pressed him silently
in his arms. Louis felt the pulse of the pitying heart that beat
against his; but he was not then susceptible of comfort from any human
commiseration; and, with an unaltered aspect, he raised himself from
the Marquis's breast, and passed unmoved through the less delicate
crowd, who pressed on him with compliments on his exertions of the
day. He heard nothing but the buzzing of many voices; and bowing
without observation as they approached or retreated from him, left the
pavilion; and as unnotingly proceeded to the city.
The nature of Ferdinand's wounds not allowing him to share in the
service of the day, hourly messengers from the field duly communicated
the progress of the victory. The contest was at last over; and
the Marchioness and her daughter threw themselves in speechless
thanksgiving upon the ground, before the Almighty Preserver of Santa
Cruz. They had known all the agonies of being within hearing of a field
of battle. The distant uproar of death; the thundering of the guns;
the red and billowy clouds which, at every explosion, a strong east
wind drove in darkening volumes over the fortress, were portentous
accompaniments to the terrifying successions of the wounded, which
every hour brought within its walls. The horrid suspense of that day
often came over Marcella in future years, with a recollection so
present of mental torture, that catching the hand dearest to her in the
world, and trembling with dismay at what might have been the issue, she
has wept over it tears of ceaseless gratitude. But in the dreadful hour
of conflict, those tender expressions of anxiety were driven back upon
their source; and, while thinking on no other object than the life of
her father and his friend, her hands, with her mother's, assisted in
binding up fractured limbs, and staunching blood, welling from many a
brave heart.
The trumpet of recall from the victorious chase, sounded near the
walls. The Marchioness rose from her knees; and though unable to move
herself, from strong emotion, she dispatched Ferdinand and Marcella to
meet their father. He supported his sister's agitated steps, while he
sustained his own by the aid of his crutches. They were hastening along
the main gallery of the castle, when Louis de Montemar entered from the
field.
Aware of what must be his feelings on the defeat and fall of his
father, Ferdinand instantly quitted his sister's side, and retreated
from the melancholy greeting. Marcella was not less informed by her
own heart, of what must then be tearing their friend's; but she did
not fly, neither did she move towards him. She stood still, with her
eyes rivetted on him in speechless occupation of soul. He had not seen
Ferdinand: he did not see her though he passed her close. Marcella saw
something dreadful in the fixture of his mien. Could such piety as his
be stricken with despair? She sunk on her knees at the terrible image;
and a sound, between a groan and a cry of supplication to heaven, burst
from her lips, as, with clasped hands, she looked upon his disappearing
steps.
That was a sound which had its chord in Louis's breast. He turned
round. Marcella did not cover her face; for a brighter principle than
terrestrial love actuated her soul for the noble sufferer before
her. She knelt and looked on him. Louis approached her. He stood for
a moment gazing on her. In the next, the whole agony of his mind
agitated his before marbled features. As she started on her feet he
took her hand, and firmly grasping it, said, "Oh, pray for me!" and
then dropping it, again turned away, and passed out of sight along the
gallery.
CHAP. XIII.
The siege of Ceuta was now not merely raised, but the accumulating
army which had so long held it in blockade, and then beleaguered it
with such enterprizing determination, was disappeared as if it had
never been. Victors and vanquished were mingled in one common grave.
The steed with its rider, and he who slew, by the side of him that was
slain. The Spaniards performed these frightful obsequies; and he who
held the mattock and the spade had often to contend with birds of prey,
and ravenous dogs, howling amongst the mangled remains.
A flag of truce arrived from Adelmelek. It offered preliminaries of
peace in the name of the Emperor; while the vindictive Hadge accused
the defeated Aben Humeya of all the reciprocal outrages committed
during the present campaign.
Santa Cruz inquired the fate of the late Basha.
"He fled from the field of battle," replied the Moor, "and has not yet
been heard of."
"Your information is false," returned the Marquis; "I myself saw him
streaming with wounds and insensible, borne out of his consuming camp
by a party of your own countrymen."
"I speak on the word of my commander," replied the Moor.
"You must bring me better evidence of his truth," rejoined the
Marquis, "before I trust him. Return this day week to Ceuta; and, as
he dissembles or fairly represents the last act of his fallen rival,
I shall shape the terms my Sovereign may empower me to make to your
Emperor."
Santa Cruz was not long in receiving ample credentials from the court
at Seville for all he might wish to do in re-establishing the Spanish
interest in Barbary. At Seville, as in Ceuta, it was believed that the
Duke de Ripperda had expiated his crimes with his life; and, in answer
to the evidence which Santa Cruz transmitted, of the inextinguishable
loyalty of the Marquis de Montemar, the King issued a new edict,
granting him the restitution of all his late father's hereditary
honours and possessions. But there was a clause in this munificent
investiture. The future Duke de Ripperda must avow himself of the Roman
Catholic communion.
The re-opened wounds of Louis were just cicatrized; and he was leaning
over the table on which he was writing to his friends in England, when
the Marquis entered with the official letter from the King. He read
it aloud. At the end of the catalogue of the Ripperda territories and
titles, before he opened on the clause, Santa Cruz paused.
"De Montemar," said he, with solemnity, "hard trial has separated the
gold from the dross in your heart; and you will not esteem the last
title with which your King would invest you, the least honourable,--a
true Christian!"
He then read the condition: "That all these restitutions should be
ratified by the royal seal, on the day that the Cardinal-resident at
Madrid should witness the baptism of Louis, Duke of Ripperda, into the
bosom of the Church of Rome."
"I am sensible to the gracious intent of my Sovereign," replied Louis;
"but that name I once idolized, I would now hear no more. It shall
never be borne by me! And for the rest,--I am a Protestant, and I will
die one."
Santa Cruz urged him by religious arguments and persuasions, drawn from
the reasonableness of maintaining the rights of his ancestors. He spoke
of the justice he owed to himself in restoring the illustrious name of
his family to its pristine lustre; and, at any rate, it was his duty,
when so offered, to transmit it, and the inheritance that was its
appendage, unimpaired to his posterity.
"I shall have no posterity," replied Louis. "My father died an Infidel,
and his name and his race are no more."
"What do you mean, De Montemar?" demanded the Marquis, regarding with
alarm the countenance of his young friend.
"Nothing rash; nothing that this venerable man would not approve," said
he, laying his hand on the letter he was writing to Mr. Athelstone.
"But Marquis!" cried he, "Is there not matter enough to break a son's
heart?"
Santa Cruz replied, by turning the subject to Louis's own great
endowments of mind and figure; and tried to awaken his ambition, by
dwelling on the impression his high principled conduct at Vienna had
made upon his Sovereigns. It could only be equalled, he said, by their
admiration of his late intrepid defence of Ceuta. On these grounds, the
Marquis added, he had only to chuse, and the first stations in the
state, or in the army, must in process of time be at his command.
Louis shook his head.
"I was not born for a statesman," replied he. "I acknowledge no
morality but one; and I have known enough of the ethics of cabinets to
loathe their chicanery. I have seen that in the adjustment of their
respective interests, the principles of common honesty may not only be
dispensed with, but that no subterfuge is too mean for adoption, when
expedient to disguise truth or over-reach a rival party. Where every
man is supposed a deceiver by profession, no man can really trust in
each other; and I will never be one of a set of men, where all are
suspected of dishonour. As to the army!--I have had enough of that
also." He shuddered as he spoke, and covered his face with his hand.
Santa Cruz did not require that shudder to be explained; but he
affected to consider this wide rejection, as derogatory to his
loyalty, and to the general manliness of his character.
"Not in my mind," added he; "but in the opinion of the world. You
must recover what your father's dereliction has lost; and the public
suffrage is only to be retained by a succession of distinguished
services. You are especially called upon to make manifest in all ways
what you are,--a true subject of Spain, and one whose piety is worthy
the adoption of our Church."
"I am called upon," replied Louis, "to appear what I am! I served
the King of Spain at the expence of many a sacrifice. I need not turn
your eyes to the last. My faith is not in my power to exchange at will;
but ill would he serve his Prince who could so desert himself: the
example before us ought to set that at rest for ever. If, by remaining
a Protestant, I must be no more a Spaniard, the forfeiture must proceed
against me. I have still the country of my mother. It will judge me
with candour; and there, I trust, I shall do my duty in whatever state
of life it may please Heaven to number out my days."
As Louis uttered this, his countenance was calm though sorrowful;
and Santa Cruz, struck with such awful resignation in one so young
and powerfully endowed, grasped his hand with as much reverence as
affection, and soon after left the room.
CHAP. XIV.
Meanwhile, all was consternation and mutiny amongst the shattered
remnant of the Moorish army. Ali had collected the fugitives from the
bloody day of Ceuta; and attempted to re-organise them into some line
of defence. But, fearful of being led a second time against their
conquerors, they resisted every law of discipline, and spread the same
refractory spirit to the camp of Adelmelek. The Hadge had undesignedly
prepared his legions for this excess of disobedience, by impressing
them with a belief that the conversion of the Duke de Ripperda to the
Ottoman faith, was only a master-stroke of Christian policy, to acquire
the Emperor Abdallah's confidence; and then, as he had done, betray the
whole of the Moorish host to the sword of Spain. The people of the
country at large were made to believe the same. Their credulity was
easy, as their masters seldom consulted any counsellor but caprice;
and, secure in their poverty, but bold in the use of their tongues,
they clamoured against the court, for putting such implicit trust in
a renegado; who, it was manifest, repaid the Emperor by betraying his
army to the Christians; and had withdrawn himself from punishment, by
shutting himself up, with the embezzled treasures of Abdallah, within
the bulwarks of Tetuan.
At this juncture, Muley Hamet having been secretly apprised of the
disaster which had befallen his former vanquisher, re-appeared upon the
plains of Marmora; and, at the head of an armed multitude of Moors and
Arabs, marched towards Mequinez.
Sidi Solyman, his near kinsman and secret partisan, was then in the
capital. He was ready on any promising occasion to blow the flame of
sedition; and, with great industry and dispatch, prepared the way for
Muley Hamet, by publishing the reverses of the campaign. He accused the
great officers of state of mal-administration; their chief agent, the
renegade Duke, as an infamous trafficker of his faith; and urged, that
Abdallah, having introduced the Christian impostor into the councils of
the empire, had rendered himself obnoxious to the prophet's vengeance;
the people, at present, lay under the same curse; and their first
act must be to appease the heavenly power, by the deposition of the
Emperor, and the delivery of Aben Humeya to the expiation of the laws!
The ever discontented and tumultuous rabble of Mequinez listened to
these suggestions in the very spirit that was desired. They set fire
to the imperial palace, and marched out of the town, headed by the
incendiary, Solyman, to meet his kinsman on the plain.
Abdallah, at that time, was with a few chosen troops, winding his way
through the Habad mountains, to support the joint authority of Ali and
Adelmelek with his presence; and also to ameliorate the fury of those
two commanders against the Spanish Basha, whom he still believed to be
as true as he was brave.
Adelmelek was so well aware of the consequence to him of the Emperor's
arrival, should he hear from Ali that the battle of Ceuta was lost by
the disobedience of the army of the interior to the summons of Aben
Humeya; that on the very day he was told of Abdallah's approach, he
caused Ali to be assassinated, and detached a body of troops to escort
the Emperor with honour to his camp. But an honest Moor, who knew the
designs of the Hadge, made his escape into the mountains, and informed
the Emperor, not merely of the murder of the Sidi, but that Adelmelek
intended his sovereign the same fate; after which he would march upon
Tetuan, where the Basha was shut up, utterly helpless from his numerous
wounds; and storming the place, deliver the whole with the empire, into
the hands of Muley Hamet. Other information more than corroborated this
statement; and Abdallah soon saw that temporary flight was his only
resource. He called his few faithful followers together, and taking
a circuit through the mountains, made a safe retreat into the desert
regions of his empire.
Muley Hamet was declared Emperor by Sidi Solyman and Adelmelek; and
the troops of the latter rejoicing in any change, readily obeyed his
orders for a mere shew of discipline, while he dispatched his second
ambassador to Ceuta, to make peace at any rate with the Spanish King.
By the information of this Moor, Santa Cruz learnt, that when Ripperda
fell in the battle of the camp, it was the last stroke of many wounds,
and had been supposed mortal. But his immediate followers, snatching
him from the crowd of slain, laid him on a camel, and disappeared with
him from the field. It was some days before Adelmelek knew what was
become of the fugitive party; and then a messenger from Ismail Cheriff,
chief of his Arabian guards, brought information to Ali, that he had
borne the wounded Aben Humeya to the safe hold of his own fortress of
Tetuan. Ali lost no time in sending the courier back to the faithful
Arab, with a full account of Adelmelek's intentions to give the Basha
up to the resentment of the turbulent soldiery, or to influence the
Emperor to order his immediate death.
The consequence was, Aben Humeya closed the gates of Tetuan as firmly
against all the insidious advances of Adelmelek, as he would have done,
to repel an open attack of the outrageous Moors, "Ali is dead; and
Muley Hamet Emperor of Morocco,"--continued the ambassador, "Adelmelek
is alone powerful with the new sovereign; and the first judicial act
of the divan has been to declare Aben Humeya a traitor to the empire
and our prophet. Should the desperate state of his wounds fail of
proving his executioner, before the next moon Tetuan will be stormed by
Adelmelek, the inhabitants put to the sword, and the treacherous Basha,
die the death of a slave."
To these denunciations, Louis de Montemar, who was present at the
audience, paid no attention; all that he heard, and seized as the
renewal of life, was that his father yet survived; that he was accused
of irreverence towards the founder of the Ottoman faith; and that he
had taken refuge in a place not more than a day's journey from the
Spanish fortress.
When the Mussulman closed his communications, and withdrew to leave
their import to consultation, Louis imparted what were now his
designs. Indeed, it was hardly necessary to declare them; for the
existence of the Duke de Ripperda was no sooner affirmed, and his
occupation of Tetuan mentioned, than Santa Cruz read in the instant
blaze of his friend's countenance, the regeneration of hope; and the
enterprize to which the welcome visitant would give birth.
"But the hazard is so infinite!" rejoined the Marquis, "where are we
to find a person who would have the boldness to guide you through the
brigand parties of the rival Moors? And even should we be successful in
that object, and you arrive at Tetuan, consider the result. You may be
admitted to your father; but should he perish in his apostacy, where
would be your protection, and what would be your fate?"
"That I leave to providence!" replied Louis, "my course is clear:--to
seek my father; and make a last effort to share with him that
happiness in the world to come, he has for ever destroyed in this."
"But his wounds are mortal," returned Santa Cruz, "he may be dead
before you have reached this scene of peril. You will then have exposed
your life, and more than your life, in vain. Think of the horrors that
would befall you, should the infuriate Moors discover in you the son of
the man, his enemies have taught them to believe was their betrayer?"
"Nothing is terrible to me," replied Louis, "but the idea of my father
dying in his apostacy. Heaven appears to have opened his grave, to give
him for a short time to my prayers; and shall any thing prevent me
entering it, even if it should prove my own? I feel I have my errand!
It is to touch the dead with the recalling breath of his redeemer; it
is to see him rise again to life everlasting!"
Louis's soul was kindled into a holy flame. It was the ardent devotion
of a son, mingling with the fervour of a really pious spirit. The
enterprizing hope that was its offspring, might, by colder natures, be
termed romantic vanity, or fanatic enthusiasm; but the warm heart of
the Marquis saw religion in his zeal; and filial duty in the hazarded
self-immolation.
After discussing many plans, it was at last decided, that the safest
scheme was to pass from Ceuta by water; and that Louis should put on
the garb of a brother of Saint Philip, one of the Orders of Mercy,
then by licence scattered throughout the marine towns of Barbary.
As he passed into the chapel, to receive the vesture and holy
benediction from the superior of the Ceuta brethren, he found Santa
Cruz and his family kneeling before the altar, to unite their orisons
with that of the priest.
The supplications of the veteran were fervent, though silent; and as he
prayed, he often turned his eyes on his daughter, who knelt by him,
with her face concealed in her veil.
The abbot put his hands on the head of Louis. The Marchioness wept; for
she had no faith in this expedition, and thought within herself--"So
he sanctifies the youthful martyr! For from that den of infidelity, he
never will return!"
Ferdinand whispered something of the same import to his mother; and she
sobbed audibly.
Louis turned to her voice, and put her hand to his lips. The Marquis
and Ferdinand embraced him. Marcella had raised herself from her knees,
and held by the rails of the altar. Louis did not see her face, for
the veil yet hung before it; but the other hand that was laid upon her
breast trembled; and he thought he saw he was not less in her thoughts,
than in those of her parents. He wished, yet hesitated to approach
her. Santa Cruz observed the direction of his eyes, and his doubting
movement, but he did not speak. Louis's heart failed him; and blessing
her in its inward recesses, he turned away, and followed the abbot out
of the chapel.
Having received his credentials from the superior at Ceuta, to the
fraternity of the same order at Tetuan, who resided there for the
ransom of Christian slaves; Louis took his station in the open boat,
that was to convey him, through the dangers of the counter-current at
that season of the year, to the Moorish strong hold of the province of
Hadad.
CHAP. XV.
The river of Tetuan meets the sea, little more than a league from the
town. All was quiet on its banks; and the boat which conveyed Louis to
the Christian convent on the city walls, threw out its grappling irons
under the deep excavation of a rock, at the base of an old tower.
Through a kind of lantern staircase in the hollow of the wall, Louis
was conducted to an iron grating. The man who had been his pilot in
this midnight voyage, pulled a bell which hung within the grating;
and crossing himself at the same instant, muttered the Moorish
benedicite, "Sta fer Lah!" and hastened to his comrades in the
boat. Louis had been warned by the brethren at Ceuta, not to ask
his navigators any question; and when he witnessed this monstrous
association of Mussulmen, with Christian devotion, he did not doubt
that he had been rowed to Tetuan by characters of as little principle,
as those which at first brought him from Spain to the Ottoman shore.
Before any person answered to the pull of the bell, which had ceased
ringing, he heard the boat splashing away with its crew from under the
caverned passage; and shortly after, the dead silence assured him he
was left quite alone.
The mariner had given him a dark lantern, which shewed him the gloom of
his situation. A short flight of steps; a fathomless abyss of waters at
his feet. Before him a strong grated door, through which no human nerve
could force an entrance; and immediately beyond it, a rough dark wall,
which did not appear more than a foot distant from its impassable
portcullis.
Louis had just raised his arm to the bell, to make it sound a second
time, when a figure appeared at the grate with the suddenness of an
apparition. Without a word being uttered on either side, the massy bars
were drawn; and Louis found himself following this silent conductor,
through a long narrow stone passage, to another iron door. The mute
friar made its bolts yield before him; and the chamber, to which
its porch was a vestibule, presented to the eye of de Montemar, the
assembled body of the holy brotherhood at Tetuan.
This little synod did not exceed ten; the person who conducted him
completing that number. The prior rose on the entrance of a stranger
brother of their order, which the ringing of that secret bell
announced. It being a mode of egress to their cell, by which none but
the respective fraternities of Saint Philip of Mercy were ever
allowed to enter.
A peculiar badge on the cowl of Louis announced that he came from the
Abbey of Ceuta; and the credentials he immediately delivered to the
prior confirmed its evidence. He was introduced to the brethren at
Tetuan, as one who had a message of conscience to the dying Basha; and
they were exhorted, by every argument from the Christian faith, to
further the visit of the sacred embassador.
"I must see him this night."
"That is impossible," replied the prior, "but within an hour,"
continued he, "I expect a visit from Martini d'Urbino, the alcaide
of his Christian slaves. He will judge of the practicability of your
demand."
Louis inquired how the alcaide reported the state of the Basha; and
asked the purport of his visit to the cell.
The prior hesitated to give a candid answer. But he recollected the
style of his superior's letter; and Louis repeated his questions,
though mildly, with so unappealable an air of authority, he could no
longer refuse a true and respectful reply.
"The Basha cannot live many days; and his Christian servant visits this
cell by stealth, to witness the masses which we say for his master's
soul."
"At his master's requisition?" demanded Louis.
"At his servant's," replied the prior; "the Duke himself is yet lost to
redemption."
Louis sighed heavily. He wrapped himself in his mantle, as he took
his station by the low embers of the hearth; and spoke no more, till
a hasty step in a distant passage announced the approach of Martini.
The friars had respected the abstracted taciturnity of their stranger
brother; and did not even obtrude on him by an observation, when they
saw him start from his seat at the well-known tread of his father's
faithful follower.
Louis's cowl hung over his face when Martini entered. Indeed, it had
never been raised.
The alcaide's appearance was strange to the eyes of him, who had last
seen him in the light European garb of his country. He was now covered
with the gorgeous draperies of an Asiatic officer; and the load of his
magnificence seemed to weigh as heavily on his frame, as the fetters of
his office oppressed the careless gaiety of his naturally free spirit.
He did not remark an accession to the number of the brotherhood,
but immediately announced the Duke's augmented bodily danger. The
anguish of his wounds had that day been more intolerable than he could
bear; low groans burst from his lips, during their most insufferable
extremity; and when the hours of cessation from pain recurred, he
lay in sullen despair, only breaking the fearful stillness, by
occasionally murmuring the words, "lost! lost!"
"'Tis the evidence of his spirit against him!" exclaimed the prior.
"But here is a brother," pointing to Louis, "whose holy zeal would try
to lead him into some view of comfort."
"That is not to be done in this world," returned Martini, "he has lost
too much, for any mortal aid to give him consolation."
"Then," cried the priest, "his doom must be eternal death!"
"Teach him to think that! that the doom of an unpardoned transgressor,
is utter extinction;" replied Martini, "and you complete his perdition.
He would find a treacherous peace, in anticipating the oblivion of the
grave. But now--let us to prayers, my holy fathers; that is the only
way by which we can bring him comfort."
The prior began the mass. Louis was on his knees, as well as the
brothers. His prayers were not in their words, nor uttered in any
sounds: but the inward groanings of his earnest spirit, like those
of him who smote his breast in the temple, and exclaimed, "Lord, be
merciful unto me a sinner!" were heard, and answered from above.
At the end of the service, Martini laid his oblation on the altar, and
was turning away to withdraw, when Louis put his hand on his arm. He
durst not speak to him before the brethren; for the abbot at Ceuta had
warned him not to discover himself in the priory at Tetuan, until his
success with the Basha should supersede any cause of fear at such an
enterprize.
"Signor alcaide," said the prior, "if it be possible, you must
introduce that brother to your dying master. He comes from Ceuta, and
his mission is of importance."
"Nothing from Ceuta can be of importance to my master now," replied
Martini, "its very name would re-awaken him from the melancholy stupor
in which I left him, to all the horrors of his most terrific agonies."
Martini paused an instant; then in a suppressed tone he addressed the
stranger friar.
"The Marquis de Montemar, his only son, fell on the walls of Ceuta in
his sight and in his defence. And when any circumstances recall the
scene, then it is I see the palsied quivering of his lip, and hear the
often repeated lost, lost! till the low, half uttered sound almost
drives me mad. I too, loved him. But all is now gone for ever!"
Louis grasped his arm, and made a sign to the brethren to withdraw.
There was that in the credentials he brought, that told them to respect
all his wishes; and without a word they obeyed the motion of his hand.
Assured from what he now heard, that his father had restored him to his
heart; the hope he derived from this happy change, nerved him with
perfect self-possession; and drawing Martini towards the lamp that hung
over the altar, he raised his cowl from his face.
"Martini," said he, "you will not deny me the sight of my father!"
It was flesh and blood that clasped his arm: but it seemed the voice
and countenance of the slain de Montemar! The latter was wan and pale,
and in the scared apprehension of the beholder, ghastly, as if just
risen from his bloody grave. He did not speak; but with his eyes fixed
on what he believed a terrible fore-warning of his master's death,
shook almost to fainting, on the breast of the supposed phantom.
Louis comprehended his fear, and instantly relieved it, by saying, "I
was wounded when my father saw me fall. But heaven has spared me to
this hour; and you must do the last service to the Duke de Ripperda and
his son." Though Martini was now convinced, it was no spectre that
stood before him, he sunk upon the steps of the altar, and remained for
some time in much emotion before he could reply. At last he spoke; and
in his rapid and agitated recapitulation of the events which succeeded
the repulse at the storming of Ceuta, he mentioned, that Ripperda's
indignation at the Moors for abandoning the ramparts, seemed the more
exasperated, when report told him the breach was defended by the
Marquis de Montemar.
"We both did our duty," said he to me, with a horrible smile; "though
Louis would have served Spain better, if he had suffered his brother
soldiers to kill its enemy." "But he would not have been your son!"
replied I. The Duke looked sternly at me. "Martini how often have
I told you, I have no son? No part in any human being--but what
administers to my vengeance!"
"Then came the intercepted courier from Oran. His dispatches related
the attempt on Ceuta; and that the Marquis de Montemar was dying of
his wounds. He was brought before the Basha; and, on being questioned,
acknowledged that you were dead. At that unexpected disclosure, nature
asserted itself in your father's breast. He found you were yet his
son, in the moment you were lost to him for ever. His grief knew no
bounds; it was terrible, and in despair. Alas! Signor, it was phrenzy
wearing the garb of warlike retaliation. His orders were full of blood
and extirpating revenge. All flew at his command; but, though all
were brave, none fought as he did. His onward courage and invincible
resolution on that desperate day of his defeat, surpassed human daring,
and almost human credibility. He fell, bleeding at every pore. I was
near him at the instant; and raising him from the ground, then as
insensible as if past the pains of death, the Arab, Ismail Cheriff,
assisted me, and we bore him to a place of security.
"We knew that all was over in the field; and, dreading the malice of
his Moorish rivals, as soon as we perceived life in him, we conveyed
him safely into Tetuan; and, closing the gates, prepared to defend
him against the immediate fury of his vanquished soldiers; who, we
were soon informed, were in mutiny, and urging their no less hostile
commanders to lead them against their former Basha."
But an antidote to the deadly aconite which much of this narrative
contained, was also gathered by the anxious son of Ripperda. He learnt
that the blood which flowed so copiously from his father's wounds had
cleared the long troubled fountain of his heart.
When the Duke recovered from his first mortal weakness, he found that
he had also recovered a memory he would gladly have lost for ever. The
madness of his revenge had passed away in the floodgates which opened
from his streaming sides. No mist now hung over his better faculties.
He saw his injuries as they were; but he also beheld his extravagant
retaliation in its true enormity. He had become a rebel, an apostate,
an enemy to all mankind! He had sacrificed his honour, his affections,
his soul, to a phantom that vanished in his embrace, and left him to
a terrible conviction of perdition! His son was no more! The race of
Ripperda was then extinct; and all the fame, and all the glory for
which he had contended, were blotted out for ever. His evil deeds alone
would be remembered, as an example to avoid and to shudder at! Remorse
fastened on the heart of the dying man; but it was a remorse, direful
and dark. Repentance did not shed a tear there; for the mortal vice of
his youth and of his manhood still kept guard over the better spirit
within. He was too proud to give vent to the anguish of his soul; too
proud to acknowledge to man or to God, the secret of his misery,--that
he was a sinner and in despair.
Louis passed with Martini over the embattled terraces, which, in the
present fortified state of the city, occupied the place of citron
groves on the flat roofs of the houses of Tetuan. The Ginaraliph,
or, otherwise, the Basha's palace, was in the centre of the town,
surrounded by sumptuous gardens, and stood in the moon-light,
reflecting from its gilded domes the milder splendours of her orb. The
courts and the chambers spoke of pomp and luxury. Guards lined the
galleries; and the baths and remote pavilions of the Basha, breathed
every fragrance of Arabia, and sparkled every where with gold and
silver stuffs, draperying the walls, and carpeting the floors. Did
Paradise consist in banqueting the senses, here it was. But Paradise
dwells within the heart. In that of the expiring possessor of all these
delusions, there was only a desert to be found; and, in such a state,
gloomily awaiting his last sigh, and the direful judgment that was to
be passed upon his soul, Louis beheld his father, lying as one already
dead, under the mockery of all this gilded pomp.
Ripperda did not see the grey form that glided into his apartment;
for he did not raise his head from its fixed position on his pillow.
Martini advanced to the couch.
"My Lord, I bring you good tidings!"
Ripperda took no notice of what was said. Martini drew closer and
repeated his words. His master opened his eyes with a look of reproach.
"I do not deceive you, my Lord," cried the faithful servant; "my
tidings are the most precious your dearest wishes could desire."
"Then they would rid me of this world, and all that troubles me!" cried
Ripperda. "Tell me nothing, for I have no wishes here." "Your son, my
Lord," returned Martini, "would you not hear of him?"
"No!" cried the Duke, in a voice of peculiar strength. "His reputation
is my infamy! Let me die without that last drop."
Louis could refrain no longer. He sunk on his knees. His cowl was now
thrown backward from his head; and though at the extreme distance of
the apartment, his father recognised him at the first glance. His eyes,
for a while, became riveted to the strange vision; but he did not, for
a moment, believe it otherwise than a reality.
"Who is that?" cried he to Martini, and pointing to the figure.
"The Marquis de Montemar," replied the Italian.
Louis was now on his feet, and approached his father. Ripperda drew
himself up on his bed.
"And what," cried he, in a severe tone, "if you be yet a wretch in this
miserable world? What tempts you again into the presence of the man
who has survived all relations but his own conscience?"
"My own conscience, and my heart!" cried Louis, "from this hour,
determined to live and die by my father."
Ripperda bent his head upon his clasped hands. Louis drew near, then
nearer, and kneeling by the bed, touched those hands which seemed
clenched in each other with more than mortal agony. The bed shook under
the strong emotion of the Duke. At last, his hands closed over his
son's; and Louis, in broken accents, exclaimed: "Oh! my father: In all
that I have offended you, in word or deed, pardon; and bless me by your
restored confidence!"
"Louis," cried the Duke, after a pause, and relinquishing the hands he
held: "Pardon is not a word to pass my lips. I know it not. I shall
never hear it. Let all men perish as I shall perish."
"You will not pronounce such a sentence on your son?" returned Louis,
seeing the distemper of his mind, and praying inwardly, while he sought
to soothe, and to turn him to better feelings. "You gave me birth, and
you will not leave me to die, without having received your forgiveness
for all my unintentional offences."
"Louis de Montemar!" cried the Duke, "virtuous son of an angel I shall
never behold! There is no death in your breast; no need of forgiveness
from earth or heaven! But your father!--Shudder while you touch him,
for hell is already in his bosom."
Ripperda's face was again buried in his hands. That once godlike
figure shook as under the last throes of dissolution; and before his
anguished son could form his pious hopes into any words of consolation,
a slave appeared for a moment at the curtain of the door. The act of
prostration, holding out a sealed packet to Martini, and vanishing
again, seemed comprised in less than a second. Martini knew the
writing to be that of a friend of his own, in the suite of Adelmelek;
and, aware of some pressing danger from the abrupt entrance of the
slave, he broke the seal. He read, that the late Emperor being deposed,
Adelmelek was advancing to Tetuan, to threaten it with destruction;
or to allow it to purchase its ransom by an instant surrender of its
Basha. This sacrifice being made, the offending Aben Humeya would be
put to an ignominious death; and so the laws of Mahommed should be
appeased, and an exemplary warning set up to all foreign invaders of
the rights and honours of true Mussulmen.
Without preface, Martini communicated this information to those
present. He no longer feared the execution of such threats, but
felicitated his master on the arrival of the Marquis de Montemar, who
would himself defend his father's life from these ungrateful Moors.
"And was it my death you feared?" asked the Duke, gloomily looking up
from his position, and bracing his nerves at this seeming summons to
renewed action. "Were it to be found, I would seek it; but there is no
death for me. Torn from this murderous world by violence, or sapped by
the consuming hand of corporeal pain, neither can give me rest."
"Yes, my father," gently rejoined Louis, "there is rest in the grave
when--"
"Silence!" interrupted the Duke, all his former haughtiness confirming
his voice and manner: "Is it you that would cajole reason with
sophistry? That would give up your unsullied truth at last, to insult
your father by preaching an annihilation you know to be a falsehood?
I know a different lesson. A man cannot rid himself of bodily pangs
by moving from place to place. How then shall the torments of the
spirit be extinguished, by so small a change as being in or out of
this loathed prison of flesh? When my soul, my own and proper self,
when it is freed by death from the fetters of the passions which have
undone me; then I shall think even more intensely than I do now. I
shall remember more than I do now. I shall see the naked springs, the
undisguised consequences of all my actions. They will burn in my eyes
for ever. For such, I feel, is the eternal book of accusation prepared
for the immortal spirit that has transgressed beyond the hope of
pardon, or the power of peace! Louis," added he, grasping his arm, and
looking him sternly in the face; "has not your Pastor-Uncle taught you
the same?"
"Yes; and more," replied his son. "He has taught me, that it is
impossible for the finite faculties of man to comprehend the infinite
attributes of God;--how he reconciles justice with mercy, in the
mystery of the redemption, and renews the corrupted nature of man
by the regeneration of repentance! Recall the promises of the
Scriptures, my father; and there you will find, that He who washed
David from blood-guiltiness, and blotted out the idolatry of Solomon;
that He who pardoned Cephas for denying Him in the hour of trial, and
satisfied the perverse infidelity of Thomas; that He who forgave Saul
his persecutions, and made him the ablest apostle of his church; nay,
that He who has been the propitiation of man, from the fall of Adam to
the present hour,--wills not the death of a sinner, but calls him to
repentance and to life!"
"But what," returned the Duke, "if I know nothing of these things? You
start! But it is true. The Scriptures you talk of, is the only book I
never opened." There was a terrible expression in the eyes of Ripperda
as he delivered this, and listened to the heavy groan that burst from
the heart of his son.
"In this hour," continued he, "when all human learning deserts me;
rejected by the world, and loathing man and all his ways;--in this
bitter hour, I believe, therein I might have found the word of life!
But I derided its pretensions, and the penalty must be paid!"
Louis had recovered himself from the first shock of this awful
confession. He beheld the desperate resignation of his father's
countenance when uttering the last sentence; but he did not permit
it to shake his manhood a second time, as he now took up the sacred
subject in the language of Scripture itself. He had been well taught by
the precepts and example of his Pastor-Uncle; and with a memory whose
tenacity astonished even himself, and a power of argument which seemed
the eloquence of inspiration, the young preacher sat by his father's
side; till a light, like the morning sun, rose upon the chaos of his
mind, and feeling warmth with the beam, his heart, which until now had
been like a stone in his bosom, melted under the genial influence; and
the eyes, which had not endured the softness of a tear for many months,
overflowed on the hand of his son.
The soul of Louis was then as in heaven. He was speechless with
gratitude; and when his father looked upon him, he beheld his face,
indeed as an angel; for all that he had taught and promised, was then
effulgent in his upward eyes.
Louis passed the night in his father's chamber. And before another sun
arose and set, and rose again, he had so entirely satisfied him of the
truth and efficacy of the religion of Christ, that the noble penitent
begged to seal his repentance and his faith, by receiving the holy
sacrament from the hands of the prior of Saint Philip's.
During these few sacred days, the Duke became so tranquillized by
the hopes of religion, that he found freedom of mind sufficient, to
converse with his son on his future temporal concerns. He took pen and
ink, to write something to that effect; which he forbade Louis to open,
till the writer were no more.
"It particularly relates to England;" said he, "for that country must
hereafter be yours. It is the only one I ever knew, where virtue is a
man's best friend. You came innocent out of it; and it is to your own
credit, and the influence of God alone, that you return unpolluted by
the stains which have made my name one universal blot. Oh, Louis,"
cried he, wringing his hands; "you have taken from your father, the
sting of death; you have brought him the true unction of heaven; and
given him that peace, which the world and all its empires cannot give;
and what do I bequeath thee in return. The memory of my infamy? But it
will not reach you in England; or if it do, that people are too just,
to condemn the blameless son, for the delinquency of his parent."
Louis's heart sprang to that country to which his father exhorted him
to return. Since he left it, his pilgrimage had been one of anguish; an
expedition of contest and sorrow; of defeat without error; and victory
which could yield no triumph.
"But you will live, my father!" said he, observing that for the last
few hours his pains had ceased; and his countenance bespoke, if not
the serenity of innocence, the resignation of religion. "Your bodily
sufferings are ameliorated; and we shall see England together."
Ripperda looked on him with a sudden brightness in his eye.
"That penance is spared me!" cried he, "while on earth, I should feel
that memory and reproach are the worms that never die! I have indeed,
no pain; neither in my spirit, nor in my body; and in the moment the
latter ceased, your father felt the bond was taken off that fastened
his frail being to this world!"
Louis now understood what another few hours would so soon demonstrate.
"Here is the remnant of a sword," rejoined the Duke, putting the
shattered remains of one into his son's hand. "It broke in the conflict
on the breach of Ceuta, but it did not fail me. Its fractured blade
slew the Biscayen who wounded you in my defence. Preserve it Louis;
for it was my friend, when I believe I had hardly another friend left.
It saved my life from assassins in the mountains of Genoa. Who wielded
it, I know not; but remark its motto, J'ose! and should you ever meet
its owner, remember that William de Ripperda's last injunction was,
Gratitude!"
Louis kissed the shattered blade, and put it into his bosom. At the
same instant he heard a stir in the vestibule; and with a melancholy
haste, he rose, and opened the curtain, to welcome the prior of Saint
Philip.
The Roman Catholic religion was the first Ripperda had exercised; and
though he knew it by its ceremonials only, yet it was most grateful to
him to die in its profession:--And as his soul now worshipped the only
God and Saviour, in spirit and in truth; in his circumstances, every
water was alike holy that baptized him to salvation.
"Father!" said he, when the priest entered; "you come to behold in me
the end of all human vanity. What have I not been? What am I now? An
example, and a beacon! What Ripperda was, is now forgotten; what he is,
will be remembered by men, and reproached upon his posterity, when God
has erased the record for ever!"
With his hands clasped in those of the prior, he made a short,
but contrite confession of his transgressions and his faith. From
those hallowed lips he received the sacred absolution; and as the
consummation of his eternal peace, raised on his bed upon his knees,
and supported on the breast of his son, for the first, and the last
time, he received the pledge of his salvation, in tasting with a
believer's heart, the last supper of our Lord.
"It is the bread of life!" cried he, firmly pressing the hand of Louis;
and starting forward with his eyes rivetted, as if on some invisible
object:--"Thou hast given it me; and thy mother----" he fell back on
the bosom of his son. At that moment, the smile which was once so
beautiful, but now rendered ghastly by the hues of death, flitted
over his blanched lips. It seemed the glittering wing of a seraph,
escaping the marble tomb. All was still. The voice of the priest raised
a requiem to the departing spirit; but Louis had neither voice nor
tear. He was sunk on his knees, to adore the merciful God, into whose
presence his beloved father was then passed away.
CHAP. XVI.
Louis opened the sealed packet, and obeyed his father's dying
injunctions to the minutest circumstance.
According to the noble penitent's written command, and by the friendly
management of the faithful Arab, his death was concealed from the
Moors, until all was accomplished which he wished to be done. When
every thing was completed, his body was taken away by night to the
chapel of Saint Philip, and buried in its consecrated garden, without
pomp, or a register on his grave.
Louis remained for an hour alone, by the humbled relics of all that was
once admired and honoured in man. His heart would have been with that
cold corse, had he not known that its spirit must be sought in other
regions. But on that awful spot, he called on the shade of his mother;
he invoked the soul of him, who had sinned and been forgiven! He laid
his own ambition, and all that was yet within him of this world, on
that first altar of nature, at the foot of the cross. He rose with a
holy confidence, and was comforted.
He bade adieu to the brethren, who now knew him as the son of the
deceased, and blessed him for his filial heroism. The prior conducted
him, with a similar benediction, to the boat that was to convey him to
the late Basha's armed galleon in the bay. Martini was already there,
with the Count de Patinos. Ripperda had held him a close prisoner
in a remote tower of the Ginaraliph; but with his dying breath, he
pronounced his release; and the Count with other Christian captives, to
whom the same voice gave liberty, were now safely embarked, along with
the treasures of Ripperda, in the vessel that was to carry his son to
the opposite shore.
Nature seemed to have put on her mourning garments; for all was
universal darkness: not a star in the heavens, nor a glow-worm on the
beach, shed one ray of light to guide his little bark, as it silently
floated down the river.
He left a letter with the prior, for the Marquis Santa Cruz. It was to
be conveyed to Ceuta with the first messenger from the brotherhood; and
would inform him of the melancholy and decisive events in Tetuan. Louis
wrote fully on every subject; and told the Marquis, that his father had
ordered him to take de Patinos and the Christian captives to Gibraltar,
and from thence give them liberty. The Duke had also enjoined certain
sums to be left with the brethren of Ceuta and Tetuan, for the ransom
of other captives in the interior; while the treasure on board the
galleon was to be consigned to the governor of Gibraltar, under the
personal agency of Martini d'Urbino, for a general fund towards
freeing the numerous Christian slaves on the coast of Barbary.
Louis closed his letter, with his father's commands respecting his
return to England, and his own wish to the same purpose. But he added,
he would not take so decisive a step until he could consult the
Marquis, how far he might comply, without violating his pledged duty
to Spain. It was therefore his design to re-visit Ceuta, as soon as
he had fulfilled his commission at the British fortress; and from the
experienced counsel, and unswerving integrity of Santa Cruz, shape his
future fate.
But Louis was never to see Ceuta again; never to set his foot again
upon the Spanish shore; nor to hear the voice of Santa Cruz, till his
destiny was decided beyond the power of friendship to dissuade or annul.
A whirlwind from the north-west, caught the galleon and its newly
enfranchised crew, at the mouth of the bay of Tetuan, and drove it out
to sea, where it was beaten about at the mercy of the winds and waves
for many days. After having been twice nearly wrecked, first on the
coast of Algiers, and then on the spiky shores of Murcia, a Levanter
suddenly springing up, drove them as fiercely back towards the Straits;
and falling calm opposite the Bay of Gibraltar, on the tenth morning
after he sailed, Louis landed at the British fortress.
As he stepped out on the old mole, the partialities of his infancy
were awakened instantly by what he saw; and though more than a nominal
Spaniard, he felt the exultation of an Englishman, in viewing that
rock, and those bastions, where the most heroic and persevering
atchievements had been performed by the countrymen of his mother. It
was England's own imperial domain; and Louis sighed when he inwardly
exclaimed, "Oh! why did I wish for any other country?"
Lorenzo awaited him in the town with a packet from Santa Cruz. It was
in answer to that which the Tetuan monks had forwarded to Ceuta; and
was written just as the Spanish army was embarking on its return to
Spain. By order of the King, Santa Cruz had made peace with the new
government of the Moors, and was recalled with his whole family, to
rejoin the court at Seville, and attend it to Madrid. But this was
not all the Marquis had to communicate; he inclosed an angry letter
from the Queen, on the subject of Louis having preferred the errors
of heresy to the truths of the Church; and the prejudices of an
absurd education, to the favour of his too indulgent Sovereigns. Her
indignation was so highly incensed against so signal an instance of
folly and ingratitude, that she told Santa Cruz, the delinquent must
no longer consider himself protected by Spanish laws, should he ever
presume to re-enter that country.
"'Tis well!" said Louis to himself; and he turned the page.
Santa Cruz then addressed him as a father, consoling and cheering him
with every argument that could be drawn from an heroic and pious mind.
"You have convinced me," added he, "that the Holy One is no respecter
of persons; that all, of every country and sect, who work the works
of righteousness, are accepted by him. If I can bring you brighter
tidings from my at present inexorable mistress, you shall see me again
in Lindisfarne. Meanwhile, be assured of the parental exertions of
your unalienable friend,
SANTA CRUZ."
A heart-wringing farewell was added by the Marchioness. It was
blotted with her tears; for she, who knew the vindictive personal
arrogance of the Queen, had no hope of her being appeased; and there
were expressions of a wild and mysterious regret in this affecting
postscript, that puzzled Louis to understand; while, once or twice, he
unconsciously sighed when he read the name of Marcella, coupled with
words of maternal lamentation. She was ill, and urging her father to
place her in the convent she had so long resisted.
A letter from Ferdinand seemed to explain this change in her
resolution. "He regretted that his own selfish wishes had ever given
her an idea, that such an immolation could purchase his happiness. He
acknowledged that he now saw his father would not be bribed, even by
her compliance, to grant what he had once refused to the same plea.
Persuasion was the only engine that could be used with any hope; "and,"
he added, "were you to second Marcella's entreaties for me, with your
persuasions I should not fear a refusal. My father holds you in such
esteem, I think he could deny you nothing.
"It was only yesterday, he was nearly drawn into a quarrel on your
account; and, that it did not come to a more serious argument than
dialogue, is, I believe, more owing to his principle against duelling,
than to any deference to his antagonist.
"The affair took place in the Queen's cabinet; where, it seems, a
little junto sits every morning, previous to the council in the King's
presence. About half a dozen old grandees, your father's mortal
enemies,--and, consequently, no friends to his son,--followed up their
observations on the late business in Africa, with certain insinuations
against all of his race. The Queen was already provoked at your
declining the King's conditional re-investiture; and, instigated by the
sly hints of these men, she, in her turn, let drop a few animadversions
on your conduct. This was unleashing the hounds; the cry was up; and,
in five seconds, the poor Marquis de Montemar was torn limb from limb.
He was to be publicly branded as a heretic; deprived of his fortunes
and his name; and the memory of his ancestors erased from the archives
of the Escurial!
"If your Majesty gives but the word to our gracious Sovereign,"
exclaimed the old Duke d'Almeida, "in another hour, the last of that
rebellious race will be reduced to the condition of its long demerits,
and be numbered with the dregs of the people!"
"We have a petition here to the King, to that purpose," hastily
rejoined the Count de Paz. "If Your Majesty would sanction it with your
royal signature!"
Isabella took the pen. Duke Wharton, who was present, but who had
remained all this time in silence, turned haughtily towards de Paz:
"And who are we?" cried he; then, with his usual effrontery, laying
his hand on the paper before the Queen, exclaimed: "This is all
short of the mark! These venerable Lords, in the compassion of their
natures, have refrained from noting to your Majesty, the true offence
of this daring Anglo-Spaniard. They know, that the favour with which
half the princesses of Europe have treated this audacious young man,
has turned his head with vanity. Nothing will now satisfy him, but to
assume a particular deference to the Queen of Spain's commands alone.
He rejects the King's conditions, not because he prefers heresy and
rebellion, but he is ambitious to pay all his duty to his country,
rather as a personal devotion to the royal Isabella, than as a
peremptory obligation to his Sovereign. This wild arrogance must arm
all our hearts against him; I, therefore, petition your Majesty not
to mock your own dignity, by a beggarly stripping him of lands and
parchments, but give him Phaeton's fate at once! Strike him where he
is vulnerable, by banishing him your presence for ever."
The Queen's colour heightened during this speech. She rose proudly
from her chair: "My Lords," said she, "what the Duke of Wharton has
intimated shall have its weight with me. Meanwhile, I will reconsider
the sentence you are to propose to the King, and give you my directions
accordingly."
On my father arriving at the palace, (which was immediately after the
breaking up of the consultation,) the Queen's secretary told him all
that had passed. He was justly irritated at the false representation
Duke Wharton had so malignantly made, of the motives of your conduct;
and accidentally meeting him in his return through the gallery, he
accosted him without ceremony, and with a severe reproof. Wharton
listened to him with a provoking kind of respect; and when my father,
with some heat, had finished his reproaches, the Duke coolly replied:
"I am sorry your Lordship and I should differ on any subject; but
you are too good a Catholic to wish any man to speak against his
conscience!"
"I am too much a man of honour, Duke Wharton, to sanction any man in
speaking otherwise than what is fact. I know the Marquis de Montemar;
and you have no authority for what you said this morning to the Queen."
"Did the Marquis Santa Cruz wear a cowl instead of a helmet," answered
the Duke, "I might possibly make him master of my cabala; but, as it
is, we may part friends, since I am determined not to confess myself
his enemy."
"My father turned indignantly from the gay bow of the Duke, and so they
separated.
"These are bad symptoms for you, dearest Louis," continued the letter
of Ferdinand; "but if any thing can be done to protect your paternal
rights in this country, my father will do it. And, as to my mother, I
believe she thinks of you more than she does of me; but that is because
you deserve it better. Write to me from Gibraltar; and say that you
will gladly welcome to England your friend,
FERDINAND D'OSORIO."
Louis received these packets from Lorenzo, at the house of a Spanish
merchant residing in the town of Gibraltar. The Spaniard was known to
Santa Cruz, and recommended by him, as a person well adapted to assist
in the accomplishment of Louis's views in visiting the rock. He found
the house in a retired part of the town, and preferred such a residence
before the military bustle of the British quarters.
Having read the letters of his Spanish friends, he put them into a
bosom that had long been accustomed so to hide the sorrows of his
heart; and, having seen, the Count de Patinos respectfully attended
to by Lorenzo, and the other captives comfortably disposed under the
care of Martini, he quitted the merchant's house, to seek his first
conference with the British Governor.
He had no occasion for other introduction to General ****, than the
announcement of his name. The gazettes of Ceuta had been daily in
the hands of the British garrison; and the tremendous bombardment of
the Spanish fortress having been seen from the heights of Calpe, its
gallant defence was read with avidity by the generous spectators. The
Marquis de Montemar filled every line in the two last reports; and
General **** rose to receive him, with that respect in his deportment,
which is the brightest meed that veteran glory can bestow on youthful
fame.
While Louis sat with the English Commander, in spite of his late
inattention to objects of trifling import, the furniture and style
of the apartment struck him as what he had not seen since he left
England;--and, he was conscious to an emotion, as if he had drawn at
once near to his home; and even felt the atmosphere of this room,
different from that in the Spanish quarter of the rock.
It was not necessary, in his conversation with the Governor, to pain
himself by any elaborate explanation of his father's rupture with
the Spanish Court, and his fatal engagement with that of Morocco.
The pillars of Hercules were too near to each other, for what
was transacted under the shadow of the one, to be unknown to the
inhabitants at the foot of the other. The Governor of Gibraltar admired
the greatness of the Duke de Ripperda, when his virtues guided the
Spanish helm; and his own virtues did not prevent him pitying the
fallen statesman, when his ill-directed resentment made him dictator to
a horde of barbarians.
Louis pleaded to himself the partial phrenzy of his father's mind,
as some extenuation of his conduct. He learnt from Martini, that the
Duke's passions had always been strong; but, until he received the
wound on his head in the porch of the Jesuits at Vienna, they were
always under his controul. From that perilous hour, his temper became
more irritable; and in every way he shewed himself more vulnerable to
the attack of circumstances. These circumstances at last overwhelmed
him; and, disappointed, insulted, and betrayed, madness contended with
reason in his brain. With just enough of the one, to shew him the
enormity of his retaliation, and of the other to precipitate him into
its commission, he became the desperate victim of revenge; a renegade,
and a slave.
Nought of this passed the lips of Louis to the English general; but
he understood it all, from the report of certain Jews from the coast
of Barbary; and, in conversing with the son of the unhappy Duke, he
delicately implied, that he knew his illustrious father had been led to
his last fatal step, by the false lights of a distempered mind.
"In his latter hours," replied Louis, "that, indeed fatal disorder was
taken away. He was restored to the upright principle of his former
character; and his penitence for the effect of his dereliction, was as
deep, as his injuries were indelible. But, in that hour of terrible
recollections, he forgave all, as he hoped to be forgiven. And I saw
him die in the faith of the church."
Louis spoke this with a steady voice; and a certain dignity elevating
the sadness of his countenance, which convinced his auditor, that the
son of Ripperda felt the honour of his name returned to him, in the
restoration of his father to the religion and pardon of his God.
General **** entered with zeal into the plans which the deceased Duke
had laid down, for the redemption of several hundred Christian slaves
in the interior of the Barbary states. And as the scheme must occupy
much time, and numerous agents, to bring it to effect; Ripperda had
fixed upon Martini, as the negociating person, on the Spanish side of
the lines of San Roque. Certain deposits of treasure for ransoms, were
to be left, both in his hands, and in those of the Governor of the
English fortress, who, from the political relations between it and the
Barbary coast, could be the most efficient agent in the great design.
General **** having heard of the probable sequestration of all the
Ripperda property in Spain, ventured to hint to the despoiled heir,
that there might be an excess of generosity, in at once relinquishing
so vast a sum as that which the munificence of the Duke had allotted to
the cause of charity.
"Had he foreseen the injustice of the Spanish government to his son,"
continued the veteran, "I doubt not he would have bequeathed his
benevolence in a more prudent measure! It therefore becomes you,
Marquis, to make the restrictions common equity suggests."
"No;" replied Louis, "my father's wealth was his own. I have no right,
had I the wish, to lay an appropriating hand on a single ingot. I
am rich, in the task of obeying his commands. And for myself, the
world does not want ways for a man, of few personal wants, to gain an
honourable subsistence."
A few days put every thing in a train for the prosecution of Ripperda's
charitable bequest. The treasure was lodged in the government-house;
and a list of all the yet unredeemed Christian slaves in Barbary, put
into the general's hands. The enfranchised captives, which Louis had
brought with him, were ready at the British lines, on the land-side of
the fortress, to pass into Spain. On taking leave of their benefactor;
he who had so religiously, and with largesses of money besides, obeyed
every tittle of the deceased Duke's will in their behalf; they fell on
their knees before him, and implored for blessings on his life.
"The past has been a vale of sorrows!" sighed he to himself, as he
cheerfully bid them adieu, and gave them blessing for blessing.
Martini was to lead these happy captives to their native land; and
to take up his own residence at the castle of de Montemar, until the
execution of the expected decree against its lord should drive him out
into some humbler abode; where he would still exercise the benevolent
agency, which alone could have persuaded him to separate himself from
the immediate presence of the beloved son of his ever-honoured master.
He wept at parting with Louis, and his brother Lorenzo.
"I am but your servant, my Lord!" said he, "but these are times when
the heart knows no distinctions, but those of attachment. Your noble
father is gone; and you may cut me piece-meal, before I feel his son
otherwise, than bone of my bone, and yet my honoured Lord."
Louis pressed the faithful creature to his heart; and could he have
wept, his tears would have mingled with those of Martini, which bathed
his cheek.
The Count de Patinos was to accompany the returning column. He too was
to take leave of his generous protector. It was beneath his rank to bow
the knee; it was adverse to his nature, to call a benediction on his
head: but he embraced Louis with the ceremonial of his country, while
the extension of his arms was as cold and repelling, as if the mutual
touch transformed benefits to injuries.
As the Count turned away, "Thus," said Louis to himself, "does Spain
and all its interests depart from me!"
Some other thoughts, in which Spain had a share, traversed his mind,
as he slowly took his way through the devious path-ways in the rock,
towards the dwelling of his Spanish host. As he entered it, he felt it
was possible to regret never respiring the atmosphere of Spain again.
The Governor had informed him, that a British frigate would sail for
Portsmouth next day. A passage was eagerly offered to him by the
captain; and after dining with his new friends in the garrison, and
bidding them farewell, on the evening previous to the night he was to
embark, he ascended the summit of the mountain to look round, and to
breathe his last adieu to lands he should never see again.
He was alone, and so distant from the garrison, not a sound came to his
ear, as he pensively mounted steep after steep, till he reached the
old signal-house; at this time, a lone deserted tower on the highest
point of the rock. All was calm within him, in this moment of final
separation from all that had once possessed his whole heart, and been
the utmost bounds of his far-stretching ambition.
The extended and magnificent scenery, which derived a kind of visionary
beauty from the pure and luminous atmosphere in which it was displayed,
seemed to refine the faculties by which it was contemplated, and to
dilate his soul with a tranquil and devotional delight.
"Is it," thought he, "that as man draws near the region of celestial
spirits, he begins to partake their ethereal nature?"
Still some earthly remembrances clung to the spot that horizon
bounded. He looked from side to side. The vast Atlantic, rolling into
the Straits, and ploughed by many a proud frigate, did not hold his
attention long. He turned towards the east, where the Mediterranean
took its milder course, flowing far away, between the hostile shores
of Spain and Africa; till lost in distant Italy, and farther Greece.
The Moorish coast was boldly distinguished by prominent headlands
and towering cliffs. They seemed to stretch to an infinite extent.
And, on the opposite shore, and to the same unlimited horizon, rose
the mountainous regions of Spain, the snow-clad Grenadines, and the
empurpled heights of Antequera. The plains were diversified with towns
and castles; and, immediately beneath him, lay the lines of San Roque.
He gazed on that Spain he was to leave for ever; that Spain, which
held the Marquis Santa Cruz; and her, whose voice he was to hear no
more. But the sounds were still echoing in his heart; in his troubled
dreams, or waking musings, he often heard the same. "I cannot dissuade
the Marquis de Montemar from that, for which I honour him!" He often
heard her say; "Look up, and cherish life; for heaven knows how to
bless, when all the world has failed!" His melancholy eyes ranged over
the abundant vales of Andalusia. That very province of Spain, on which
he was now looking down for the last time, was his own inheritance!
But that was little. He turned to the red line of light which now
tracked the darkening coast of Africa. There stood the rugged cliffs
of Abyla, frowning in mist over the towers he had so lately defended
with his blood. Beyond, lay a dearer spot! The green sod that covered
his father's grave.--There, the dews of night fell; and the wailing of
the blast in the lonely turrets around, were all which hereafter would
supply the place of a son's tears and groans!
"Oh, my father!" cried he, "Thou sleepest alone! Far from thy wife and
child! Far from the country of thy birth, or thy adoption--betrayed,
forgotten, stigmatized!"
While this bitter remembrance envenomed the before resigned state of
his mind, his upward eye was struck with the appearance of an eagle,
as if emerging from the ether; so high was its elevation, as it floated
over him, on vigorous and steady wing. It moved towards the coast of
Barbary. It seemed to hover over the heights of Tetuan:--it descended
for a while; remained stationary in mid air; and then, soaring aloft
like a dart of light, was lost in the heavens.
Louis saw no more. That bird was the crest of his family. Imagination
and grief were busy in his heart. He burst into tears, and slowly
descended the mountain.
CHAP. XVII.
A succession of various weather, at last brought the frigate, which
contained Louis de Montemar, and his faithful Lorenzo, in sight of the
British coast. He was returning to it, after an absence of little more
than two years, "a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief!" In the
morning of his youth, he bore in his bosom the experience of age. But
it was not with a bent spirit, nor a wearied courage.
"I am bruised," said he to himself; "but not broken. I have yet, bonds
of duty to the world, and I will not shrink from my task."
But he felt this inward assurance spring and grow, exactly in
proportion as he drew nearer to the coast where he had imbibed the
first aliments of all that was greatly emulous in his mind; where his
heart had first known the glows of dear domestic tenderness; where, in
short, he first knew a home.
"Since I left it," cried he, "I have never found another!" and, as he
stood on the deck of the vessel, he thought the glittering summits of
the cliff's he descried at a distance, shone on him like the welcoming
smiles of a mother.
He landed. Portsmouth did not detain him long; nor any town, nor
any track he passed over; while the rapid vehicle in which he threw
himself, conveyed him with all the eagerness of his wishes towards
Northumberland.
It was the season of the year when the family of Lindisfarne were
usually removed to Morewick-hall. Though the summer was far advanced,
in the southern climate he had left; in the colder latitudes of England
he found snow on the mountains, and ice in the vallies. The leafless
woods shook their glittering branches in the keen blast, and the heavy
clouds, teeming with a hail-storm, burst, and darkened the road.
Louis would not think of the orange groves, and gales laden with balm
and fragrance, he had so lately left behind; but he did not check the
remembrance, because he regretted the change.
There were memories attached to it, which he wished not to cling too
closely to his heart, when he should first press to his returning
bosom, the venerable form of him, who had blessed him when he last
crossed the top of that hill!--
As soon as the well-known pinnacles of Morewick-hall, appeared over
the woods at the bottom of the valley, he called to the postilion to
proceed slower. He was alone. For he could not approach that house,
with any witness of his emotion. But the man had no sooner obeyed his
directions, and was winding down the hill with a leisurely pace, than
Louis felt the agitation of his mind encreased by the slowness that
permitted recollection to crowd his thoughts with images. He changed
his commands, and the driver set off on the spur towards the gates of
Morewick.
Many an apprehension was in his bosom. Many a wringing reflection. How
had he left that place? How did he return? And what would be the pangs
of meeting, after the wreck of so many hopes!--
He was taking counsel of his manhood, to sustain with firmness the
questions which must summon the shadows, whose torturing substance he
had endured without a receding nerve;--when his carriage entered the
gates of Morewick Park. Lost in self-recollection, it was only by the
jerk of the horses in stopping before the mansion, that Louis knew he
was arrived. The carriage door was opened. In that land of hospitality,
the house-door also stood at large. He sprang from his vehicle into
the hall. Servants were entering it from different avenues; but he
passed through them all, and knew nothing of what he saw or did, till
he found himself at the feet of his revered uncle.
He was clasped in the arms of his aunt; and Alice bathed his hand with
her happy tears.
It was many minutes before a word was spoken. But every heart knew each
other's language, and the folded hands of Mr. Athelstone, as he stood
over his nephew, told to all who looked on him, that his grateful soul
was then at the feet of his God.
The embrace with which Louis strained his aunt to his bosom, recalled
her passing senses to recollection; and, throwing her arms round his
neck, she wept there, almost to suffocation. While the Pastor, with
eyes no less the witnesses of a joy that has not words, assisted his
nephew to bear her to the settee, Louis put the venerable hand to his
lips. The last time he so pressed it, he was possessed of a father whom
he loved and honoured!--That father was now no more; and the pride with
which he then dwelt on his name, was extinguished for ever! He would
not allow the swelling sluices of his heart to give way, or even to
intimate what was labouring there, by pressing that hand to his bosom!
"Dearest Louis!" cried Alice, who was the first to speak;--for her
mother sat on the sofa with her arms still on the neck of her nephew,
and gazing with anguish on his face:--"Dearest Louis!" cried her
daughter, in a voice as plaintive as her mother's looks; "Oh, how you
are changed!"
"Not in heart, Alice!" said he, turning his eyes tenderly upon her.
"Ah! that voice, is still his own!" cried Mrs. Coningsby, throwing
herself upon his bosom, and weeping afresh. "Yes, Catherine;" said the
Pastor, regarding the agitated groupe, with all the tenderness of his
sainted spirit. "A veil has fallen over the lustre of that beauty you
used to prize so much! but it is a veil only; the light of heaven is
still behind it!"
It was not until this day of emotion was quite over; and that both Mrs.
Coningsby and Alice had given their hands to the kneeling obeisance of
Lorenzo, with rather the welcome of kindred than of superiors; and the
calming solitude of night had schooled every heart to the necessity of,
at least, assuming tranquillity, that the little circle at Morewick
could fully feel the happiness of re-union.
Before Louis quitted his chamber next morning, the usual domestic
groupe were assembled in the breakfast room. Mr. Athelstone, with pious
gratitude, remarked to Mrs. Coningsby on the trying circumstances of
his nephew's yet early life; and exulted in the integrity with which
he had passed so fiery an ordeal.
"Yes," returned she, "many begin their contest when he has finished
his. But he has not escaped the marks!" and she shuddered while she
wiped the starting tear from her eye.
"Man's contest," rejoined the Pastor, "is not finished till he grounds
his arms in the grave. That our nephew has so soon commenced his
combat; that he has so bravely resisted what has overcome more veteran
spirits; is a sign that much remains for him to do. The soldiers of
our heavenly captain, are not taught in vain: they must struggle and
conquer until the end; and then they will receive their rest and their
reward!"
"Hitherto," replied Mrs. Coningsby, with almost audible sobs, "his
discipline has been severe indeed! but altered as he is, never did I
behold affliction so dignified. His eyes, in their brightest happiness,
never looked so lovely as last night, in the wordless anguish of his
soul."
"And yet, Catherine, you lament his bloom!"
"No, Mr. Athelstone, it is the cause of its loss, that fills me with
regret."
"But I do;" cried Alice, "I lament the loss of all that was my former
Louis! his light, ethereal step,--his look of radiance,--and his voice
of such soul-entrancing gladness!--But now, his movements are slow; his
cheek is wan and faded; and his voice is so full of pity, I could weep
whenever he speaks."
"Give him time, my child," returned the Pastor; "the hand of recent
sorrow is yet heavy on him. He must yield his tribute to Nature. Suffer
him now, and Nature will reward us with an ample restoration of all his
delighting powers."
Louis's entrance checked the reply of Alice. And now he was welcomed to
the dear domestic breakfast table, with smiles, instead of the tears
which on the foregoing night, lingered in every eye until the hour of
retirement.
During the meal Mr. Athelstone made the conversation cheerful, by
turning it on general subjects, and particularly enlarging on Sir
Anthony's improved manner of life. He had thrown aside all his old,
reprehensible habits, and preferring the occasional society of his
niece Cornelia, (who, in consequence of the gout flying about him, was
now with him at Cheltenham,) his days passed in the equable current of
domestic comfort and social respectability.
While the Pastor pursued this discourse, and Louis listened to him with
evident pleasure, Alice contemplated her cousin's face and figure;
and at last wondered within herself, how she could have thought him
so greatly altered. If any change had taken place in his figure, it
unquestionably was to its advantage. A certain martial dignity was
added to its former pliant grace. It was now a form where every god
had seemed to have set his seal to shape the perfect man;--before,
it was that of a beautiful youth,--the dawn of this checquered, but
resplendent day!
If this were the case, it must then be his black garments, which had at
first struck her with some melancholy idea of a change in his person as
well as face! she scanned that face with equal scrutiny. To her poetic
fancy, his still matchless smile played under the soft moon-light of
his now pensive eyes, like the shadowed, yet scintillating wave of her
native stream.
At the moment this romantic image crossed her mind, she descried a spot
of a deeper hue than the rest, and of the form and tint of a faded
leaf, upon his cheek.
"Dear Louis!" said she, pressing affectionately to his side, and
putting her finger on the place; "what mark is that?--It was not there
when you left us?"
All her cousin's wonted bloom suffused that pale cheek, and obliterated
the mark, as she uttered the question. It was the remains of the wound
he had received there, in defending the life of Don Ferdinand.
"Do not enquire of all things, sweet Alice!" returned he, as he pressed
her hand to his lips.
But he said it with an accent and a look so fraught with tenderness,
and a something implied besides, that Ferdinand immediately occurred
to her mind, though she knew not why, and casting down her eyes with a
blush; she again thought within herself:--
"How could I think that Louis was altered?"
Before the expiration of a week, he had communicated to the different
members of the little circle, all that respectively most interested
each. But it was only when alone with his revered uncle, that he laid
open the undisguised history of all that had befallen him in his
father's calamities and his own; the undisguised confession of his
trials, his disappointments, and the present unnatural torpor of his
soul.
The Pastor, with the gentleness of affection, and a knowledge that knew
when to probe, to render the cure more radical, entered on all these
discussions with wisdom and truth. He shewed Louis how mistaken had
been his early conceptions of human nature; how idolatrous had been his
estimation of beings, formed of the same dust and ashes as himself.
"I told you this from the first, my child!" said he; "and though your
lips accorded, your spirit would not believe. But it is the error of
most of us. We garnish finite man with the perfections of the infinite
God. We fall down and worship the image we have made. We pray to it,
we rest on it. But we soon find our trust is in a piece of clay. It
has ears, and hears not; eyes, and sees not; and hands that cannot
help!--Yes, Louis, all earthly idols are little more than blocks of
wood; which might have been secure staves to hold us on our way; but
when elevated to shrines, we find them things of naught. Now, my
son, if we view all that are born of woman as erring creatures like
ourselves; and accordingly love and assist, pardon and sustain them; we
shall support, and be supported, through this travelling pilgrimage,
till we at last lay down our heads in the grave, at peace with all
mankind. But, on the reverse, when we look for perfection, and meet
error, we are shocked; we resent and abhor; we do not forgive, we will
not excuse; and they become our enemies from despair, whom the tender
charities of a Christian spirit might have preserved as friends, and in
time, persuaded to the hope of unerring purity!"
Louis acknowledged the truth of these observations. He had erred under
them all, excepting that, of not knowing how to pardon; and there,
his heart bore witness to itself, that he could forgive the hand that
stabbed him.
"Yes, Sir;" replied he, "I know that in striving after excellence; to
bear, and to forbear, is the duty of men on earth. Perfect virtue will
be his happiness in Heaven."
"You sigh, very heavily, my dear Louis;" replied Mr. Athelstone, "while
you acknowledge this!--But so right a judgement at so early an age, is
cheaply purchased by the sweet uses of adversity!--you know I told
you, in my first letter on the beginning of your misfortunes; that, may
be you were only entered into a cloud, which would shed forth a gentle
shower to refresh your virtues--and the event has proved it." "But not
with gentle showers!" replied Louis with a smile of anguish.
"No, my child," answered the Pastor, tenderly regarding him; "but had
you not required it, they would not have been so heavy."
"I believe it, Sir!" replied Louis rising from his chair, "I was proud,
and I was ambitious. The world reigned in my heart, when you thought it
possessed by a better principle. I was ignorant of my own state, till
I was made to see my own likeness in a mirror--But we will not speak
further on it!" cried he, interrupting himself,--"It is over,--quite
over;--buried deep, deep--beneath the walls of Tetuan!"
Louis had touched a string that made every chord in his heart vibrate;
and, he quitted the venerable presence, to recover composure in the
recollections of solitude.
CHAP. XVIII.
The letters from Morewick, which announced to Sir Anthony Athelstone,
the return of his nephew, found the Baronet at Cheltenham, just
recovering from a fit of the gout. He was seated in his great-arm
chair, and Cornelia reading by his footstool, when the tidings were
brought in. Under these circumstances, for either to set out on an
immediate journey northward, was impossible; but the raptures of both
were not less eloquent; and was expressed with boisterous joy, by the
one; and the mild transport of perfect happiness, from the lips of the
other.
Sir Anthony wrote to Morewick, that his physicians would allow him to
set forward in a very short time; when six horses should bring him
with all speed to the banks of the Coquet. But this permission was not
granted so soon as he expected; and, when it was accorded, the haste
he made in travelling was so hostile to his convalescent state, that,
within a stage of his own place of Athelstone-manor, he was seized with
a relapse. Cornelia got him to the house, but no farther; the gout had
now made prisoners of both feet; and he was laid upon his couch, for,
perhaps a month to come, when she wrote to her cousin to tell him of
this prevention to their progress.
The anticipated answer to this information was not disappointed. Louis
set out for Athelstone. His reception there, was like that of the lost
sheep being found; or the prodigal son, returned from his hopeless
wanderings. The fatted calf was killed; and all the costly apparel
brought forth, by the tenantry to honour the re-appearance of their
master's future heir. Sir Anthony fell on his neck; and the happy
Cornelia, standing bright in her beauty, like the palladian goddess
her form and character resembled, looked on him with a sister's love
beaming through her tears.
Time flew in this dear domestic circle. Louis and Cornelia successively
read, and conversed; and amused the good-humoured invalid, in every
possible way. And what was less agreeable to the cousins, the
neighbouring gentry were curious to renew their acquaintance with
the young and always animating de Montemar; but who was now returned
amongst them, a politician and a soldier. Some enjoyed his society,
with the zest of highly intelligent minds. Others gathered from his
observations, information and pleasure; while the rest (and some of
the older sort,) listened, and questioned; and marvelled with an
absurd wonder, at such extraordinary knowledge in a man not yet
four-and-twenty.
During his first visit to Athelstone, which was lengthened to more than
a month, he received letters from Spain, from Martini and Ferdinand.
The former told him, that he was still an unmolested occupier of the
castle on the Guadalquivir. There was but one sentiment along its
banks, with regard to him: lamentation for Ripperda, whom they still
designated under the title of the Great Duke, while they accused the
present ministry of Spain, of having forced him into rebellion. His
dying in the arms of the church was a sufficient propitiation, in their
eyes, for his short defection. But that was not enough for their love;
and masses were daily said throughout Andalusia for the repose of his
soul.
Martini's duty of charity proceeded in a manner equally grateful to
the son of Ripperda. General ****, in Gibraltar, and Ismail Cheriff
in Barbary, continued zealous coadjutors in the good work; and
many slaves were ransomed, who had since arrived in Spain, full of
thanksgiving to the hands which gave them freedom.
Ferdinand's letter was of a less agreeable complexion. An air of
restraint pervaded its communications; which induced Louis to believe
that his friend did not wish to let him see the whole hostility of the
Spanish court against his father's fame, and his own claims on the
country. He wrote of armaments by sea and land. This could no longer
excite its former interest in the mind of his correspondent. He added
there were great schisms in the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Queen; but
there was one head acknowledged infallible by all parties, and that
was Duke Wharton. He rode the government, as Jupiter did his cloud;
and in the same invisible manner shot his thunderbolts; every body
knowing whence the shaft came, but nobody daring to mention the name
that launched it. However, he was lately gone to Paris, to meet the
Electress of Bavaria.
"I would, I might never read of him, or hear of him again!" exclaimed
Louis, as he turned to the pages, which spoke of the Marquis Santa
Cruz's journey into Italy, for the benefit of Marcella's health.
"She has never recovered her close attendance on the two wounded
cavaliers at Ceuta," continued Ferdinand, "The life of so worthless a
being as I am, may have been dearly purchased; but I will not say the
same of my friend! However, Marcella will not own to this cause of her
illness. She rather believes it to be a punishment laid on her, for her
long resistance to the wishes of my father, for her entire seclusion
from the world. This idea has fastened on her; and now all her
petitions are to be fixed with our aunt, the abbess of the Ursalines."
Louis closed the letter at this passage. The form of Marcella was
then before him. She whose bloom of health, he was too sensible had
in part been sacrificed for him! He recalled her as she used to sit,
evening after evening, by his apparently unobserving side, in that sad
chamber of suffering at Ceuta. In those hours, the bright moon of that
clear atmosphere, shining through the solitary window, fell direct on
her face. It was pale from watching; but her eyes were often fixed on
the orb; and the expression of her countenance, ever reminded him of
Milton's lines:
"So dear to Heaven is saintly charity!
That when a soul is found sincerely pure
A thousand liveried angels lacquey her;
Tell her of things, that no gross ear can hear;
Till oft converse with heavenly habitants,
Begin to cast a beam on th' outward shape,
The unpolluted temple of the mind,
And turn it by degrees to the soul's essence,
Till all be made immortal!"
When he used to repeat these lines to himself in her presence, and
gazing upon that form, which already appeared half angel; he did not
sigh when they closed with the remembrance of the vow, urged on her by
her father. Why then did separation make a change? Why did her image
haunt him? Why did his heart feel as if it had received another death
stroke, when he read it was now her own repeated wish, to retire into
the convent of the Ursalines?
His bosom's deepest grief whispered the solution to this mystery. While
his father lived in exile, he was conscious to no feeling that did not
point at him. That absorbing interest gone, the repressed sympathies
of his heart streamed towards their attraction; and he found that he
loved, and had most inexplicably dared to hope! But this letter of
Ferdinand's extinguished the vain chimera. He was made sensible that
the object of his tenderest thoughts, had never been more to him than a
Sister of Mercy; that her unconscious eyes had never looked a dearer
language; that she was now passing from him, by her own wish for ever!
"Then be it so!" said he, striking his breast; "I deserve this new
misery, for my most extravagant presumption."
A few weeks after the receipt of these letters, Sir Anthony Athelstone
was so completely recovered, as to meditate the transfer of himself and
family to Bamborough. Mr. Athelstone's little household had been some
time removed to Lindisfarne; and the prospect of the whole party being
reunited under the venerable roof, was impatiently anticipated by them
all. But the Baronet being one in the domestic circle of the Pastorage,
was to be yet further postponed. The King had died the beginning of
the month; and Sir Anthony was suddenly summoned to town, by order of
his successor George the Second, to receive His Majesty's commands
respecting the civil management of his northern counties. Other great
land-holders, north of the Humber, had received the same writ; and
without demur, the Baronet set forward with his nearest neighbour, to
obey the summons of their new King.
Louis and Cornelia had their uncle's permission to proceed immediately
to Bamborough; and either invite the family of the Pastorage to be
their guests till his return, or if they preferred it cross over and
take up their temporary abode at Lindisfarne.
It was a fine morning in the month of June, when they set off from
Athelstone manor. Lorenzo, who would never lose sight of his master,
rode by the side of the carriage. The usual out-riders kept their
stations before and behind.
The cousins being together alone for so many hours, various subjects
passed in review before them; and none of deeper interest, than the
mutual attachment of Ferdinand and Alice.
"I wish," continued Cornelia, "that my sister could have pitied,
without loving him." "But is it not natural to love what we pity?"
"Not always," replied she; "we must admire, to love."
"And may we not admire what we pity?" inquired Louis, the secret of
whose heart was prompting these questions.
"In some cases," returned Cornelia; "but surely not in Alice's, when
she first knew Don Ferdinand. She saw by his manner, that he was
a man whose conscience was ill at ease; and how she could fix her
pure affections on one his father acknowledged to have been very
blame-worthy, has ever been an inexplicable wonder to me."
"But his melancholy was contrition for his offences, Cornelia," replied
her cousin; "and Alice, admiring the principle, on your own argument,
loved him."
"It may be so!" replied she, with a smile. "But were I to chuse, it
should be an unsullied tablet!"
Louis shook his head. "Then, my sweet cousin, you must go to heaven
for it!"
Cornelia shook her head in return.
"You are an amiable sceptic, my Cornelia; and, Heaven grant that time
may not be the teacher to you, that it has been to me!"
"Louis," answered she, with a tender seriousness; "will you not be
offended if I make a candid reply to that invocation?"
"Nothing that you would say can offend me."
"Then," replied she, "had you not deserted your youthful standard of
female perfection--" She paused, and feared to go on. Louis completed
the sentence.
"You would say, I should not have been disappointed in the Countess
Altheim!"--A heightened colour was on his cheek as he spoke.
"Forgive me!" cried his cousin; "I was indelicate and cruel in making
the reference." "Not cruel," returned he; "for she is no more to me
than the recollection of a hideous dream. My imagination, not my heart,
was the victim of her delusions."
"Ah, Louis!" cried Cornelia, again forgetting herself in the
earnestness of her remarks; "It was something like your infatuation
for Duke Wharton. My uncle always called him a splendid mischief; and,
happily, the outlawry against him has banished him this country for
ever. But you have long been convinced of his worthlessness; and, I
thank Heaven for your second escape from similar delusions!"
Louis did not answer, but gratefully put his cousin's hand to his lips.
She resumed.
"Indeed, when you wrote of her to my uncle, and under your best
impressions too you dwelt so much on her beauty and accomplishments
only, and her preference for you, that we could no way make ourselves
esteem her, or believe her capable of making you finally happy. Dare I
venture to go on, Louis?"
"Yes; you are a gentle physician!" replied he, with a forced smile;
"and man's vanity needs a probe!"
"Now, the Lady Marcella!" continued Cornelia. Louis prevented himself
from starting. "You wrote little of her, and you have said less;
but it was always of her virtues; and in such few words, we saw her
fairer, than the proud beauty of Vienna." Again Cornelia paused, and
looked on her cousin, whose face was now bent on his hand. She rather
hesitatingly proceeded. "We wished and thought, that had it not been
for the vow anticipated by Ferdinand, you might have found her nearer
to your first ideas of female excellence, and repaid her goodness to
you with your love."
Louis did not speak, but still kept his head in its reclining position.
She saw the struggle of a suppressed sigh, which would have been a
sufficient response; and, grieved at the pain she had unconsciously
excited, she tenderly pressed his hand.
"Louis," said she, in a tremulous voice, "could I have conjectured
this--But I begin to think I have a very inhuman heart!" and the tears
sprung to her eyes as she spoke.
"Not so;" replied he, looking up with a serene, though sad,
countenance; "it has all of human softness, without its weakness. And,
that I may emulate you, my Cornelia, there are some subjects I would
rather avoid."
Cornelia did not answer this, nor ask another question: it declared
itself. And turning to the other side of the carriage, while she gently
pressed his hand, affected to gaze out of the window; but it was to
allow her tears to flow unnoticed down her cheeks. Though she had never
known the passion whose struggles she pitied, she loved the sufferer,
dear as a brother; and, at that moment, would have surrendered her
own blameless life, if, by that means, she could have purchased the
happiness of Louis with the angelic Marcella.
CHAP. XIX.
During these conferences, the day gradually declined into red billowy
clouds, till the whole heavens were overcast; and the pregnant vapour
hung on every hill. A chill, unnatural to the season of the year,
pervaded the air, while at times, a steam of sulphureous vapour
descended from the sky, and rendered the atmosphere hot to suffocation.
With the gathering clouds the evening soon deepened into night; and, in
the midst of a succession of wide moors, this fearful canopy developed
itself to the travellers, in all the horrors of a tempest. It was
profoundly dark, though the hour could not be much beyond the time of
twilight. But the violence of all the seasons, seemed accumulated in
this tremendous storm. Thunder and lightning, sleet and rain, and
furious hurricanes of wind, menaced the travellers in every blast. The
postilions lost their way. Sometimes plunging into plashes of water; at
other times, struggling in a morass; but, at every step encountering
some new obstacle, and some new danger.
Several hours passed in this dreadful wandering over the dreary fells;
and the yawning coal-pits which were scattered over their bosom, were
not the least objects of fear to the bewildered drivers.
Louis became alarmed for the health, as well as the immediate personal
safety of his cousin; for owing to the frequent narrow escapes of the
carriage, from over-turning in the difficult and trackless road, he
let the windows down, for fear of the glass injuring her, in case of
an accident. He drew up the blinds in their stead; but, from their
construction, little of the outward weather could be excluded; and the
whole weight of the storm drove in upon her, till she was wet through.
He had covered her with his coat; but all could not shield her from
the deluge and piercing blast of that furious night. She shivered,
and shrunk close into the corner of the carriage, in spite of her
resolution not to distress him, by shewing herself affected by what was
hopeless of remedy till the morning light should shew them where they
were.
In the midst of this compulsory resignation, the carriage made a
violent rebound, and stuck fast in the mud behind, while the horses
plunged and reared with such strength, as to threaten its instant
over-turn in the morass.
Lorenzo dismounted, and throwing open the door, Louis leaped out, and
taking Cornelia in his arms, who was almost fainting from exhaustion,
he carried her out of the reach of the wheels and refractory horses.
One of the servants approached him at the moment, and told him the
accident was occasioned by the breast of one of the leaders striking
against the angle of a stone-hovel. It was a miserable, uninhabited
shed; but might give some shelter to Miss Coningsby, till they saw what
could be done with the carriage.
Revived at hearing of any refuge from the fury of the elements,
Cornelia exerted herself to obey the suggestions of the servant;
and Louis, equally glad of so providential a shelter, supported her
tottering steps through the muddy ground. The hovel appeared of
considerable extent, from the length of wall they had to grope along,
before they reached the entrance, for door it had none. Louis bent
under the low rafter, and leading Cornelia in, found his way obstructed
by heaps of dried turf. On one of these heaps, she proposed seating
herself, till her cousin had enquired after the injury of the horse,
and given his judgment on what was best to be done for the extrication
of the carriage.
Louis knew her too well, to fear that solitude and darkness alone could
create any alarm in her mind; and, having seen her harassed spirits a
little revived by the comparative security of the place, he had just
consented to quit her for a short time, when Lorenzo re-entered with a
glimmering lamp he had rescued from the carriage. All the others had
been extinguished in succession, by the storm; and this was following
their fate, when the prompt Italian seized it from its hook, and
brought it in to light a few turfs, and warm Cornelia.
She took it, and dismissing her cousin and Lorenzo to their exertions
without, with her own unpractised hands, she gathered some of the
moor-fuel into a distant corner from the rest, and soon spread a
cheering light and glow through the dreary habitation. Lorenzo ran in
with a flask of oil from one of the postillions' pockets, to replenish
her lamp; and he answered her anxious enquiries, by saying, that the
wounded horse was loosened from the harness, and his master was then
examining the injury. After this information, he left her.
While the group without, were raising the carriage from the bog
into which it appeared to sink the deeper after every attempt at
extrication, Cornelia sat, anxiously attending to their alternate
voices of hope, and the disappointing plunges of the vehicle into the
treacherous soil. In the midst of this solicitude, she thought she
heard sounds of another import; and listening, found they were repeated
low and heavily, as from one in a dying extremity. She turned her head
in the direction whence they came; and, as she held her breath to hear
more distinctly, the moans became louder, and drew her eye to a narrow
door-way in the side of the intermediate mud-wall, at some distance
from where she sat.--Without once considering there might be danger
to herself, in exposing herself alone to the human being, or beings,
she might find there, she thought only of succouring the distress
those sounds indicated; and taking up her lamp, made her way over the
scattered turf, to the miserable half-shut door.
It let her into a part of the hovel, even more dismal than the one
she had left; for here was the confusion and stench of old worm-eaten
sheep-skins; broken tar-tubs; and other implements of the shepherd's
life, lying about in rust and disorder. In the middle of the apartment,
something dark was spread on the floor. From that wretched bed the
moans proceeded. Probably the poor tenant of this lonely sheep-cote,
lay perishing there, under the toil of his occupation; without the
support of necessary nourishment, or the comfort of a companion to
soothe him in the last moments of over-tasked nature! She stepped
gently towards the object of her pity. As she drew near, she saw the
bed was a heap of these dingy fleeces, half covered with a cloak, on
which lay the suffering person.
Cornelia bent over it; and holding the lamp, so as to distinguish what
was beneath, beheld, not the squallid shape of poverty and comfortless
old age, but a man in the garb of a gentleman, and with one of the
noblest forms that ever met her sight. His dress was disordered, and
clotted with the slime of the morass; but his figure, whose contour
she thought she had never seen equalled, needed no embellishment to
shew its consummate elegance, though now motionless in the torpor of
approaching death.
Cornelia's astonishment was not so great as to supersede the active
exercise of the benevolence which brought her to his side. She bent
down, and placing the lamp on the ground, with her trembling hands
attempted to turn the face of the dying person, from the stifling wool
in which it was now sunk. When she had accomplished what she wished,
her pitying admiration was not less attracted to that face, than it
had been to the figure of the unhappy sufferer. It was as pale and
motionless as marble; and as perfect in every line of manly lineament,
as the finest statue that ever lay under the chizel of the sculptor. A
majesty, almost more than human, was stampt in the brow, on which her
eyes were rivetted.
A deep groan broke the fixture of his lips. It was that of pain; and
she took up the lamp, to see if she could find its immediate cause. She
then saw that where his waistcoat was open, the linen on his breast
was stained and stiff with blood. His before tranquil features, which
had appeared fixed in death, were agitated by an evident sense of
acute suffering. She put her hand upon that part of his linen, where
the blood-stain was the widest, and in the act, she thought she felt
a gaping wound. He shrunk under the touch, and convulsively opened
his eyes. They were shut as suddenly, and in a low voice, he hardly
articulated--
"Where am I?"
"In a wretched place," replied Cornelia, "but with those who only wait
the morning light to bear you to one of comfort."
On the first sounds of her voice, the sufferer appeared to struggle to
bear the light with his eyes; but it was beyond their power. He tried
to speak:--
"If I live--" said he. But a sudden agony rushing through his frame,
arrested the rest; and turning his face again upon the dark pillow,
Cornelia thought that moment was his last.
She clasped her hands, in the wordless sympathy of human nature. She
was then brought through the horrors of the still raging tempest, at
that dismal hour of night, to this lonely hovel, to close the eyes of
a forlorn stranger!--To perform the last offices to the beloved son or
husband of some tender mother or doating wife, who must "long look for
him who never would return!"
"Louis, Louis!" cried she, in the piteous accents of one calling for an
assistance they needed, but despaired of its bringing help. Louis heard
the cry, and the tone struck him with an alarm that instantly brought
him into the hovel. Lorenzo followed his master, and both rushed
through the chamber in which she was not to be found, into the one
whence the light gleamed. She pointed, without being able to speak, to
the heap on the floor. Seeing her so overcome, instead of approaching
it, Louis put his arm round her waist to support her. Lorenzo stepped
towards the wretched bed, and the rays of the lamp resting upon the
marks of blood, he started back, and exclaimed:--
"Santa Maria!--A murdered man!"
Cornelia gasped at this enunciation of his actual death; and Louis,
while he held her faster to his heart, instinctively moved towards the
terrific object. Her feet readily obeyed the humane impulse of his; and
sliding down on her knee by the side of the motionless stranger, she
ventured to put her hand on his, expecting to feel the chill of death.
"He is warm!" cried she, looking up in the face of her cousin. He had
caught a glimpse of the figure as it lay, and she saw him pale and
trembling, while putting away Lorenzo, who leaned over to assist in
raising the dying man, he approached close to the bed. He bent to the
head that was smothered up in the wool, and touching it with an emotion
in his soul he had only felt once before, he turned that lifeless face
upwards. He did not gaze on it a moment. His nerveless hands let go
their hold, and it would have fallen back into its loathsome pillow,
had not the watchful care of Cornelia caught it on her arm.
"My God! my God!" exclaimed he, as recoiling from the bed, he hid his
face in his hands; "to what am I reserved?"
Cornelia did not move from her position, but her eyes were now fixed
on her cousin. The emotions of his mind shook his frame to convulsion,
though he gave no second utterance to his thoughts.
"Who was it then, whose deathful face now lay on her arm?" She had
seen, by her cousin's countenance, on the first view of the sufferer,
that he knew him; and she now contemplated the silent agonies of a
more than common grief!--Her hand instinctively moved to the heart of
the stranger. "Lorenzo," said she, in a low voice; as if alike afraid
to wake the dead, or to disturb the living; "feel! surely there is a
pulse!"
Lorenzo obeyed her; but not so gently as her tender touch; and pressing
likewise heavily on the body, as he leaned over to examine, the
sufferer started in Cornelia's arms, and murmured a few inarticulate
sounds. Louis heard them, as a voice from the dead; and springing
forward, was again at his side.
"He is wounded, but he lives, Cornelia!" cried he, "we must search his
wounds, and he may yet be saved!"
"Who is he?" asked Cornelia, in a tone that echoed the deep interest of
his own.
"He is my friend," answered Louis. But he checked himself from saying
more, for his heart smote him with the true response: "my bitterest
enemy!"
Heavy groans succeeded the few halfuttered sounds from the lips of
Wharton; for it was he that Louis recognized in this lone abode of
ruffianly murder; and finding that as he and Lorenzo attempted to raise
him, the symptoms of pain were always most acute when he appeared to
press on the left shoulder; Louis concluded that on that spot was the
principal injury. Though the sufferer was evidently sensible to bodily
anguish, his other faculties were too confused to shew any perception
of what was now passing around him.
On examining farther, which his anxious attendants did with the
tenderest care, they found his shoulder dislocated, and a frightful
wound in his breast, made by some jagged instrument. The blood was
staunched over it by the cold of the night. Louis had no sooner removed
the stiffened linen, and a broad blue ribbon, part of which had been
stabbed into the wound, than the blood began to flow afresh. Cornelia
shuddered as the pure crimson trickled over the hand of her cousin. He
shuddered also, but it was from a different reflection. She gave him a
cambrick handkerchief from her neck, to well up what she feared might
be the last effort of life. The heart's surgery was then in the hands
of Louis; and by the time he had bound up the wound, and composed the
shoulder, so as to produce the least possible pain until he could reach
proper assistance, a servant came in from without, to say the carriage
was brought into a tolerable state for proceeding.
On Lorenzo going out to examine, he saw the information was correct;
and returning, told his master the extreme violence of the storm having
subsided, one of the out-riders had found his way back with tidings of
a secure track. Another had been yet more successful, having brought a
herdsman, whose cottage he had lit upon; and arousing him, by a promise
of reward, had engaged him to guide the carriage over the waste into
the direct northern road.
On inquiry of this man, Louis found they were now in the midst of
Wansbeck Moor, a terrible wilderness of bituminous slime, exhausted
coal-pits, and pasture land, so marshy, that it was rather poison than
aliment to the cattle which were so miserably provided, as to be turned
on it to graze. But as it possessed a few causeways of firmer texture,
which the wretched herdsmen had raised for their own convenience, such
tracks were sometimes temptations to less practised travellers to use
as cross roads; and often, as might be expected, led them astray, or
into no very insignificant nightly perils. This had been the temptation
and the issue to the postilions of de Montemar's travelling equipage.
When all was prepared in the coach, the wounded Duke was carried into
it between Louis and Lorenzo. None knew who he was, but the bleeding
heart of him who had once been his friend. At the unavoidable changes
of position, his sufferings became so grievous, that every sound went
to the soul of Cornelia; who now felt both for the invalid and her
cousin, whose interest in his recovery, she saw, not in words, but in
the pale cheek and searching eye with which he composed every thing
that could yield him ease.
In her discourses with Louis concerning Germany and Spain, she had
heard him speak of estimable persons in both countries; but who of them
all, was now before her, she could form no conjecture; for though he
spoke of several, with considerable regard, yet he had not given her to
understand that he had conceived a friendship for any one of them, so
exclusive as that which was now manifested in his silent but ceaseless
attentions to the noble stranger. That he was noble in other respects,
besides the stamp of nature, was apparent to her, from the ribbon of
some order which hung on his breast under his linen. There was a badge
suspended to it, which Louis concealed the moment he had extricated the
ribbon, by rolling them up, and putting them, without an observation,
into his own bosom.
The travellers were now in the carriage, and the rain having ceased,
the wind that remained did the service of dispersing the clouds, so
that the moon sometimes appeared, and Louis had the hope of reaching
Morewick soon after sun-rise. The dell in the Moor, from which they
started, was not more than three hours journey to Warkworth; a
little town, about two miles from the hall; and he gave orders, that
in passing through it, a surgeon should be called up to follow the
carriage to Morewick.
As they journeyed forward with the stranger's head in the lap of
Cornelia, and Louis supporting his shoulder on his knees; her cousin
told her, in a suppressed tone, that it was necessary for a time,
the invalid should remain in ignorance that he was at Morewick-hall,
and who were his present attendants. "Therefore," continued he, "your
Christian charity must take charge of his comforts; and as you love
my peace, neither ask his name, not let him hear that of Louis de
Montemar!"
"Not ask his name!" repeated Cornelia, looking down upon the deathly
face on her lap; "what has he done to be ashamed of it?"
Louis turned almost of the same ashy hue: "do men never seek
concealment but from infamy?"
"I would not think so ill of any man you could love;" replied she, "and
certainly not of this;" her eye again falling on the finely composed
features before her; "for here the finger of heaven seems to have
written true nobleness."
"Cornelia;" returned he, "when we obey the commands of Him who told of
the Samaritan binding up the wounds of the stranger, and bade us do
likewise; he did not say, inquire of his virtues first; but behold his
misery, and relieve it!"
There was an air of reproof in this remark; a something of asperity,
that Cornelia could not understand; and instead of its raising doubts
in her mind relative to the character of the stranger, she cast down
her eyes in silence, to conjecture what she had done to merit such
unusual harshness from the unerring candour of her beloved cousin. The
features her meditating gaze dwelt on, were to her an unimpeachable
witness of good within. But what would she have felt, could she have
been told at that moment, that the object of Louis's distracted
thoughts, and her own then unqualified pity and admiration, was the
delusive, treacherous, and out-lawed Duke Wharton!
CHAP. XX.
On the travellers' arrival at Morewick, the orders of its present
temporary master were strictly obeyed. Duke Wharton was laid in an
airy, but remote chamber; and a surgeon, with every proper assistant,
in attendance day and night. The Duke's shoulder was set, and his wound
probed. The danger of the latter arose rather from the nature of the
weapon by which it was inflicted, than from its depth or direction; but
his life hung on the termination of a fever, which, though it did not
at first amount to absolute delirium, was continually hovering on its
verge.
For swine time he remained in a strange dreamy sort of inanity,
which threatened his wound with mortification. But no watching nor
hopelessness, could weary the cares of Cornelia. And though she
was not the only attendant on his comforts, in his most trance-like
distractions, he had yet perception enough to appreciate the tenderness
of her hand, when it placed his pillows; and the gentleness of her
voice prevailed, when no other could induce him to obey the orders of
his medical attendants.
Louis also hovered near; and the medicines passed through his hand
to that of Cornelia, when the burning lip of Wharton turned from all
other persuasions. As the fever gained ground, his delirium became
absolute. Yet it was never violent, but rather uttered itself in low
and half articulate murmurs. In its fits, he often muttered the names
of de Montemar and Ripperda. When she first heard the latter, her eye
instinctively turned upon her cousin, who sat behind the bed curtain;
and such an expression of horror was then in his countenance, that it
struck her with a nameless terror of some past or coming evil. Louis
soon after quitted the room, and he did not return any more that day.
The next morning brought him intelligence that surprised, and increased
the present agitated state of his mind. There was pleasure in it; but
the accompanying circumstances were of such mingled nature, he could
hardly trust his heart to say, "I am glad!"
This surprise was a letter from the Marquis Santa Cruz, dated from
Harwich. It requested Louis to join him there without loss of time, to
be the conductor of the Marchioness and Lady Marcella to the hospitable
shores of Lindisfarne. The Marquis had a particular mission to the
Spanish Embassador in London; therefore, could not himself proceed so
far northward as the Holy Island, before he had seen that minister.
Besides, his daughter's fatigues, from a very boisterous voyage, made
his stay at Harwich a little excusable; and there he would remain
until his friend should arrive, and relieve him of the care of the two
dearest objects of his anxiety, his wife and her invalid child.
On Louis turning to the date of this letter, he found it had been
written several days, and must have been unduly delayed in its
progress. No time, therefore was to be lost in welcoming his best
friends; and, above all, the friends of his father's memory, to the
land which, he trusted, was now to be his undisturbed home. And, having
dispatched a messenger to prepare his uncle at Lindisfarne for his
speedy arrival with the illustrious Spaniards, before he communicated
to Cornelia the necessity for his temporary absence, he begged an
audience of the Duke's surgeon.
This gentleman answered his agitated inquiry with more truth than
sympathy.
"Sir," said he, "if a material change does not take place in the course
of eight and forty hours, he will not be alive the day after!"
"Then I must not hope to see him again, should I be absent three days."
"I fear not," replied the surgeon.
Louis left the room.
He passed along the silent galleries, for it was now a very late hour,
to the chamber of his friend.
"Wharton!" cried he, as he stood alone by the side of the Duke's couch,
and gazed, as he thought, for the last time on his face; "Is it thus we
are to part?" He took the inanimate hand; and, wringing it between his,
held it there for a long time in the agony of his mind.
"O blighted affection! Tenderness mourning that man is frail! Here
stand, and feel that thine is the canker worm that eats into the heart!"
The unconscious violence with which Louis clasped the hand of him he
once loved and trusted, roused the dormant faculties of Wharton to
some perception. His eye opened; but it turned vacantly and without
recognition on the anguished face of his friend; and, heavily sighing,
he fell back on the pillow.
"Here, vanity of man, and pride of intellect, behold thyself!" cried
the inward soul of Louis, smiting his breast. "Here is all that woman
ever admired, or that man envied! All that betrayed him to dishonour!
All that bound me to deplore him, and to love him to the end!
Wharton,--farewell!"
Louis could not utter a dearer appellative, than the low breathing
of that ever-beloved name; and, with a death-chill at his heart, he
pressed the unconscious hand to his lips, and rushed from the room.
Cornelia met him in the anti-chamber. She observed his extraordinary
agitation; and, without a preface, which he had not sufficient
self-command even to attempt, he informed her of his summons to the
south-east coast, and of the probable event before his return.
"Cornelia," said he, "to what a scene may I leave you! But should the
last extremity come,--should he then be sensible, and he chance to name
me,--tell him under whose roof he dies,--and he will then know he may
die in peace!"
"Louis," returned she, "you do indeed leave me to an awful task! I
cannot regard one you appear to love so much, with a common compassion.
Trust me, and tell me who he is?"
"I dare not.--On his life, short as it may be, I dare not," repeated
her cousin. "Too soon it may be revealed, and then you will respect
my reasons. And, for his knowledge of where he is; only in the case
of his naming me, with the anguish that is now wringing my heart for
him,--only, in that case, say, his last friend was Louis de Montemar!"
"Your emotions are terrible!" cried Cornelia, clinging to her cousin's
arm; "What do you leave me to suppose, by such inscrutable mystery?
Oh, Louis, except when speaking of your father, I never saw you shaken
thus!"
"On your bosom's peace, my sweet Cornelia!" replied he, "inquire no
further. Should he be no more, preserve the sacred remains till I
return. They at least, shall sleep with my ancestors.--There is no
enmity in the grave."
The morning after that of Louis's departure for Harwich, the Duke awoke
to a perfect perception of his state, his wounds, and his danger.
He remembered every event which had brought him into that perilous
condition. His secret missions from the Kings of Spain and of France,
to examine into the aptness of the public mind in Scotland, and in the
border counties of England, to receive a foreign army, headed by the
exiled prince. To do this unsuspected, and to avoid the forfeiture
of his head, should he be found in England after his attainder, he
disguised himself as a German merchant at Hamburgh, where he engaged
two resolute men of the country to be his servants. They served the
seeming trader with sufficient fidelity during his Scottish progress.
He came southward; and now he had to recall what terminated his first
day's journey. He recollected being thrown from his restive horse in
the storm and darkness of Wansbeck Fells; also, that the accident
dislocated his shoulder; and that his two servants, by his own orders,
had taken him into the hovel, whose sudden discovery in the lightning,
had frightened his horse.--In attempting to set the dislocated limb,
which he had also directed them to do, their awkwardness occasioned
him so much pain, that he fainted under the unsuccessful operation.
When he recovered from his swoon, which he did with an extraordinary
sickness at the heart; he put his hand to his side, where the peculiar
sensation was, and found it weltering in his blood. It was not needful
for him to find no voice return an answer to his immediate call upon
his servants. The previous silence, uninterrupted by any thing but the
raging storm without, confirmed his suspicion that the villains had
given him his death wound; and were fled with the booty. He, however,
thrust the linen of his shirt into the wound; and lay half dead with
pain and exhaustion, till all was lost in insensibility. He knew
nothing from that hour, until he now opened his eyes from a refreshing
sleep. He saw himself on a comfortable bed, instead of the wretched
litter on which he had believed himself left to perish! He was then
in the hands of some benevolent person!--But how brought, or where
resident, he could not guess.
At this moment of conjecture Cornelia heard him move, and gently put
aside the curtain. Her eyes met the surprised fixture of his.--But
it was no longer with the glare of fever, with the wild flashes of
delirium; the light of recovered reason was there, and the inquiring
gaze of gratitude. If she had thought his face perfect in manly beauty,
while it was insensible, or only moved by a distempered spirit; what
were her impressions, when his intelligent mind was restored to all its
powers, and it shone out in those eyes, and in that countenance?
Even her self-controuled spirit, trembled before the resistless
influence; and with a failing voice, she answered his respectful demand
of where he was.
"You are under the roof of a gentleman who is my kinsman, and who has
left you under my care."
Wharton considered for a moment.--"his name, noble lady?"
"Your present critical state," replied she, "does not permit me to
answer you that question."
An immediate apprehension that he was a prisoner, shot through the
mind of the Duke.
"I am then in the house of an enemy!" cried he, starting on his arm;
"and your benevolence, Madam, would spare me the truth!"
"No," answered Cornelia, astonished at the suspicion; or, rather,
gazing on him with renewed anxiety, for fear his delirium was
returning. "He is your friend--your anxious friend. And, while he
enjoined me not to mention his name in your hearing; he likewise
refused me, and all in this house, the knowledge of yours."
"That is sufficient!" replied Wharton, "Madam, whoever your friend may
be, this caution does indeed manifest him to be mine. I am without
guess on the subject; nor will I seek to penetrate what he wishes to
conceal. But you may answer me, how I came under this generous care!"
Cornelia briefly related, (though without betraying whence she came,
or whither she was going;) the events of the Moor.
"Then I am still in Northumberland?" replied Wharton. He paused, and
added; "there are some names I would inquire after in this county,
but--" and he paused again. "It is better I should not. My last hours
shall not injure any man."
There were sensations within him, that made him murmur to himself the
concluding sentence. And Cornelia, seeing, by the sudden lividness
which overspread his so lately re-animated countenance, that some
unhappy change was recurring; rose from her chair, and summoned his
medical assistants.
They were closed up for nearly an hour, with their patient. At the door
of the anti-room, Cornelia met them; and, with a dawning hope in her
heart, to which his recovery to reason had given birth, she hastily
inquired their opinion of the invalid.
"That he may last till to-morrow morning, but not beyond it," replied
the superior surgeon.
She heard no more; though his colleagues spoke also, giving their
various reasons for this judgement. She stood benumbed; but shewed no
other sign of the blow on her heart, while bowing their heads, the
party left her. She then walked steadily to her own chamber; and there,
throwing herself on her knees before heaven, petitioned for its mercy
to heal so prized a friend of her beloved cousin.
"Thy hand alone!" cried she, "and on that alone, I now confide!"
She was soon after summoned to the side of the dying stranger, by one
of the female attendants who waited in his anti-room. He requested the
lady he had seen, to have the goodness to grant him the use of pen and
ink, and to allow him to see her once more. Cornelia took what he
required, and hastened to his apartment.
He was propped up in the bed, by the attentive hands of Lorenzo; who
remained, by his directions, after the entrance of Cornelia. The
paleness of watching and anxiety was in her face. The flush of pain,
mental and bodily, on Wharton's. She drew near him.
"Noble lady," said he, "your physicians are honest men. They have told
me, my hours are numbered; and, that I have a short time in which to
express my thanks to your humanity; and to make up my accounts with the
world. Will you indulge me with the means?"
And he stretched his hands towards the writing materials. Cornelia
relinquished them to his eager grasp; though, at the same time, she
expressed her dread of the exertion increasing his danger.
"This done!" replied he, "an hour more or less, in arriving at the
goal, is of no consequence.--Delay me, sweet lady," continued he,
observing her reluctance; "and you may deprive me of the victor's
crown!"
Cornelia gave him the pen; and bowing gratefully, he began to write.
She moved to withdraw, but looking up with a beseeching eye, he
entreated her, as well as Lorenzo, to remain, to bear witness that the
papers he was writing were penned by his own hand.
She retook her place, and soon found her presence necessary; for he was
often faint under his task; and, after taking a restorative from her
hand, in spite of all her persuasions to the contrary, recommenced it.
As he closed one packet, to begin another, she laid her hand upon his
arm. "For the sake of all you revere in earth and heaven, desist!"
cried she, "this perseverance is suicide."
"No," replied he, "there is but one man in the world, who could act by
me, as your kinsman has done! And this deed is my last act of duty to
him and to myself."
Cornelia said no more; but submitted with an awful awaiting of the
conclusion.
By the Duke's orders, Lorenzo sealed the first packet, and returned it
into his hand. No one saw how he directed it. The second packet was
then sealed, and superscribed, and both put into a cover. This was also
sealed, and when directed by the Duke's hand, he put it into that of
Cornelia. She glanced upon the superscription.
"To my benefactress. But not to be opened until I am dead."
She read it, and for the first time in his sight, her eyes gushed out
with tears. The burning hand, which then gratefully pressed her's as he
relinquished the packet, would be cold and motionless, when she should
break that seal! Human nature, pity, admiration! all struck at once
upon her heart, and she trembled, almost to sinking.
The Duke observed her emotion, and made a sign to Lorenzo to withdraw.
Both his hands now clasped her's, as with his dying eyes he gazed on
her.
"Lady," said he, "when you open that packet, you will know that he
who you now honour with your pity, was a being to be condemned; but,
he trusts, to be pardoned also! I am a man, and I erred; but I am a
Christian, and have contrition. When you know me, remember me with
one of those tears, and my conscious soul will disdain the world's
persisted obloquy!"
Cornelia wept the more at these words; but she strove to speak; and
to gently extricate her hand from a grasp, which already seemed the
convulsive pressures of death.
"You will tell de Montemar," cried he in great emotion; and in
that moment, of what he thought mortal fainting, forgetting his
caution:--"You will tell him----" he paused, and struggled for a few
seconds--then gasping--relinquished the hand he held, and fell back
upon his pillow.
Cornelia saw and heard no more; she fainted, and sunk upon the floor.
When she recovered, she found herself in another room, and supported by
her uncle of Lindisfarne.
"Your fears are premature, my dear child;" cried the venerable man, as
soon as she opened her eyes; "Lorenzo has just been in to tell me, your
invalid guest is now recovering from the swoon in which you left him;
and that the surgeons are in his chamber."
"Heaven has brought you my revered uncle!" cried she, "to sustain me.
You will see him?"
"For that purpose," replied Mr. Athelstone, "I came."
Indeed, as soon as he received Louis's few lines, imparting his
indispensable absence, and obligation to leave Cornelia to take charge
of his invalid friend; the good Pastor judged, that whoever this
nameless person might be, and for whatever reasons his reception at
Morewick was to be generally concealed; yet it was his duty not to
allow his niece to be with servants alone, in the distressing scene
which the agitated letter of his nephew confessed might be anticipated
during his absence. Notwithstanding all Louis's caution in his first
communications respecting his foreign friend; and his subsequent
reserve while continuing his apologies from the same cause, for his
and Cornelia's detention at Morewick; Mr. Athelstone drew his own
conclusions, that there was more unexplained, than the fantastic
mystery of a foreigner wishing to travel incognito. He knew Louis's
mind too well, to believe that he would adopt with such carefulness
of concealment, so trifling a whim. He was convinced that danger to
one party at least, hung over the discovery; and in his guesses, he
was not very remote from the truth. The more his suspicions gained
ground, from the style of his nephew's last letter, the more he saw
the propriety of acting in defiance of Louis's positive request,
that he would allow none of the Lindisfarne family to interrupt the
charitable duties of Cornelia. The earnestness of this injunction;
(for it was put, so as not to admit of a discussion;) confirmed Mr.
Athelstone in an idea, that peril was attached to the entertainer of
this mysterious personage; and resolving to protect his nephew and
his niece in the possible dilemma into which humanity on one side,
and romantic generosity on the other, might involve their safeties,
he ordered a post chaise to await him on the opposite shore. Without
imparting any thing of these reflections or motives to Mrs. Coningsby,
he left his directions with her and Alice, to prepare every comfort
for the expected reception of the Marchioness and her daughter. Busy
in the hospitable bustle of such arrangements, the happy mother and
her favourite child, saw Mr. Athelstone depart to rejoin Cornelia,
without a suspicion of the nature of his errand. He alighted in the
hall at Morewick, at the very moment Lorenzo had found Miss Coningsby
lying insensible in the room of the stranger, who at the instant
seemed beyond all future pain. She was brought into the next chamber,
and delivered into the arms of her uncle; while Lorenzo recalled
the medical assistants to his master's friend: and the result he
communicated, as soon as the Duke breathed, to the benevolent inquiries
of the Pastor.
When Cornelia had sufficiently recovered from her swoon to speak with
composure, she related with brief eloquence, all that had passed
between her and the invalid since his restored senses. Unconsciously
to herself, her heart spoke; and she ended her communications by
affirming, that notwithstanding his acknowledgement of errors, and the
secrecy that involved him, she must believe him to be a man not less
illustrious in the nobleness of his life, than in birth and station.
Mr. Athelstone listened attentively to all she had to say and
to conjecture about the object of their discourse. She always
distinguished him, by the approving and pitying appellation of the
noble sufferer; and the penetration of her uncle, soon discovered,
that his niece was no longer an impartial speaker.
"Cornelia," replied he, "I perceive you have no suspicion, who this
noble sufferer may be?"
"None, my uncle."
"But I have. I recognise him in every word you have uttered, except his
repentance; and that may be yet the salutation of Iscariot!"
"My uncle! what do you mean?" "I mean to speak of one," returned the
Pastor, "whose heart was lifted up because of his beauty; and he
corrupted his wisdom, by reason of his brightness; and where we should
have found light, there was darkness, and the mouth of the grave!"
Cornelia sunk into a seat. "Sir," cried she, "you terrify me with
an unutterable apprehension! If he be what you suppose, you are a
Christian minister! Go to him, in this his last hour; and save him if
it be possible, from the death whence there is no recall!"
Her hands were clasped over her face, as she pronounced the last words.
Lorenzo at the same moment appeared at the door; and beckoning Mr.
Athelstone, the pious man left the room, with the intention, if Duke
Wharton yet breathed, to obey the prayer of his niece, in exhorting him
to a sincere repentance.
CHAP. XXI.
On the evening of the second day after his departure from Morewick,
Louis found himself clasped to the veteran bosom of Santa Cruz;
ardently embraced by Ferdinand; and caressed with maternal fondness, by
the enraptured Marchioness.
"We are come to live amongst you for a long time;" cried she, "to seek
those blessings of health at Lindisfarne for my beloved Marcella, which
her brother found so abundantly."
Louis assured her of the happiness such an intention would bring to
his family; and he soon read in the looks of Ferdinand, that it was
as a privileged lover, he was now returning to the feet of Alice. The
present grief which Louis had in the depths of his heart, he hid
there, and smiled his congratulations to the animated eyes of his
friend.
"Our Marcella," said the Marquis, "is suffering under sorrow as well as
illness. While I went to Rome on a mission of consequence to us all, I
left her with my wife, under the care of my sister, the abbess of the
Ursalines; and on my return, I found I had lost my sister by a sudden
death; and that my daughter, from the shock, was reduced to the brink
of the grave."
"But she is now out of danger, I trust?" replied Louis in a tone, which
could not be mistaken.
"And a letter from you, was our first comfort!" was the inward response
of the Marchioness, though her lips made no reply. She left that to the
calmer reason of her husband.
The letter, her thoughts referred to, was from de Montemar to
Ferdinand, in answer to one, wherein he enlarged on Marcella's changed
wishes with regard to a monastic life. When Louis came to that subject,
without being aware of the clearness with which his words unfolded his
own heart, he wrote as follows:
"I begin to think my probationary conflicts, instead of confirming my
spirit, have, in some cases at least, a contrary effect. I felt so
much in reading your sister's wish to bury herself from all she has
hitherto blessed with her virtues, that--I wish I could for ever be
kept in ignorance of the time when she is really professed. At least,
Ferdinand, do you refrain from telling it to me, and I shall not dread
to open your letters."
Ferdinand shewed this paragraph to his mother. The lamp in his own
soul had discovered sleeping love, in every unconscious line. The
Marchioness had observed the powerful impression which de Montemar
made on the memory of her daughter, when she first admired his filial
enthusiasm in the Val del Uzeda. From that hour, her distaste, as well
as her religious opinions, was adverse to a monastic vow. But when her
awakened sensibility comprehended the feelings of her brother; though
unconscious of the new principle within her, which pleaded his cause
even against her own heart, she became willing to sacrifice herself
for his happiness. In Barbary, as in Spain, she found nothing but
what increased her admiration, even to reverence, in the devoted son
of the misled Duke de Ripperda. And, being so devoted a son, it never
crossed the pure heaven of her mind, that any idea of her, but as a
sister of Mercy, could ever occur to his heart. She believed, that
she also thought of him as a "thing enskied and sainted," and that
his remembrance would be as innoxious to her peace, after they had
separated for ever in this world, as that of the most lovely characters
she had read of, who were now in the grave; but whose society would be
one of her felicities in the life to come.
But she deceived herself. The sting was in her heart. She saw Louis
de Montemar no more, but his image was ever before her, his words,
his looks, his actions; and, finding the secret of her soul, in its
anguish and her despair; she every hour urged her parents to shut her
up from the world, which contained the object who made her feel that
she was no longer mistress of herself. This fatal secret she revealed
to no one. It preyed upon her heart, and her life; and, not until the
Marchioness was secluded with her in the convent of the Ursalines, did
she penetrate its depth and power. She also had wept in silence, over
what she had too soon discerned; this unhappy, unuttered passion: and
a sad immature grave, seemed ever opening before the feet of her most
loved child.
But, when her eyes fell on the paragraph concerning Marcella, in
the letter from Louis to Ferdinand, she became convinced that the
tenderness was mutual; and that mutual was the hopelessness and misery.
Without appearing to design any peculiar communication to her daughter,
she read the letter to her; and dwelt with particular emphasis on that
comprehensive sentence. Marcella listened, as if transfixed by a shaft.
She durst not receive its import; she feared there would be crime in
even wishing it real; although her abbess aunt had put a decisive on
her monastic intentions, by telling her there would be positive guilt
in her becoming a Catholic nun, with her religious reservations.
"Not a nun!" murmured she to herself, "but I have never been allowed
to consider myself with any connection with the world. I feel as if
I sinned in the very wish! and I must be a recluse." She leaned her
throbbing head upon her hand. "My child," said her mother, tenderly
drawing near her; "what do you think of de Montemar's animated
gratitude, in these touching sentiments?"
"That it is gratitude!" replied Marcella, rising with a forced smile,
"and I am obliged to him for anticipating a pity, which my aunt teaches
me, I cannot with conscience put myself into the condition to merit."
"And do you see no more than gratitude and compassion here?" asked the
Marchioness, re-reading the passage, and holding her daughter's arm
while she did so. "Were I to speak what I think, this matchless young
man loves you!"
These words, from the lips of her mother, were more than Marcella could
bear; she gasped and fell into her arms.
When the Marquis returned from his successful mission to Rome, he found
his sister dead; and his wife in possession of his daughter's unlimited
confidence; but that timid and self-accusing daughter, was brought to
the verge of the grave by sorrow for the deceased, and shame at the
weakness of her heart.
His first communication to the Marchioness was to prepare her family
for crossing with him to England.
"I have given my sanction to Ferdinand's attachment to the niece of
Mr. Athelstone;" said he, "travelling and change of scene will be
beneficial to Marcella; and our friends of Lindisfarne will give us the
welcome of kindred."
Marcella obeyed the commands of her father in these preparations: and
perhaps the more readily, since her mother's irrepressible and constant
representations of Louis's demonstrations of a peculiar sentiment
for her, had in spite of her own prepossessions to the contrary, and
what she would not acknowledge to herself, given her an idea of the
possibility of what her mother believed, being true. In urging these
sometimes visionary arguments, the Marchioness at last said to her.
"Should you and the Marquis de Montemar meet as I expect, it is not
probable that your father would be more inexorable to his daughter and
best loved friend, than he has proved himself to Ferdinand and Alice
Coningsby!"
"If I go to England," returned Marcella, and she believed she spoke the
truth, "I will never meet the Marquis de Montemar at all, if you, my
dear mother, are to draw any conclusions from that, that I expect, or
even wish him to consider me in any other light than as a professed
nun. That sin of my imagination is now over: I shall see my father's
friend with the confidence of a sister. But no more."
If the Marchioness thought otherwise, she did not express it; and
Marcella was not again persecuted on the subject.
Being in England; and learning from her mother, (who glided out of
the room with the information;) that the preserver of her father and
her brother, was then in the house; she did not deny the next request,
that she would obey her father's wish in joining the party in the
drawing-room. She felt confident in her own resolves; and with a serene
aspect, put her arm on her mother's to comply.
She was in black.--It was the first time Louis had seen her out of the
dress of a nun; and, on her entrance, he started with an emotion that
surprized him, at so unexpected a change.
Her face and hands were pale; but a gentle colour, like the soft
reflection from the rose, passed over her cheek, as he approached her.
She tried to meet him with tranquillity; and to look at him with the
open eye of friendly cognizance. But the moment his hand touched hers,
her eye-lids fell; and a chill ran through her whole frame, to blanch
her cheeks; and shook her with such a trembling, that the Marchioness
made a sign to her husband to assist her in bearing her to the sofa.
The Marquis sat for same time, rubbing his daughter's cold hands in
his; and the Marchioness touched her forehead and lips with essence.
Louis did not venture to follow her to the sofa, but remaining standing
where the group left him; and, as she lay, like a lilly on a velvet
pall; so fair and fragile, in her mourning garments, he felt the
possibility of his feeling a yet bitterer pang, than the death of his
false friend. But the moment he thought so, he checked the selfish
sentiment; and said in anguish of spirit to himself.--"O no! For with
that gentle being dwells innocence and virtue.--When she goes hence her
translation is to heaven:--And, can I mourn with bitterness, her who is
in blessedness? But when the deluding, the betrayer, the impenitent!
are called away! then my cry may be that of David--Oh, thou who wert
once my friend--would to God, I could have died for thee!"
Ferdinand observed his countenance, and touched his arm.--"Why do you
gaze with such despair on my sister?" whispered he, "Her illness is
merely weakness, from fatigue. Lindisfarne will restore us all!"
"Heaven grant it!" was the response of Louis, as he recalled himself
from the momentary wandering of his thoughts.
Marcella soon after re-opened her eyes; and having recovered her
perfect recollection, she also strove to rally her self possession;
and, though with still down-cast lids, she stretched out her hand
to her father's friend, as he again advanced to impress it with his
lips;--and in a calm, but low voice, expressed her pleasure at seeing
him returned in safety to the country of his dearest relations. Louis,
without attending to all the import of his words, replied by saying,
that he trusted she would consider them as her own.
Many mutual inquiries now took place, and her share of the conversation
was carried on for nearly an hour, with a composure, on the side of her
daughter, that surprised and pleased the Marchioness. When she appeared
exhausted, her mother rose; and she, following her example, took the
parental arm, and with a bend of her head to her father, quitted the
room.
Santa Cruz turned towards Louis, as his daughter disappeared; and
observed, with a solemn emotion at his heart, that his eyes followed
with anxiety, the slow progress of Marcella from the room; that he
gazed on the door, a long time after it was closed on her; and then
withdrew his attention, with a heavy, and deep-drawn sigh.
"De Montemar," said the Marquis, "come with me into my chamber; for I
have much to say to you." The conference lasted many hours.--Santa
Cruz assured him, that he had left no power unexerted, day or night, to
bring the prejudiced mind of the King of Spain, to a fair judgment on
the Duke de Ripperda's political integrity, great exasperations, and
religious penitence.--"The Queen was more placable on your behalf;"
continued the Marquis, "since the subject in debate was a handsome
young man, who admired her.--At least so Duke Wharton made her believe!"
"Duke Wharton!" echoed Louis.
"Yes," replied the Marquis, "that man was ever a Proteus; and never
more so, than in the present instance. When I, and all the Spanish
ministry, thought him the most active enemy you had; he became master
of all the malignancy that was in arms or in ambuscade against you;
and, by a generalship as effective as it was surprising, turned the
whole battery against its inventors." "Marquis!" cried Louis, starting
from his chair; "What is it you say?"
"The truth, though a strange one," replied Santa Cruz, "and this ruse
de guerre of his was so artfully managed, that not a man in the
Spanish cabinet is aware of the hand that gave the overthrow. Being one
in all their secret counsels, he influenced the separate members, to
certain exaggerated conduct; and playing the one off against the other,
in their allegations against your father, managed that contradictions
should occur in every hearing before the King. And, by himself accusing
you to the Queen, in terms to awaken her vanity against your enemies,
and to influence it with a belief in your personal loyalty to her; he
gained your point there. With your personal enemies, and his political
friends, he affected to wonder at the Marquis de Montemar's restitution
to the royal favour; while with me, he rejoiced in private,--laughing
at the absurdity of such grey-beards, as the frowning de Castellor,
and that earthworm de Paz, making any tilt against the armed virtue of
neas and his Achates.
"And his cloud is a bright one!" continued the Marquis, kindling with
his subject. "It has absorbed the follies of his youth. And, gazing
with wonder at his capacity, I beheld with admiration, the man I once
despised. In short, his genius, with a sort of supernatural cognizance,
darts into the views of men, and turns their devices to the side of
justice and honour!"
Louis's deep groans burst upon the ear of Santa Cruz. His face, for
some time, had been covered with his hands. An amazed inquiry, and an
agonized reply, soon informed the Marquis of its cause. Wharton, that
unalienable, that energetic friend, was then at the point of death,
in the house of his uncle at Morewick! was dying, under an impression
that Louis was estranged from him; nay, had united with his father in
denouncing him as a traitor! He might now be dead!--And he, who loved
him to the last, never be able to pour out his gratitude for such noble
assertion of that father's fame!
This information astonished, and distressed Santa Cruz; and the greater
the extremity of the Duke, the more he thought himself called upon, to
relate every thing explicitly to his agonized friend. In the course of
this protracted conversation, he gave a brief account of all he knew
of Wharton's conduct throughout the whole transactions relative to the
Duke de Ripperda.
Wharton frankly acknowledged, that from the period he was convinced
no impressions in behalf of the Stuart or Bavarian interests, could
be made on Spain, he determined to overthrow the political power of
him, who avowed himself the root of this obstinacy. Ripperda had
proclaimed his devotion to the House of Brunswick, more than once, at
the great councils of Vienna. He had affirmed his implacability to both
pretenders, at the table of the Cardinal Giovenozzi; and he did it,
with circumstances of such personal insult to Wharton, that the English
Duke, at once laid a comprehensive plan to make him feel his power.
Routemberg's conspiracy against the Spanish minister, did not originate
with Wharton; but it was modified by him; he mounted the guns, and
planted the circular batteries; and he did it, to bring Ripperda to a
point, where none could preserve him but the man who held the springs
of every movement in his own hands. This man was Wharton's self. Twice,
at critical moments, in Vienna and at Madrid, he offered his terms:--to
unmask every machination against Ripperda; and to maintain him in his
seat against all the world; if he would at last oppose the house of
Brunswick in the empire and in England. Both overtures were rejected
with disdain; and events took their course. Ripperda's was a fall, not
a descent, and the ruin was terrible. The new ministers of Spain, who
had bought their elevation by embracing Wharton's views, triumphed in
every way over their disgraced predecessor. But the English politician
was of another spirit. His enemy, once down, his care might be to
prevent his rising to the same adverse station; but he told his
coadjutors, he was not of the herd to strike his heel against the
fallen lion.
It did not, at this juncture, accord with the interests of his two
royal friends, James Stuart, and Maria of Bavaria, to make a full
disclosure in favour of the overthrown Duke; but he made secret
visits to the King's confessor, and to the Queen's, not to incense,
as was supposed, but to propitiate each sovereign against the cabinet
ministers' rancorous persecution of their fallen rival. He denied all
the circumstances which had been alleged by these men, to prove that
Ripperda had negociated with him against the existing orders of Philip.
He positively asserted, there had never been any amicable private
meeting between them. He explained the adventure in the Carinthian
post-house, where he returned the dispatches to the Duke; also another
rencounter in the mountains of Genoa where he accidentally rescued him
from a band of assassins, to whom he had been betrayed by a man who was
a Spaniard; "and therefore," said Wharton, "I will not name him."
It were not possible to describe the varied anguish of Louis de
Montemar, during this discourse, and the new discoveries it made at
every sentence. He did not utter it, for he was on the rack. But when
he found that it was Wharton's arm which had saved his father amongst
the maritime Alps; that it was to him, though unknown, Ripperda had
bequeathed the Gratitude of his son;--then Louis felt the iron enter
his soul.
In short, Santa Cruz informed him, that Wharton proved to the King and
Queen, that his enmity was against Ripperda's politics, not against
himself; though he protested, there was not a man on earth who detested
another with more determined hatred than the ex-minister detested him.
Things were in this state, when the Duke was summoned by the Chevalier
St. George, to a conference at Rome, and the field being left open to
Grimaldo and his colleagues, their violent proceedings ended in the
flight of their proposed victim.
In this pause of the narrative, Louis wrung his hands, and bitterly
exclaimed:
"What an extreme and false judge have I been of this unexampled friend!
And just is my punishment, that I should lose him for ever, in the
moment I know his invaluable worth!" "Be not unjust to yourself, my
dear de Montemar," answered the Marquis, "Philip Wharton did not open
to me only half his soul. When we pledged our faith to each other, on
two sacred subjects, (one of which was your restitution to your rights;
but which coalition to your advantage, was not to be revealed to you
till it was successful:) he confessed to me, that he deserved your
warmest resentment; for, the sin of his life, since he knew you, was
an incessant attempt at rendering you in all things like himself! De
Montemar was bright and ambitious," said he, "too likely to outshine
his master, unless I gave his towering soul a little of my own ballast.
I tried him, where man is most vulnerable. Marquis! I was so very a
wretch, that the clearer I saw my power over him, with a more devilish
zeal I thrust him into the fire. In the garden of the Chateau de
Phaffenberg was the scene of my last attempt! His resolution, not only
to meet ruin himself, but to consign his idolized father to the same,
rather than rescue either by a dereliction from virtue, was a sword,
that cut asunder marrow and spirit! Since that hour, I have regarded
that boy as a Mentor, worth all the bearded sages, from Socrates to the
Cambray Bishop!"--
"So spoke the animated Duke," continued Santa Cruz; "and he has
honoured his model! For, from that time, (although it was long before I
shared his secret,) he has been your unsuspected and efficient friend.
The re-enrolment of your father's name in the national archives;
and, these parchments, containing your own restituted rights without
condition or substraction, but the Dukedom of Ripperda, (which none but
a Catholic can bear,) are undeniable witnesses of this fact."
"Marquis!" replied Louis, walking the room in insupportable agony of
spirit; "you heap coals of fire upon my head! Oh, why must I remember,
whose voice denounced him to this government; who proclaimed him a
traitor to the House of Hanover!--His own rights in this country are
wrested from him by that hand!--a price is set on his head,--and hidden
like a thief, he lies, murdered by assassins, under the very roof which
ought to have been rent with acclamations, when he sought it as a
refuge!--Oh, my venerable friend, I cannot bear what is pressing on my
brain!"
The Marquis saw that Louis was in no condition to listen with
attention, much less with complacency, to any thing else he had to
impart; and aware that his greatest proof of kindness would be to
hasten his return to Morewick, to yield him some chance of seeing his
friend alive; he declared that such was first in his thoughts; and he
soon withdrew, to give corresponding directions to his family.
CHAP. XXII.
The morning's light saw the Marquis Santa Cruz step into the
post-chariot that was to convey him to London. He had advised Louis
not to distress the apprehensive mind of the Marchioness, by imparting
to her, or to any of the travelling group, the afflicting scene at
Morewick; besides, under the dangerous circumstances which enveloped
Wharton's asylum there, the fewer who were privy to the secret, the
better for all parties.
Immediately after a breakfast by sun-rise; when the Marquis had driven
away, Louis led the Marchioness to her carriage. Ferdinand had already
placed his sister within it, and Don Garcia de Lima, the family
physician, with the female attendants of the ladies, took his station
in de Montemar's travelling chaise. A cold Northumbrian morning,
which, though at deep Midsummer, is sometimes saturated with fog,
chilled the delicate frame of Marcella, and wrapping herself within her
pelisse, she drew close into the corner of the coach.
The first start of the horses from the inn-gate, re-lit hope in the
breast of Louis. And as they flew along the northern road, the pinions
of his soul seemed to extend themselves; while with the animating glow
of renewed confidence in Wharton, and the sanguine expectation of soon
avowing it at his side, dilated his heart, he appeared to the eyes
of his companions a new being. Marcella sighed as she contemplated
that radiant, unobserving countenance; she saw it was happiness that
shone there. Happiness in returning whence he came! for his eyes were
directed forward with an eagerness which plainly declared that at that
moment he thought not of any one in the carriage. She was unconscious
that she sighed; and feeling the fresh air particularly bleak at that
instant, even shuddered.
"You are cold, Lady Marcella!" said Louis, hearing the gentle shiver,
and drawing up the window that was next her; "I fear our Northumbrian
breezes are rough in their welcome!"
Marcella did not speak, but bowed her head.
This little incident recalled Louis's attention to those around
him. They remained ignorant of what was in his thoughts; and the
mournful comfort which the Marquis's communications had infused there,
influenced him throughout the journey, to complete it with greater
cheerfulness than he could have affected, had his mind been still
weighed down with the conviction that he lamented an unworthy friend.
Over and over again he felt that a perfect reliance on the virtue of
a beloved object, and his acceptance with the source of all-purity,
is what takes the mortal sting from death; and though sorrow and
anxiety were full in his heart, the shafts of despair and horror were
extracted, and he thought himself equal to seeing his friend pass that
bourne--where, he trusted, one day to follow him into the land of peace.
All this genial impetus of spirit succeeded very well, until the
morning of the third day, when the travellers assembled in the
breakfast-room of the inn where they had slept, and prepared to renew
their journey. Marcella became so powerless of exertion, from the
exhaustion consequent to the two preceding days rapid travelling, that
she fainted in her way to the carriage, and was brought back in the
arms of Ferdinand into the house. Her mother, (the physician's chaise
having been some time driven on,) applied the usual restoratives;
and when she was sufficiently recovered to comprehend what was said,
the Marchioness tenderly assured her, she should not be hurried by
proceeding that day; for the Marquis de Montemar was already gone out
to order the carriage to be put up.
"At your request, Mamma?" slowly articulated Marcella.
"Yes, my child; and he complied immediately."
But how complied, the apprehensive eye of Marcella saw at once, when
he re-entered the room. His countenance was pale and troubled. He
approached her couch, but his eye roved over it.
"His wishes, his anxiety," said she to herself, "are in another
place!--It is this incomparable Cornelia, this beloved cousin he is so
eager to rejoin!--And my illness shall not detain him."
"I thank you, my dear mother!" cried she, "and you too, Marquis; but
after this fit of weakness, I am well enough to go on." "Impossible!"
cried the Marchioness, "the fatigue would destroy you."
"No;" replied Marcella, with a wan smile, "I can only be destroyed by
finding myself an incumbrance, and I know Ferdinand thinks every moment
an age till he arrive at Lindisfarne."
"Not while you are so ill, my kindest sister," replied he, "to-morrow
will find you stronger, and six fleet horses will soon make up for the
delay."
Louis turned towards the window. It might in the meeting of lovers,
who had yet many happy years before them! but an hour, or a moment,
might be sufficient to divide him for ever in this life, from the
friend of his heart!--Marcella was ill; but she was not dying; and
the determination to delay a whole day and a night, struck him with
an agony he turned away to conceal. But Marcella caught the look;
its whole expression entered her heart, and she took an instant
resolution. Perhaps an emotion of resentment; the first she had ever
known in herself, at least, the first she had ever acted upon, roused
her to extraordinary powers; for she felt that no consideration of her
possible peril, could awaken in this devoted, impatient lover, this
ungrateful kindless de Montemar, one wish to linger a moment for her
sake.
She pressed the arm of Ferdinand and whispered him.
He kissed that soft hand, and immediately withdrew. The Marchioness,
suspecting that embassy was to recall the carriage, hastened up to
Louis, and whispering him in her turn, begged him to prevail on
Marcella, not out of indulgence to her brother's haste to reach
Lindisfarne, to run herself into any risk. Before she could receive an
answer, she glided out of the room in pursuit of her son, to stop his
counter-orders, and to reprove his persisted selfishness.
Louis turned round to utter persuasions so foreign to his heart; but
a severe look from Marcella checked him: yet he drew near. She again
turned her eyes upon him; but there was an expression of distress
in his face which disarmed her resentment; and being sensible to an
undefinable sympathy, for whatever might be his motives for this, to
her, unfeeling haste, she paused a moment to consider what she should
say. A certain spirit of female dignity, that resisted, while it felt
too powerfully his influence over her, and something of her usual habit
of self-denial, impelled her to rally all her strength at once. And,
alike contemning her body's feebleness, and that weakness of heart
which had been its origin, she rose into a sitting position on the
sofa; and, with every nerve braced, and a lofty, though compassionate
air, she interrupted him as he began to speak.
"You are very kind, Marquis, to intend to obey my mother. But I am
well, and shall proceed." Louis made an attempt to answer, but again
she intercepted his first words; and, rising, rung the bell.
"Tell my mother," said she to the person who entered, "that I am ready
to attend her to the carriage."
Louis looked on her with agitation. She observed him, and turned away
her head, though with an air of unaffected serenity. Marcella was
always serene after any struggle in her soul, when the conquest was
gained.
The Marchioness, on receiving the message hurried into the room, and
found her arguments for delay, answered in every point by the steady
step and cheerful voice of her daughter. Ferdinand rejoiced in the
change, without investigating the cause; but his mother looked towards
Louis. She saw that it was some observation Marcella had made upon
his conduct, which had produced this dangerous resolution. Experience
convinced her, that so quick an alteration could not arise naturally;
but she feared to oppose the effect, and durst not conjecture the cause.
In half an hour, they were re-seated in the carriage; and, by the
orders of Ferdinand, who had received a whispered command from his
sister, the drivers kept their horses to their fullest speed.
Little conversation passed in this day's journey. The spell of the two
former ones was broken by the check in the morning. Louis wondered
how he could have felt the ignis fatuus hope which that check had
extinguished; and, with proportioned despondency, he silently counted
the hours which, he believed, had too surely cut him off from the last
moments of his friend.
Marcella spoke little; for she durst not spare any waste of strength,
from the exertion necessary to bear the casualties of the journey and
to satisfy the frequent anxious inquiries of her mother. The eyes of
Louis turned often on her, with an expression of solicitude that
penetrated her heart. But the effect it produced, favoured the first
deceit she had ever practised in her life. It drove the blood from
that heart to her cheek; and she looked well when her soul was almost
fainting within her.
It was ten o'clock, on the third night after their leaving Harwich,
that the harassed party entered on Morpeth-moor, within a stage of
Alnwick. The darkness, during this latter dozen miles, concealed from
his companions the increasing discomposure of Louis. Every step drew
him now so near to Morewick, he was ready to break from the carriage,
and escape at once to the side of his dying friend. These twelve miles
seemed a hundred to his impatience; and, when the drivers drew up
before the door of the inn at Alnwick, he sprung out, as if it had been
into his Uncle's house.
Marcella would fain have made a proposal to go on, even during the
night; but nature was at last subdued; and she did not chuse to speak,
when she knew, that the now hardly articulate powers of her voice,
would too truly proclaim that she had already done too much.
The Marchioness having alighted, Louis drew near to assist Ferdinand in
bearing out his sister; but Marcella merely bowed to him, and gently
waved him away with her hand. Ferdinand threw his arms round her waist,
and supported her failing steps into the house.
She was seated, pale and silent, in a chair by the fire-side, (for
the night was cold and wet,) when Louis re-entered from giving orders
respecting their apartments. Don Garcia's hand was upon her pulse.
"Donna Marcella had best retire immediately," said the physician. "You
want rest, my child!" rejoined the Marchioness, putting her daughter's
arm within her's.
"But I shall be ready to re-commence our journey to-morrow at
day-break!" answered she, gently turning her head towards Louis. He
bowed, with a full heart; and she left the room, leaning on her mother
and the physician.
"Ferdinand," said Louis, "it is not necessary to disturb your sister
so early as she intimates. I have business at Morewick,--it is only a
few miles off,--I shall take a horse immediately; and return--" His lip
became convulsed, and he could not proceed.
"Why, what is the matter at Morewick?" hastily inquired the young
Spaniard; "Your family are at Lindisfarne!"
"All excepting Cornelia. But spare me further questions. When we meet
again--" Again he interrupted himself, and then resumed in a more
collected voice. "Rest is necessary, both for your mother and your
sister, after the hard travelling of three such days; therefore, do not
allow them to be disturbed till noon. I shall be with you long, very
long, before that!"
"This is very strange, de Montemar!" said Ferdinand, with rather a tone
of offended pride.
"For no other cause than the one that impels me," returned Louis,
"would I leave their side. But when you know it, they and you will
pardon and pity me."
"I ask no farther," said Ferdinand.
CHAP. XXIII.
The horse was fleet that carried Louis that dreary night, without star,
or guide of any kind, over the lonely heaths which lay between Alnwick,
and the little bye road which led through Warkworth to Morewick hall.
But he knew every dell and dingle in that near neighbourhood; and
without once going out of the direct track, soon found himself under
the tall elms of the avenue, which now groaned in the blast around the
old walls that sheltered his outlawed friend.
The porter, whom he had aroused at the lodge gate, followed to take
his horse. But the bell at the great door was rung twice, before there
was any appearance of its being answered. At last he heard voices,
as if in consultation within the door. He rung a third time. They
receded; and in a few minutes, a window was cautiously opened above his
head. He could not see objects in the darkness, but he looked up, and
impatiently demanded to be admitted.
"It is my master!" exclaimed Lorenzo; and quitting the window, hurried
down stairs. The door was instantly opened by him; while immediately
behind, a little within the hall, stood Mr. Athelstone.
At sight of him, Louis felt that the object of his haste must be
no more. The shaft of death seemed struck into his own soul, as he
desperately stepped forward, Mr. Athelstone clasped him in his arms.
"Then all is over!" burst from his sealed lips.
The Pastor drew him into a room, and Lorenzo followed with a lamp.
Louis stood so calm, so unshaken, under the belief that his friend was
dead, that the affectionate Italian gazed at him with surprise. But
Mr. Athelstone read under that fixed endurance, a sensibility to the
shock he had anticipated, which made the good man only too eager to
unfold his better tidings.
"Does my presence, my dear nephew," said he, grasping his marbled hand;
"only speak of death? Your friend's fever has left him; and his wound
has begun to cicatrize."
Louis had armed himself to bear the stroke of consummate grief; but
this turn of joy being beyond his hopes, was also beyond his manhood,
and with his first step towards the parlour door, he staggered and
fell. But an insensibility which is the effect of happiness, is as
mists before the sun. A few minutes recalled him to perception; and
the blissful tears which flowed from his eyes, bathed the hand of the
venerable messenger of such good tidings.
"They are full of peace to me!" cried Louis. "They ought to be so,"
replied Mr. Athelstone. And then his nephew listened with a chastized
anxiety, while the pious man explained his own presence at Morewick;
and that his first meeting with Cornelia, confirmed his suspicions that
Duke Wharton was this secret and cherished guest.
"I went to him," continued the Pastor, "to arouze his spirit from the
deleterious slumber of this world, ere he should sink into that sleep
which might prove eternal. At the first sight of me, he knew me; and
by that knowledge was confirmed in his own belief, that he was under
a roof which belonged to you. I confess to you, Louis, that though
I had suspected it, I receded a step, when I found that it was the
treacherous Wharton! When I knew that by granting him this protection,
you laid yourself open to the condign punishment he might escape! He
who had cozened you of your friendship; who had rifled you of your
father's honours and life."
"My uncle!" exclaimed Louis interrupting him.
Mr. Athelstone put forth his hand with a sign, that he wished to be
heard to the end; and then he benignly resumed:--
"But I went forward; and repeated those blessed words of the giver of
all pardon:--
"Peace be to this house, and grace to all who dwell within it!
"When I drew near, the Duke stretched out his hand to me. "Mr.
Athelstone, (said he) you do not visit the pillow of an impenitent. But
where is my friend?" And he looked as if he thought you were behind me."
"And he looked in vain!" exclaimed Louis.
"But your spirit entered with your uncle!" replied the Pastor, laying
his hand gently on the bent head of his nephew. "And a better spirit,
my child: that which, as a minister of Christ, I derived from his
holy word!" The succeeding two hours I passed by the bedside of the
Duke of Wharton; and when I left him, that resplendent countenance of
his was lit with a new light; the effulgence of heaven shone on it,
and pressing my hand to his lips, he called me his father! his better
father!--"For you have poured on me, (said he,) not the unction which
gives temporal, but that which dispenses eternal life!"
Two similar hours were now passed between Louis and his uncle. During
that time, all was communicated, which the former had learnt from
Santa Cruz relative to Duke Wharton; and Mr. Athelstone unfolded to
his nephew what the sealed papers in Cornelia's possession contained,
and which, as a full avowal to his Christian confessor, the Duke had
permitted the Pastor to read.
The night that followed Wharton's first conference with Mr.
Athelstone, was succeeded by a comfortable sleep. And then it was,
that on the ensuing morning, before he would venture to partake the
holiest rite of the Christian church, with the Pastor, and his still
hovering attendant, Cornelia, he entreated both, to break those seals,
and read the contents. The packet that was addressed to de Montemar,
did not contain the later circumstances which Santa Cruz had mentioned,
for those particulars it referred Louis to that mutual friend. But the
narrative generally and briefly explained his antecedent conduct with
regard to Ripperda and his son; and ended with affirming the spotless
fidelity of the former, both to the sovereigns of Austria and of Spain,
until he passed from Europe into Barbary. His concluding farewell to
Louis was short, but to the soul; yet, still the usual spirit of the
writer prevailed, to cloathe his last words in the cheerful garb of
verse--and he wrote:
"Be kind to my remains; and oh, defend
Against your judgment, your departed friend!
Let not the invidious foe, my fame pursue!
The world I served, and only injured you!"
The second paper was to the secretary of state in London; declaring on
the word of a dying man, that he only suspected, under whose protection
he was.
That he believed, none of all who attended him in his asylum, but the
one romantic friend who brought him there, knew they were harbouring an
outlawed man. He therefore wrote this, on the truth of an accountable
being, ready to be called into the presence of his Creator; to
exonerate all, and every one, who had granted him protection in these
his last hours, from any implication of disloyalty against the existing
government of England: though, with his last breath, he would say,
"Long live King James!" "Cornelia," continued the Pastor, "has been
an unwearied watch in his apartment. She is now reposing with her maid,
in a room adjoining to his, while he sleeps; and this is his third
night of undisturbed rest."
To invade those hours of genial slumber, was the last thing to which
Louis could have been brought to consent. But neither he, nor his
uncle, felt any thing dormitive in their faculties, while conversing on
a subject so dear to both their hearts; to the one, a restored friend;
to the other, a redeemed fellow creature.
During these precious vigils, Mr. Athelstone learnt from his nephew,
the true object of the Marquis Santa Cruz's visit to England. It was
not merely a private mission to the Spanish embassador in London; but
to give his personal sanction to the attachment of his son to Alice;
and to use his influence with the Pastor and Mrs. Coningsby, to accord
their consent to the marriage.
"Which we shall readily grant," replied his uncle, "for the hearts
the Almighty hath joined together in innocence and virtue, let no man
put asunder! And that He has done so by an awful covenant between
the Marquis's family and ours, is distinctly marked by the mutually
shedding of their blood for each other, in the terrible fields of
Barbary."
Mr. Athelstone dwelt with the tenderness of a parent, on the fading
health of Lady Marcella; and while he eulogized her benevolent care
of Louis during his wounded state at Ceuta, he could not refrain from
expressing a regret that so much active virtue should be intended for
the living tomb of a convent.
"And yet," added the venerable man, "there are excellent divines of
our own church, who tell us, that a vestal life is an angel's life.
Being unmingled with the world, it is ready to converse with God; and,
by not feeling the warmth of indulged nature, it flames out with holy
fires, till it burns like the seraphim; the most ecstasied order of
beatified spirits!"
"Is that your sentiment, Sir?" inquired Louis, looking down; and
quelling the palpitation of his heart.
"No, Louis; my opinion of an angel's life, both on earth, and in
heaven, is, that it must be one of ministry. And that cannot be
fulfilled, by retiring to a solitude beyond the stars; or immuring
one's-self below them, in monasteries and loneliness."
"Then, to covet one, likely to be so immured," replied Louis, with a
mournful smile, "is not a very mortal sin!"
This remark put his uncle to painful silence. He understood its import,
though he had never before suspected the possibility of its existence.
The moment he heard it, he wondered that he should not have foreseen
the birth of such a sentiment, in such a character as Louis, for
such a mind as Lady Marcella's. And, in the moment of apprehending
this affection, being also aware, that it was awakened only for
disappointment, he paused, and fixed his benign eyes on his nephew. The
venerable man, had in early youth, once known to love, and to resign
its object; and, now remembering something of the pangs he had so long
forgotten, he exclaimed, "alas! alas! I was not prepared for this!"
Louis took his hand with the enthusiasm of a manly heart re-illumining
his momentarily saddened countenance.
"But I am, my uncle!" said he, "and when she, who alone I ever truly
loved, has indeed uttered the fatal vow; I will do my best, to
reconcile your plan of ministry, with that of Bishop Taylor's celibacy:
and, so tread in the steps of my revered Pastor, to the end of my days!"
He put his uncle's hand to his lips, to conceal the sigh that would
have ended the sentence.
Mr. Athelstone thought it best to pass immediately from a subject on
which hope could have no footing; and he proposed, that as heaven had
seen it good to spare the life of Duke Wharton, their next object was
to preserve him from the knowledge of the government, until he were
sufficiently recovered to pass beyond seas. To effect this concealment
with the least mystery, he recommended entrusting the Marchioness and
her family with what had happened. Don Garcia, the physician, would
be bound to keep the secret, on account of the Duke's power in the
Spanish court; and then he might be removed to Lindisfarne, as part
of the travelling suite. In that remote place, he would be attended
by Don Garcia; and might await his convalescence without much alarm
for his personal safety. Louis highly approved of these suggestions;
and settled, that as soon as he had seen Wharton in the morning, he
would return to Alnwick, and make the necessary arrangements with the
Marchioness.
Towards dawn, the Pastor dropt asleep in his great chair, and Louis
was left to his meditations. He too well remembered the distressed,
and almost reproachful looks, with which the mother of Marcella had
regarded him, when he so quiescently permitted her daughter to hurry
forward to the danger of her health; and also, the uncomplaining
perseverance of Marcella, for the two first days; and the unselfed,
and almost indignant firmness with which she bore the third. There was
something in these remembrances, which, while they overpowered him with
regretful shame at his seeming ingratitude, yet awakened a countless
train of recollections that flowed like balm into his soul. With his
lips, he foreswore all hope of Marcella; but there was a subtle
something in the bottom of his heart, that would not allow him to feel
that he must absolutely seek the resignation he professed.
He ruminated on the consolations he had received at her hands when
he lay in sickness and in sorrow; on the gentle virtues, which, like
silent rills, only betraying their hidden course by a brighter green
above, shewed their foundation in the beautiful composure of her
character. Her tender cares had been as unremitting as efficient; and
made her influence be felt throughout his whole soul, even as the
atmosphere that surrounded him; soft, balmy, and inspiring!
Louis knew not that he loved her, till he believed he took his last
leave of her, on the steps of the altar in the chapel of Ceuta. He knew
not how he loved her, till the burthen of his friend's delinquency was
taken from his heart; and its first spring was to pour the rapture of
the conviction into her pure bosom. He would not, however, acknowledge
to himself, that he thought she loved him. But he felt it in every
nerve of his body, in the dearest recesses of his soul, in every
heaven-directed aspiration of his grateful spirit.
"And, in heaven alone," cried he, "will it be mutually imparted, and
enjoyed!"
CHAP. XXIV.
The morning's sun witnessed the agitated, though happy meeting between
Louis and Cornelia, while their venerable uncle was gone to prepare the
awakened invalid for the entrance of his friend. Much circumlocution
was not suffered to precede a re-union, after which the Duke panted, as
if it were the earnest of all his future good. Louis was not less eager
to forgive, and be forgiven; and to throw himself on the breast of the
man he had always loved, (whether in admiration, or in forbearance;)
with at last the sanction of the best guardians of his youth and virtue.
When he was told he might approach the chamber; the permission, and
the clasp of Wharton's arms around his body, seemed the action of one
instant. Mr. Athelstone closed the door on the friends, and left them
alone. The gallant heart of the Duke, and the soul of Louis melted at
once into one stream of mingling tenderness; and, sweet were those
manly tears. They were as the "Pool of Bethesda;" whence each arose
strengthened; and restored to a friendship, deathless as their souls.
All was recapitulated; all was explained. And Wharton now stood before
his friend, without a shadow, without a mystery. But in the deep and
intricate enfoldment of the snares which lurked in the gay assemblies
of the Hotel d'Ettrees, Louis often shuddered in the depths of his
heart.
"I found you there;" continued Wharton; "I doubted, and I tried you!
But like the light, you pass through the impurest objects without
defilement!--Yet, when you are a father, de Montemar, never advise
your sons to make a similar experiment."
"Never! never!" returned Louis, with every agonized recollection in his
voice.
The Duke resumed; and as he, in like manner, unwound the devious clew
of policy, and shewed him all its labyrinths, and gins, and hidden
places--where
"The toad beds with the viper; and darkness
Weds with murder, to do the work of hell!"
The spirit of Louis mourned within him, that such paths
had been those of his friend; that in those trackless wildernesses his
beloved father had perished.
"But it was to kill the Minotaur, I entered his den!" replied Wharton.
"Yes," answered Louis, "but you did not escape the taint of his
breath!--Let me thank Heaven, I was so soon beaten from the same
ground!"
"No;" replied the Duke, "the politics of Europe are only to be
redeemed from Machiavelian villanies, by honest men turning their
talents to fulfil the trust, of which those talents are the warrant."
"But then the mode of warfare!" rejoined Louis, "all the evil passions
are aroused; and who would enlist with such leaders?"
"Reverse the order, and make them your followers!" replied Wharton.
"Man must be ruled by our knowledge of his nature. To the noble, give
noble stimulus; to the base, the scourge. You must take the world as
you find it; use it according to its own worthlessness, and not by the
measure of yourself. To talk of virtue to some statesmen, would be
casting our pearls before swine! And, we should certainly share the mud
in which the hogs would trample them. To act virtuously is our command;
and obedience will work its way. Your uncle reads us a parable to this
effect?"
"He does, Wharton!" replied Louis, pressing his friend's hand; "But he
also reads--Let not thy good be evil spoken of! and, has it not been
too much the case with thine?"
"Granted!" returned the Duke, "What has been, shall not be again. And,
if God grant me life," continued he, "you shall hear of me, to the
satisfaction of your heart, and to the confusion of my enemies!"
The spirit of Wharton seemed in such vigour during this lengthened
interview, that it embraced every subject that could interest Louis
or himself; and readily fell in with Mr. Athelstone's project of his
accompanying the family of Santa Cruz, to Lindisfarne.
"And will those holy walls open to receive me?" asked the Duke; "de
Montemar, I have not seen the rocks of Lindisfarne, since I forced you
into its waves! It is not my interest to woo your Cornelia on that
spot."
"Take her then, to the mountains of Genoa!" replied Louis. He had not,
before mentioned his knowledge, that it was Wharton who preserved his
father from assassination in those mountains; and, the reference now,
shot such a hope into the breast of the Duke, that catching the hand of
his friend to its beating pulse, he exclaimed:--
"Be you my advocate with that unsullied being! Oh! how different from
the meretricous syrens who beguiled me of my youth--who made me doubt
all of her sex's mold, till I beheld her! Her sentiments, language, and
manners, are like her frame; made in the image of man, but possessing
every softening grace of female nature. Four years ago, little did I
know the treasure that islet contained; else I would have leapt the
rock, by your side:--And, what a waste of life, might then have been
spared me!"
This avowal from Wharton enraptured his friend. His former Duchess, (a
wife, only in name,) had been long dead; and Louis would have been
glad that Cornelia had been his sister; that the bonds which might
unite them, could have been nearer to himself; he expressed this with
animation; and the Duke as earnestly replied:--
"My dearest Louis! Is not kinsman, brother, cousin, all comprised in
the precious name of friend? Intercede as such, for me, with your
beloved cousin: and she will not then silence the pleadings of her own
generous bosom. I am too well-read in woman, not to see she does not
hate me. And I also see she can reject the thing she loves--when she
doubts its worthiness!"
"Cornelia, could never love, what she thought unworthy;" replied Louis,
"therefore, my friend, repose in that faith, till we meet again!"
CHAP. XXV.
Ferdinand had just left with his sister, a few hasty lines which had
preceded Louis from Morewick, when the writer himself entered, like
Maia's son breathing hope and happiness, into the room where the
Marchioness was preparing breakfast.
"Whatever your secret may be, it is a pleasant one!" cried she, "your
countenance is a brilliant herald."
That of Marcella's (as she was dismissing her maids from the adjoining
apartment where she had just finished dressing) was blanched, pale as
the trembling hand which closed upon the unread letter.
"Oh," sighed she, to herself; "would to God, that I had never left
Spain--or never seen this land!" What were Louis's answers to her
mother, or her brother (who both spoke at once) she did not hear. The
pulses of her head beat almost audibly, and seemed to exclude all other
sounds from reaching her ears. She was separated from the room by a
slight door only, which, standing ajar, discovered his figure to her
as it animatedly moved to and fro, as with similar energy, but in a
lowered voice, he imparted his secret to her mother and brother.
Ferdinand came in; and finding her thrown back into her chair, he
gently touched her arm; and entreating her to allow him to lead her
into the breakfast room; added, if she still felt too fatigued to be
anxious to pursue her journey; he was sure she would think otherwise,
presently; for de Montemar was come back, and had much to tell her!
"He has told you, and my mother;" said she, "and that is enough. I
shall soon have no interests in this world!" but the last, was only
murmured to herself. However she rose; and leaning on her brother,
walked steadily and serenely into the next room.
Louis stood opposite to the door at which she entered.
"Were I a Catholic, sweet saint!" said he, inwardly; "how would I
worship thee!" and his head bent with the sentiment, upon his breast.
She bowed calmly to him.
"My child," said the Marchioness, "we are to pass this day at Morewick;
where you will meet Mr. Athelstone, and Miss Coningsby."
"And am I to witness their nuptials?" cried Marcella to herself; "but
even that I will endure!" And forcing a smile, which gleamed like a
moon-beam on a flowery grave, she answered,--"Just where you please,
madam." And took her seat.
The Marchioness turned from her to Louis; and observing the deep and
penetrating tenderness with which he regarded her; she drew near her
son, and while a tear started in her eye, whispered him. "Surely your
father may consider of his daughter's happiness too long; and withhold
the dove of promise, till there be no resting place for its foot."
Ferdinand saw his mother was affected; and making an excuse to attend
her, to consult with Don Garcia respecting their proceeding, he took
her from the room.
Marcella was now left alone with Louis. She sat like a cold statue.
His joyous heart was overclouded at once; and with a slow step he
approached her. Her eyes were cast down, and fixed on her clasped
hands, in which she still held the letter. At that moment all his
love, and all the agonies of her displeasure, were apparent in his
countenance. She looked up; and received its full import direct upon
her heart. The confusion in her's, the gasp with which she recalled
her eyes, and covered them with her hand, proclaimed her whole secret
to Louis; and wrested from him all his own; but not a word could find
utterance on either side. He was at her feet on his knees, and with the
hem of her garment pressed to his lips.
But how different was the sentiment which then rendered him speechless,
from the tumultuous emotion which arrested him in the same position
before Countess Altheim! There his spirit was divided against itself.
His reason doubted the admiration of his senses; and a racking
indecision checked his wishes and his lips. Here his whole soul
consented to the perfect love, with which the virtues of Marcella
had possessed his heart. The passion that she inspired was like
herself; a sacred flame, and lit for immortality: and Louis avowed its
imperishable nature to himself, even while he struggled for words, to
foreswear it at the feet of the future nun for ever.
Marcella's faculties, so lately possessed with the idea of his
devotion to Cornelia, were all amazement. Surprised out of herself,
by the look she had momentarily seen; and immediately feeling him at
her feet; she became so overwhelmed by her own consciousness, and his
irrepressible emotions, that she shook, almost to the parting of soul
and body.
"Pardon me, lady Marcella!" cried he, "pardon my first and my last
disclosure of a sentiment, which as it has no hope, I trust, has no
sacrilege! But to love all that is pure and noble in idea; and not
to love its living image was impossible to me. You confirmed me in
the virtue I might have deserted! You consoled me when the world had
abandoned me! You have even now, exerted yourself beyond your strength,
in compassion to a desperate haste for which I durst not assign a
cause. This last goodness leaves me no longer master of myself. It
has precipitated me to the avowal of a sentiment, which in my breast,
shall never know a second object. The hour that consigns you to a
cloister, seals my heart for ever."
This was spoken with agitated rapidity; but no answer was returned.
Marcella felt her own tenderness for him was no longer a secret to
him:--She had betrayed it herself! and her horror at this conviction,
overwhelmed all other considerations. She attempted to rise, he did not
venture to withold her.
"Have I offended you, Lady Marcella," cried he, "past all pardon?"
She had arrived at the door of the inner room, when he repeated the
demand, with an anguish of expression she could not mistake. Turning
round, she faulteringly replied.--
"I have offended, past all hope of my own pardon!"
Louis was springing forward. She saw the movement, though with still
down-cast eyes; and putting out her hand, with an air of vestal
reserve, decisively, but gently pronounced,--
"No more." And disappeared into the room.
The emotions in his breast were inexplicable to himself. He was
awe-struck, by her manner. His sentence of perpetual silence was in
those words!--And yet the flood of happiness which burst over his whole
heart, at the conviction her first moments of confusion inspired, would
not be driven back.
He was standing in this agitated state, when the Marchioness entered,
followed by Ferdinand and Don Garcia. On perceiving that Marcella was
not in the room, she expressed some alarm at her disappearance; and
accompanied by the physician, hastened to seek her in the adjoining
apartment.
Ferdinand glanced in the kindling face of his friend, and conjectured
better than his mother. He drew near him. "De Montemar," said he, in a
lowered voice, "shall I guess your meditations?"
"No, Ferdinand, I would not extend my offence; and yet you have read me
ill, if I have been able to hide it from you!"
"And who have you offended, my brother?" asked Ferdinand, drawing close
to him, and in a tone so peculiar, that Louis's bounding heart beat
against the side of his friend as he rapidly answered,
"Say not that word again, or you will undo me!"
"De Montemar," returned Ferdinand, "hope, as I have done, against
possibilities!"
Louis's eyes demanded what he meant.
Ferdinand continued; "I dare not say more: my father's return will tell
you the rest!"
"Your brother?" repeated Louis.
"My brother!" answered Ferdinand, and strained him to his breast.
Louis was now in air, in the dawning light of paradise; nor were the
interchanges produced by suspense, more than passing shadows, to the
luminous hope that shone upon his soul.
He and Ferdinand took horse for the short ride to Morewick; and
during their drive the Marchioness communicated to her daughter, all
that Louis had confided to her, respecting the cause of his late
eagerness to return thither. As Marcella listened to the history of
his friendship for Duke Wharton; its trials, its sufferings; and now
its triumph, in the reformation of his friend from all his errors, and
final restoration as from the grave; her tears bore too true a witness
to the interest with which she hearkened to every circumstance that
related to him. She hardly allowed herself to breathe, during that part
of the narrative where her mother particularly enlarged on Cornelia's
cares of the Duke; and repeated the observation of Louis, that such
cares seemed his friend's best sanative; for that he believed, if any
two persons were fitted by Providence for each other, it was the nobly
eccentric mind of Wharton, to the celestial harmony of his cousin's.
"She is my ruling planet, that I have found at last," said the Duke to
his friend, "and her attraction will keep me in its orbit."
Marcella was too confounded by the last scene between her and Louis, to
confess a word of what had passed; she had been even more ashamed to
communicate her apprehensions to her anxious parent, concerning this
boasted cousin of the Marquis de Montemar. Therefore she now looked
down, believing the fulness of her secret yet unknown to all but to its
object, and gladly would she have died, rather than be conscious to the
degradation of that hour.
She knew that her father had obtained from the Pope, a dispensation
from his vow, relative to immuring her in a convent; and she did not
doubt that Louis had been told the same in their first meeting at
Harwich.
Though she had pined in thought, from the hour of her losing sight
of him; and felt how hard it was to do, what she most inconsistently
wished to accomplish, to make monastic vows, when her heart lingered
after an earthly image!--yet, though the canker preyed inwardly, she
knew not the extent of her love, till she found its fangs of jealousy,
when she first heard him speak of Cornelia being at Morewick, and that
he must hasten to rejoin her. His conduct during their last day's
journey to Alnwick, filled her with all the tortures of passion; for
not until then, had she known, by the reverse and the disappointment,
the incipient hope which had lurked at the bottom of her heart,--that
she was not indifferent to him!
Louis in the last interview at the inn in Alnwick, had avowed something
of this sentiment, but the circumstances overwhelmed her; and wishing
to forget the whole for ever, she did not even make a remark to her
mother on what she imparted.
Louis and Ferdinand having preceded the carriage half an hour, they
stood with Mr. Athelstone under the porch of the hall, to receive the
travellers.
Marcella's eye instantly fell on the silver-headed Pastor of
Lindisfarne. He seemed to stand, like the benignant saint of Patmos,
venerable in years, and reverend in the spirit of holiness. He saluted
the cheek of the animated Marchioness; but when he put out his hand to
support the advancing steps of Marcella, her knees obeyed the impulse
of her heart, and she bent before him, kissing his sacred hand.
"Bless you! bless you, my child!" said he, laying his other hand upon
her head. Louis's ready heart could not bear the sight of such a
recognition, without a sensibility he feared to shew; and he vanished
into the recesses of the hall. The Pastor raised her in his arms, and
bearing her gently into a room, put her into those of Cornelia, who had
just embraced the Marchioness.
Cornelia dared hardly venture to clasp the beautiful phantom to her
bosom; but tenderly supported her tremulous frame to a sofa, where she
gently seated her; and, pressing her soft hand in her's, gazed at her
through her crowding tears. Was this fragile being, just hanging like
a broken lilly, between the next breeze and the cold earth; was it she
who had stood the fearful thunders of Ceuta? who had raised her head
amidst the storm of war, to staunch the bleeding wounds of Louis de
Montemar? to cherish his life at the expence of her own?
"It was!" cried the full heart of Cornelia to herself; and, in
inarticulate, but ardent, language, she uttered her welcome.
The kindness of her voice drew the last sting of jealousy from the
bosom of Marcella. She looked up, and thanked her with her eyes. There
was something which passed from them, so powerful to the heart of
Cornelia, that she gave way to the impulse of the impression; and,
clasping the interesting Spaniard to her bosom, imprinted on her cheek
a sister's kiss. That glance of Cornelia's noble countenance had struck
Marcella with its general resemblance to that of her cousin; and
she seemed to feel a pledge of something more than the welcome of a
stranger, in this repeated embrace of Louis's most beloved relative.
The Marchioness was soon at home with the benign Pastor of Lindisfarne;
and both she and Ferdinand were inquiring of him various particulars
respecting their suit with Alice and Mrs. Coningsby, when Louis entered
the room, after having introduced Don Garcia to the Duke.
Cornelia stretched out her hand to him. "Louis," said she, "you must
make an interest for me, in the heart of Lady Marcella before she
sees Alice, whom she will doubly love, for her own sake, and for Don
Ferdinand's."
"Miss Coningsby," replied Marcella, "needs no interest but her own."
Louis approached with happy trepidation. What he said was as little
to the purpose, as it was unheard by Marcella; and would have been
marvelled at by Cornelia, had she not lately found a key in her own
bosom, to explain language that had no visible meaning, and certain
inconsistencies in demeanour, which betrayed all they meant to conceal.
CHAP. XXVI.
A sojourn of several days, in which other feelings besides those of
personal weakness, influenced Lady Marcella to keep her apartment,
sufficiently restored the whole party, to enable them to recommence
their journey northward without fear of fatigue.
The skill of the Spanish physician, (who united surgery with his
medical science,) was so successful with Duke Wharton, that he, too,
was pronounced capable of partaking the removal. A litter conveyed him
to a hired yacht, which lay at the mouth of the Coquet. This mode of
travel was chosen as the easiest for an invalid in his case; and Louis,
with Don Garcia and Lorenzo, were his attendants. The wind was fair for
Lindisfarne; and the smooth sea, sparkled under a bright noon-day sun,
when the little party embarked.
Mr. Athelstone and Ferdinand accompanied the ladies by land. They had
set off early in the morning, to travel by easy stages, so as to reach
the island before night.
Though no words of mutual confidence on the subjects nearest to the
hearts of Cornelia and Marcella, had passed the lips of either, yet
each read the secret thoughts of the other, and soothed, or cheered,
with a reciprocal delicacy, as amiable as it was salutary. The little
taper in the bosom of each, which each covered with the care of a
vestal, to conceal, but not to extinguish, gave to its owner the power
of discerning the locked mysteries of her friend.
Cornelia had been benumbed with horror, when she first discovered
that the noble invalid she had cherished as some illustrious
foreigner, worthy to be loved by her virtuous cousin,--was the Duke
of Wharton!--Illustrious, indeed, in birth, and station, and talents;
noble in figure, and beloved by her cousin!--But the man, of all
others in the world, whom she had most abhorred for the abuse of
those faculties, which had been so richly bestowed, and so shamefully
abandoned to the worst of purposes. She stood aghast at herself when
she found, that she now not only knew him to be that reprobated
Wharton, but that when he should close his eyes in death, (which was
then hourly expected,) the world would then be a desert to her.
It was in the moment when Mr. Athelstone flashed it at once upon her
mind, who was her guest, that as soon as the venerable man had left
her to herself, she exclaimed in the agony of such a recognition,--
"Oh, Wharton! what the Prophet said of the Prince of Tyre, may too
surely be said of thee: Thou didst seal up the sum! Full of wisdom,
and perfect in beauty! Thou wast prosperous in thy ways, from the
day thou wast created, until iniquity was found in thee. And, now,
they draw the sword against the beauty of thy wisdom. They defile thy
brightness, and bring down thy glory to the ashes of the grave!"
And who dare lament over such a grave? There is no sympathy for her who
deplores a dishonoured name. There is no pity for her who weeps that
the traitor is no more. She must glide by stealth to that lonely tomb.
Her tears must fall in solitude on the trackless path; and, when lying
on the neglected sod, there she may cry to Him alone, whose eye is over
all, to pity and to pardon erring man!
"And so, Wharton!" exclaimed she, "I will lament and pray for thee!"
But, when her uncle informed her that this once offending and
deprecated Wharton, regretted, with religious contrition, the
transgressions of his youth, the severest pangs in her bosom were laid
to rest; and she resumed what she believed her last duties about the
dying patient, with a chastised tenderness, as soothing as it was pure
from any earthly sentiment.
When her cares, and the will of Providence, recalled him from the
brink of the grave to all the cheering promises of a speedy recovery;
then she remembered what he had been, and armed herself against the
external graces of his person, by recollecting the snares they had been
to his virtues. The enchantments of his conversation, and the subduing
influence of his mute gratitude, his eloquent looks, and often implied
love, she shut from her heart, by recalling the various reported
instances of his former delusions over man and woman. Cornelia believed
that she had disgracefully deserted the best principle of her sex, in
having admitted any sentiment more than compassion, for a stranger
under the circumstances in which she found the Duke; and, when known,
to continue to prefer him who had once been the world's idolater; she
deemed so unworthy of herself, of all her declared opinions, that,
stern in her self-controul, she turned from all his ardours with a
coldness not to be subdued, and a resolution not to be shaken. In the
dignity of unsullied virtue, Cornelia often strengthened herself by
inwardly repeating, "Wharton, thy former sins must be thy temporary
punishment; and my present weakness, the lasting scourge of mine!"
Marcella's meditations were less painful than Cornelia's; for the
object of her thoughts was spotless as her own purity. There was
no torture in her retrospections, excepting the memory of her last
interview with Louis in the inn; but, as she now intended to obliterate
its impressions on him, by an unchanging distance in her manner; she
flattered herself that he would doubt the evidence of her former
confusion; and that, hereafter, they might resume the character to each
other, of mere mutual benevolence. She believed this, and she was
tranquil; but she deceived herself on the grounds of this serenity.
Hope was the spirit of peace, which had taken its hidden station in
her heart; and health dawned, and spread upon her cheek, as the inward
principle slowly, but surely gained power.
The reception of the party at Lindisfarne, was that of the re-union of
dear and long acquainted friends. Mrs. Coningsby and the Marchioness,
met with the frank cordiality of persons who already held that
connection, which the marriage of their children would confirm. Alice
was bathed in tears, when her future second mother folded her to
her breast, and put her hand into the rapturous grasp of Ferdinand.
Marcella was greeted with equal kindness; and Mrs. Coningsby herself,
drew the old abbot's ebony couch into the circle, for the accommodation
of her gentle guest. Peter, the grey headed butler, placed its cushions
with assiduous care; and as she thanked him in the English language,
but in the Spanish custom stretched out her hand to him; he kissed it
respectfully, and prayed God to bless her!
Tea was soon prepared in that room, where Ferdinand had first beheld
the lovely sisters; and compared their unsophisticated beauties, with
those of more worldly charms. He was then a despairing wretch; he was
now a happy lover! The same moon seemed shedding her silver light
through the feathery shrubs at the window. The evening was chill, with
all its brightness; and a fire blazed as before, under the Gothic
mantle piece. The cat and the dog were also there; and the venerable
Pastor completed the picture of delighted memory:--He sat by the
side of the glowing hearth, smiling in conscious piety; as with one
hand leaning on the couch of Marcella, he addressed her with all the
tenderness of a parent. The Marchioness conversed animatedly with Mrs.
Coningsby. His own Alice, was at that moment dispensing the fragrant
tea, in the very china from which he had drank it three years ago!
Cornelia was by her side; enjoying with a fond sister's delight, the
perfect happiness of this evening's re-union.
When the tea equipage was withdrawn, and they all drew into little
groups, the artless Alice exclaimed, "oh, how I wish Louis were here!"
"I wish so too," rejoined Ferdinand, in the same affectionate tone; and
glancing at his sister, who had heard the tender apostrophe, though
spoken in a half whisper; and her kindling cheek bore witness that she
shared the sentiment.
Cornelia sighed; for she thought, "who is there, that would wish for
Wharton?"
She was near Marcella; and Marcella understanding whose image was in
that invisible sign, almost unconsciously pressed the hand of her
friend, and softly whispered, "and the Duke too!" Cornelia's blush was
now more vivid than Marcella's; and it was accompanied by a glow of
gratitude to her, which shed a distant gleam on him, she before shrunk
at remembering. His idea then was not so obscured to the eye of virtue,
but that Marcella, the all pure and saintly Marcella, could think of
him at that moment, with the approbation of a wish!
The embrace with which the two friends parted at night, told much of
this without the agency of words.
That night, when all else in the family were gone to rest, Mr.
Athelstone imparted to Mrs. Coningsby, the whole history of Wharton;
from the commencement of his friendship with Louis, to the time of his
being found by him, wounded and dying in the herdsman's hut.
When she listened to the explanation of his most suspicious, and even
hostile proceedings against her nephew; when she was told the dangers
he had exposed himself to, to shield that nephew; and considered his
generous forbearance with regard to the Duke his father; when she
comprehended all his late exertions for the reputation of the one, and
the rights of the other:--she was in an ecstacy of amazement; and with
all the usual ardour of her nature exclaimed,
"How is such a man to be sufficiently admired! How can he ever be
repaid for such unexampled friendship?"
"I believe it will be in your power," replied the Pastor, gently
smiling.
"In mine, Mr. Athelstone?"
"Yes, give him Cornelia! and I am mistaken, if he would accept the
future Empress of Germany in exchange."
A full explanation immediately ensued. And, after having mutually
agreed, not to notice the latter discovery to Cornelia, until the
Duke should avow his sentiments to her guardians; Mr. Athelstone,
and the happy mother parted; he, to his midnight orisons; and she,
not neglectful of the same, but also to plan every comfortable
accommodation for the reception of him, whom she now hoped, would be
her second son-in-law.
CHAP. XXVII.
The next day rose in storms. The sky was covered with clouds, flying
before the wind in infinite volumes of rolling blackness. The sea
raged against the beetling rocks of Lindisfarne, as if it menaced
the existence of the island; and the fishers, who had prepared their
little barks all along the beech, for embarkation at the dawn, were
seen on every side, drawing them ashore, to prevent the mischief which
threatened such small craft, from the beating of the waves.
Some, that had been more adventurous, and set forth during the night,
notwithstanding the warning elements, met the fate their more prudent
comrades averted; and Peter came in, to take away the almost untasted
breakfast, with the melancholy tidings, that the wreck of several
boats had been dashed on shore.
Mr. Athelstone anticipated a sad summons from many a bereft family
in his flock; and his own anxious fears for the yacht that carried
his beloved nephew, unfolding to him what were the apprehensions in
every breast around him, he gently reproved the old man, for bringing
in the reports of the hour, to wound the tender spirits of invalids;
and glancing at Marcella, who had turned her death-like face away, he
piously ejaculated:
"But, the Lord makes darkness his secret place! His pavilion round
about him is dark water, and thick clouds cover him. But at the
brightness of his presence, the clouds shall be removed, and he shall
take them who trust in him, out of many waters!"
Cornelia rose from her seat, and withdrew. And when the encrease of
the storm became too intolerable for Marcella to endure with any
apparent tranquillity, she too, left the Abbot's chair, and putting her
unsteady hand upon the arm of her mother, hardly sustained herself out
of the room.
The sky was red on the horizon, as if dyed in blood, and the lurid
clouds, tumbling over each other, like an upward sea of molten fire,
roared in the blast, amid the thundering of the waves below, which
dashed their boiling surges in mountainous and foaming heaps, against
the stupendous cliffs of the opposite shore.
Mr. Athelstone and Ferdinand were both on different parts of the rock,
each with his telescope in his hand, looking afar for the only object
which now possessed their thought. But a furious tornado of sleet
and rain, accompanied with thunder and lightning, and a darkness at
noon-day, black as midnight, shrouded them at once; and the re-doubling
tempest which burst forth above and beneath, seemed to shake the old
rocks of Lindisfarne to their foundations.
At the fearful concussion, which appeared to the inhabitants of the
Pastorage, like the awful summons on the judgment-day, Marcella threw
herself on the bosom of her mother, and murmured, "Louis!" till her
swooning voice was heard no more.
Cornelia was alone, and fell from her knees, prostrate on the floor.
She was found in that position, and insensible as her friend, when
Alice ran into the room in the agony of her fears; and her screams
brought their terrified mother into the same apartment.
Mr. Athelstone's look-out of utter hopelessness, was succeeded by the
now doubly afflicting duty of visiting and consoling the widows and
the orphans, which the present horrors had rendered dependent on his
spiritual comfort. More than one drowned body was carried before him,
into the sorrowing cottage which had once been its home; and, after he
had soothed the wretched inhabitants with "the hope which is to come;"
he took his way to the Parsonage, to prepare his own family for the
dreadful catastrophe to its happiness, which, he did not doubt that
night, or the next morning, would unfold.
Ferdinand would not relinquish his more cheering expectations, till
despair should appear before him, in the lifeless bodies of his friends.
Noon, and evening, and approaching night, were only marked, to the
lately so happy Pastorage, now the house of mourning, by the fits
of the storm. Marcella lay weeping in her mother's arms, no longer
disguising the condition of her heart. And the Marchioness, in more
audible anguish, wrung her hands over her, frequently exclaiming--
"Oh, most unholy Island! Would to God we had never seen its rocks!
Marcella, my child, my child! Still live for your fond mother."
Cornelia lay buried in the coverlid of her bed, in that terrible
stillness, which alike disdained further concealment of her grief, and
rejected the comfort that could not reach her heart. Mrs. Coningsby
knelt by her bed-side, and Alice, ran weeping from room to room,
offering her insufficient consolations to all.
Mr. Athelstone knew that this terrific hour of suspense, was not the
time to do more than repeat his first injunctions to hope even while
they feared; and to trust in the preserving power, or the support of
Him, who alike commanded the great deep, and the firm land.
None in the island slept that tremendous night; but those whose eyes
the surge had closed, never to wake again till time should be no more.
Mr. Athelstone remained alone in his study, composing himself for the
task he dreaded the morning would call upon him to fulfil; or walking
to and fro, struggling with the human affections in his breast which
unmanned all his resignation, when he pictured the weltering waves
which were then washing the lifeless body of his beloved Louis.
"Oh, my child!" cried he, "was it for this, that all those endowments
were bestowed?--That all these trials have been sustained!"
But he checked the rebellious grief that channelled his venerable
cheeks with tears; and, bowing before Him, whose gracious providence he
preached, he exclaimed,--"Not my will, but thine be done! For I asked
of thee life for him, and honour; but thou hast given him immortality,
and glory, even for ever!"
Whilst he was in the depths of these devotions, the violence of the
storm gradually subsided, and a stillness, horrid to meditation,
succeeded. It was a pause in nature, that seemed to declare the work
of destruction was accomplished, and the destroying agents might repose.
The dawn slowly broke, and found the pious man with his Bible before
him. A suppressed bustle, sounded from the hall. He started from his
seat, and entering the intervening room, met Ferdinand with his cloaths
and hair dripping, having neither hat nor cloak; but joy was in his
countenance, and seizing Mr. Athelstone's hand,
"They are safe!" cried he, "My father, and Sir Anthony, bring the good
tidings! The yatch is safe!"
The Pastor bent his silvered head for a moment on the shoulder of
Ferdinand, and the holy man's sacred response ascended to heaven. When
he looked up, the Marquis Santa Cruz, and Sir Anthony were in the room;
and they replied to his grateful questions, by informing him in detail,
of what the following is a brief account.
The Marquis and the Baronet met at the young King's levee. They
mutually recognised each other, and when their respective businesses in
London were finished, they agreed to return together to Lindisfarne.
The tempest which produced such calamitous effects at sea, extended
itself far on the land; and the travellers encountering its worst fury
in the road near Bamborough, the Baronet deemed it prudent to proceed
to the castle, and remain there till the state of the weather would
allow a boat to cross without risque.
During the night, and in the greatest press of the storm, he heard
a gun of distress. A beacon always burnt on what was called the
beltale-tower of the castle; but on the present intimation of some ship
in danger, he ordered other lights to be lit on a promontory which
shot farther into the sea. His life boat also was dispatched to the
assistance of the vessel. It came up with her in the crisis of her
fate; "and the result was," cried Sir Anthony, "she was hauled safely
into the Castle-creek."
"And her freight," rejoined the Marquis, with a smile and a humid eye,
"was Sir Anthony's old friend and our dear de Montemar!"
"Oh, Providence!" piously exclaimed the Pastor, "how measureless ought
to be our gratitude unto thee!"
"It shall be registered on those very rocks where he might have been
wrecked!" returned the Baronet. "When Louis blessed the well known
lights of Bamborough, which had rescued him and his friend from a
watery grave, the proper act of gratitude struck at once upon my mind.
He is to be my heir, and I told him that my ghost should haunt him day
and night, if he did not make those towers for ever after a beacon for
the mariner, and his asylum from the waves! And they shall be so!"
added the Baronet, solemnly striking his hand upon his breast. The
news was soon spread throughout the house. And when Mr. Athelstone
returned from imparting it to the two chambers of the deepest anxiety,
it was with the grateful tears of both Cornelia and Marcella, yet wet
upon his venerable cheeks, that he re-entered the room.
He found that Ferdinand, who was now gone to throw off his wet
garments, had never been within the whole night, but had passed it
in traversing the island from rock to rock, vainly listening to the
roaring ocean; and gazing through the darkness for what he feared, she
should never see again. He was the first object the crossing boat of
Sir Anthony saw on the western cliffs of Lindisfarne. Ferdinand had
descried the little vessel at a distance; and hastening down to see
what it contained, he recognised his father, and soon after was told
the joyful tidings which brought them so early across the strait.
The perils which the yacht had weathered, were not to be described;
and the Duke was so exhausted in consequence, Don Garcia would not
allow him to attempt the island until he had obtained some repose.
"I'faith," continued the Baronet, with a thoughtless laugh; "I believe
I gave my worthy friend but a thorny pillow for his opiad, by telling
him my reception from the young King! Indeed he is so gracious to all
ranks, the friends of a certain Prince may consider it the worst thing
that ever happened to their cause, when their prayers were answered
by the demise of George the First! George the Second understands that
Englishmen are born free and will remain so; and while he, and such as
he, hold the British sceptre, I shall always be one to say, Long live
the House of Brunswick!"
"Amen!" exclaimed the Pastor.
"I do not dissent from your sentiment!" rejoined the Marquis "and
whatever may be my impressions in favour of his royal competitor; I
must admit that while the house of Brunswick is represented by such
a character as the present Prince who fills the throne, James Stuart
can have no hope. To attempt the subversion of a power, founded on the
virtues of the possessor, would be to outrage heaven, and lead on to
unavailing bloodshed. Of this Louis has so thoroughly convinced Duke
Wharton, that even he acknowledges, the little probability of any sword
being drawn again in the contest, either in his life time, or in that
of the present monarch."
This information was very grateful to Mr. Athelstone, as a friend
to freedom and to the church, and also as the guardian of Cornelia
Coningsby. To give her to a man, however estimable in himself, who
was actively engaged against the royal protector of the political and
religious liberties of his country, he hardly knew how to reconcile
with his own loyalty and faith. But the present judgment Duke Wharton
had passed on his own party, seemed to untie the knot, and the worthy
Pastor was satisfied. With this difficulty happily settled in his mind,
it was with a smiling countenance that in the course of the morning, he
re-visited the chamber of her most interested in the subject.
Cornelia was too much shaken by her late mental suffering, to be yet
able to leave her room; but it was with a sensation of some heavenly
balm distilling upon her heart, that she listened to all these things.
That he she loved, was not only reconciled to his God, but had ceased
to deserve the indictment of outlawry, were precious convictions!
though not with any relation to her future union with him; that she
declared impossible.
Mr. Athelstone attended to all she professed, and with the benevolent
spirit of Him who said;--"Neither do I condemn thee.--Go, and sin no
more!" he combated all her agitated arguments against uniting her fate
with the person, she confessed to be dearest to her in the world.
"My Uncle," said she, "am I not commanded, in some cases, to cut off my
right hand? I would do it now."
"In what cases?" inquired the Pastor.
"In those which might separate me from my duty towards my Creator."
"But be careful to distinguish!" replied he, "ask yourself what duty
you will transgress, in becoming the wife of a man, whose errors have
been expiated by repentance; and whose reformation has been proved by
his conduct towards the memory of the Duke of Ripperda, and his zeal
for the rights of his son. I leave you my Cornelia, to ponder on these
things. Be merciful to yourself, and just to Wharton, and heaven will
bless the sentence of your heart!"
CHAP. XXVIII.
In the evening, when every breeze was calm, and "the bright-haired
sun was making a golden set;" the Marquis Santa Cruz sat alone with
his daughter, in her dressing room. Their conference had been long
and salutary to both their hearts, and even as it closed with a
communication to convince Marcella she entirely occupied that of Louis
de Montemar; Lorenzo entered to summon the Marquis below.
Mr. Athelstone feared to agitate her, by an abrupt enunciation of the
arrival of his nephew, but the appearance of Lorenzo, who had been
the companion of his perilous voyage, was enough; and in speechless
gratitude, she pressed her father's hand to her lips as he rose to
obey the call.
The Marchioness and Mrs. Coningsby, and all of the family, excepting
Cornelia and Marcella, were in the drawing-room with the Marquis. The
Duke still lay on the litter on which he had been brought on shore;
and he was looking around, with a melancholy smile, on the rapturous
greetings with which every body met his friend. They were the sacred
transports of dear, domestic kindred, where all was pure, and full of
innoxious pleasure.
"I never had a family!" said he to himself, "and yet I have seen, and
felt transports! and may their memory perish!" cried he, in the same
inward voice, "for nothing but selfish passions were there."
Mrs. Coningsby approached the Duke, and welcomed him with her
accustomed hospitable grace. Every one had now something of the same
import to say to him; all but Alice, and she still continued to
view from a distance this formidable Wharton, whom she had so often
designated under the alarming appellatives of hideous, wicked, and
detestable. Cornelia had, as frequently as herself, given him these
abhorring epithets; and that Cornelia should now be as much infatuated
with him, as had ever been their cousin Louis, Alice could not consider
as the least enormity of his art.
The Marquis was at that time observing on the happy circumstance of the
yacht standing for the mainland instead of the island. "In the latter
case, old Peter tells me, you must have been lost upon the southern
reef!"
"And it might have been our fate," rejoined Louis, "if Wharton's
resolution had not mastered mine. On an obvious argument, I wanted to
avoid the mainland, dreading the exposed condition in which he must
have gone on shore."
"Yes," returned the Duke, "that boy was always wiser in his own
conceit, than seven men that could give a reason! and so I even laid
him under hatches, till we hailed Queen Bebba's flambeau!"
"How wicked is that gaiety!" whispered Alice to Ferdinand, "when we
have all been so miserable!"
Wharton heard the whisper, and turning his head, met a smile from
Ferdinand. The Duke bowed to Alice, who blushed angrily, while he
requested Mrs. Coningsby to present him to her youngest daughter. Mrs.
Coningsby took her hand and drew her reluctant steps towards him.
"Sweet Lady," said he, with a gentle seriousness passing over his face;
"you are the sister of my best benefactress! and all of my heart I can
spare from her virtues, I lay at the feet of yours."
There was a melody and a charm in these tenderer tones of his voice,
the effect of which astonished her; for feeling as if she had heard
the voice of truth itself, she lingered to hear him speak again;
though she only answered him by a silent courtsey. Ferdinand observed
the sudden change, and repeating his smile more archly to the Duke,
whispered:--
"I shall be jealous, if you breathe that vox amantis again--or, you
must teach me your note!"
"Apply to her sister!" replied Wharton, turning his brightening
countenance towards approaching steps in the adjoining room. The
careless hilarity of his features vanished at once, and gave place to
an agitated sensibility, that sufficiently shewed, if his voice were
the organ of tenderness, the power itself dwelt in his heart. He half
rose from the sofa, to which he had been removed from the litter; and
Louis with an emotion not less apparent, started towards the opening
door.
Marcella was led in by her mother, and she approached with a faultering
and conscious step.
Cornelia, who had taken her resolution, (whatever Wharton might be, and
however he might profess himself) to make that just sacrifice to public
opinion and to her own consistency, which should demand of him to make
a probation at least;--drew on her own strength, and entered the room
alone, and in an opposite direction.
She was advancing with a modest dignity, towards the happy group; but
her step was hasty, as her eye instantly fell on her beloved cousin,
and all the dangers he had just escaped, rushed at once upon her heart.
Marcella entered at that moment, and looked confusedly round. She also
saw the object dearest to her, but she durst not allow her eye to
rest there. The same glance shewed her Cornelia, and being near her,
unknowing what she did, she threw herself into her arms.
But the soul's unutterable language was not confined to the bosoms of
those two conscious friends. In the same moment, Cornelia's hand was
pressed to the lips of Wharton; and Marcella's to those of Louis. They
knew whose lips were there, and, for that moment, they did not recall
the hands so transiently blest.
The Marquis raised his daughter from the neck of her friend; and,
having embraced her himself, as she leaned on his bosom put her hand
again into that of Louis, and pressing them together: "There, my
children!" said he, "receive a father's blessing, as you continue to
love each other; and are worthy of this providence of God!"
Marcella fell on the breast of her lover, and Louis bore her in his
enraptured arms into the next room, to the extended ones of her mother.
Mr. Athelstone had not stood mutely by, during this blameless eloquence
of nature; but in the moment of the Marquis's separating his daughter
from Cornelia, he clasped the hands of Wharton and Cornelia's in
his;--and said, in a low and impressive voice:--"Though he has lain in
ashes, yet he shall have wings like a dove! And, against what the Lord
hath purified, who shall dare make an exception!"
Cornelia trembled every where, but in her stedfast heart. She could not
withdraw her hand, or speak; and Wharton softly whispered:--"Oh, my
Cornelia, what that sacred hand has joined together, let not thy voice
put asunder!" With the words, he gently glided a ring from his own
finger, upon hers; and firmly added--"We have met to part no more!"
She sighed convulsively, and her head fell upon the shoulder of her
Pastor-uncle. He had seen the ring; and pressing her to his breast,
tenderly rejoined: "Be to him, my Cornelia, as a lamp to his paths!
and, at the resurrection of the just, he will be to you as the sun at
noon-day; encreasing your glory, by the brightness of his light!"
She put the hand of her uncle, which again clasped her's and the
Duke's, to her lips; and her tears were left on Wharton's in the
action. "Oh, the bliss of virtue! and of virtuous love!" exclaimed he,
to himself as he dried them with a fervent kiss.
Those tears relieved her oppressed bosom, oppressed by the love she
bore him; oppressed by the boundless and precious disclosure of his;
and with her determination to inflict a penalty on each. She raised her
head from Mr. Athelstone's breast, and turning upon Wharton, with a
look which betrayed all the tenderness of her soul while she declared
her final sentiments, she gently, but steadily said:
"I do not return you, your ring:--It shall go with me to my grave. But,
I was weak; and you know it. I must redeem myself to you, and to the
world, by not giving you this hand, until a year's trial at least. When
you are far from me, and the precepts of my uncle, your conduct must
prove to all, that his niece gives herself to the virtuous, as well
as charming Duke of Wharton!" She uttered the last epithet, with a
tearful smile; but she would hear of no change in her resolution; and
as it was dictated by the truest principles of love and honour, Wharton
was at last prevailed on by her approving uncle, to acquiesce.
This scene passed without any other auditor than themselves; for when
Mr. Athelstone first perceived the great agitation of his niece, he had
made a sign to her mother, to draw the rest of the party into another
apartment.
The next day saw the Marquis and Marchioness Santa Cruz, with the
elders of the Athelstone family, meet in the Pastor's library, to
arrange every plan for their children's future happiness.
Meanwhile Louis sat at the feet of the lady Marcella, in a little
summer-house in the garden, exchanging with her the long concealed
tendernesses of their united hearts. Theirs was already a union of
tried virtue with nobleness; and neither needed, nor admitted of any
disguise.
Cornelia would not listen to the earnest supplications of him, whose
voice, she tremblingly believed, might charm an angel from its orb;
till Mr. Athelstone himself prevailed on her, to beguile his yet
lengthened hours of confinement to his couch, by her society. There,
she heard him tell of all his plans for rendering her union with
an outlawed man, less like a banishment to herself. He spoke with
reverence of the Electress of Bavaria; with enthusiasm of James
Stuart.--"But there, Othello's occupation's gone!" exclaimed he; "the
character of the present George of Brunswick has made my commission a
sinecure."
"Your commission, my dear Wharton," rejoined the Pastor, "is a general
one.--From Heaven, and not from man.--And it consists in properly
applying your vast endowments of mind and fortune."
"To do that, can never be a sinecure. Whether you are to remain a
statesman, or to commence a private career; to cultivate in yourself a
disposition to befriend your fellow-creatures by every means in your
power; whether by your purse, your influence, or your talents; is my
acceptation of that difficult text in the Gospel, which says "Make
to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when
ye fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations!" We know
that the mammon of unrighteousness is riches; or, in other words,
worldly-power. We make these our enemies, when we use them to selfish
and unworthy purposes. But we turn their dross into real gold;--we
make them our friends, when, by their benevolent application, we lay
them up as treasures in Heaven;--and, they will receive us there, into
everlasting habitations!"
Wharton bowed his head, with the ingenuous docility that was in his
heart; and the benign teacher left his pupil to the dearer, though no
less serious converse of his niece.
With less profundity of feeling, but not less vivacity of happiness,
Alice walked by the side of Ferdinand in the garden, and artlessly
expressed to him her wonder, how any body could help admiring, and even
loving Duke Wharton, who had ever passed an evening in his company.
"He is so very handsome;" said she, "and so very gay! and so very
commanding in all he does, and says, and looks, that, at first sight
one is quite frightened at the power all this threatens. But when we
know him, he is so exhilarating, so amiable, that--that I do not wonder
Cornelia should love as she does!"
"But you must not!" rejoined Ferdinand, putting her hand to his lips,
"else I shall wish the storm had sunk him fifty fathoms below this
island." "Don't be afraid of that!" returned she, blushing while
she laughed; "Louis is fifty fathoms handsomer, and so much more
joy-inspiring, that, in days of yore, I used to call him the angel
Gabriel, always coming on some blessed salutation; if I escaped falling
in love with him, I am sure you ought not to fear the Duke."
"Then, I am to suppose you love me, because I am the reverse of these
two worthies?" returned Ferdinand, archly glancing in her face.
"There is so much of the coxcomb in the question," answered she,
sportively shaking her head, "that I will gratify your vanity by the
expected compliment."
A fortnight's tranquil residence at the pastorage drew the whole
circle into that "sober certainty of waking bliss," which no language
can describe, but happy are they who understand it by the knowledge
of experience. Cornelia was, however, still steady to her virtuous
resolution; and the Duke arranged with the Marquis Santa Cruz to
relieve his English friends of his dangerous presence a few days
before the celebration of their nuptials. He meant to sail direct from
Lindisfarne to the nearest foreign port; thence proceed to Spain, and
there enter on the probation which, he trusted, would end with the
year, by the re-union of the whole party at Paris; where Santa Cruz was
appointed ambassador, and his children had promised to rejoin him.
The Duke's wounds were healed, and a pause stood in every happy
heart at the near prospect of his departure. He was trying his last
entreaties, for a shorter term of separation, when a stranger was
unguardedly introduced by one of the under-servants, and it proved to
be a messenger from the Secretary of State. He was a younger brother
of General Stanhope's, and brought communications of the utmost
importance. Wharton was sitting in a distant recess with Cornelia,
when he entered; and the instant bustle in the room, with some words
that dropped from Mr. Athelstone, respecting the Duke, so alarmed her,
that turning in agony towards him, she fainted on his breast.
The Duke was under the same impression with herself; and, relinquishing
her in some agitation to her mother, walked calmly towards the group in
the room, while the other ladies assisted Mrs. Coningsby to bear her
insensible daughter from the expected trying scene.
But such was not the import of Mr. Stanhope's dispatches. Some were
dictated by the King himself, and others by his ministers. Part
informed the Marquis de Montemar, that His Majesty had received from
the Empress of Germany, an exoneration of all that had been alleged
against him at her court. A favourite mistress of Count Routemberg, in
her dying moments, had declared the whole conspiracy of the Count and
others against Ripperda and his son; and the Empress now made the only
atonement in her power, to the memory of the one, and the honour of
the other, by thus clearing the Marquis de Montemar in the eyes of his
present Sovereign.
Her royal kinsman noticed also the accounts he had received from
Gibraltar, of Louis's disinterested conduct as a son, and a Protestant,
and a free born descendant of one of the most ancient families in
England. These virtues, the gracious Monarch added, should have an
adequate reward. Extraordinary disinterestedness could only be repaid
by something of the same character!
By such a disinterestedness did this noble representative of the
long line of British Kings, uniting the royal blood of Scotland and
of England in the bosom of George of Brunswick, rivet the loyalty of
Louis de Montemar to the country of his maternal ancestors! Certain
wellinformed agents of the crown, had lodged private information
with the Secretary of State, that Philip Duke of Wharton was secreted
at Lindisfarne. But the same agents had also reported the calamitous
circumstances which had thrown him under that protection; and the
King, knowing the friendship which had subsisted between the Marquis
de Montemar and the outlawed Duke; for the sake of de Montemar's
virtues and approved loyalty, transmitted to him a free pardon to his
friend,--an amnesty that re-invested him with his former rights, as a
British Peer and Landholder!
"'Tis well!" answered the Duke, with a kindling cheek, when this part
of the dispatch was read to him; "I accept the amnesty, that I may
now witness the nuptials of my friend in the face of day; and, that
hereafter, my Cornelia need not shrink from giving her hand to a man
under sentence of the scaffold! But, for my rights as a British
Peer, I derive them from the House of Stuart, and will not hold their
possession by the sale of my honour. George of Brunswick may be the
people's King;--James Stuart is mine! I give what I claim. And,
while your Sovereign reigns in their hearts, I shall not dispute his
possession. Meanwhile, Saint-Germains is my country;--though my sword
may sleep in its scabbard!"
There was no voice in that room to expostulate against principle;
and the messenger himself, who was a soldier and a man of honour,
venerating the same, though it pointed differently from his own, merely
answered:
"Permit me, Duke, to explain the mistake of those who suppose that
the throne of Great Britain came to the House of Brunswick, not by
the right of blood, but by virtue of an act of Parliament. George the
First was descended from a daughter of James the First; and the act of
settlement neither creates nor confers any new right, but only confirms
that which was inherent in the House of Brunswick upon the exclusion
of the Papist branch of the royal line. To assert the contrary, is to
subvert the ancient constitution; and from an hereditary, to turn this
into an elective monarchy."
The Duke smiled and bowed.
"This is an intricate question; but I am the last man to dispute
its consequence. However, happy is the prince whose throne is so
well founded, that it may be disputed whether it rests most on his
birth-right, or his people's will!"
With this remark he quitted the room; and, leaving all other thoughts
but those of love and gratitude behind him, hastened to the suite of
chambers, where he hoped to find her whose arms had never closed on
him, till she thought he could receive no other comforter.
Louis had left the room in the midst of Mr. Stanhope's conversation
with his friend, to relieve the suffering groupe above stairs, of the
alarm which he guessed had caused the insensibility of his cousin.
Wharton met him at the door of Cornelia's chamber, where she was
resting from the awful interchanges of her feelings, on the breast of
her mother. Louis pressed the hand of his friend as he passed him.
"You will find her," said he, "all your own!"
But in this, even her cousin, who best knew the movements of her soul,
was mistaken.
Cornelia suffered the grateful, the happy Wharton, to fold her to his
heart, in the sacred emotion of a meeting, redeemed as from the grave;
for, when they parted a few minutes before, the scaffold appeared
to each, the scene of their next separation; and the world to come,
where they could only meet again! But Cornelia remained firm to her
first resolution. "In Heaven's eye," cried she, "I believe you are
as pure as in mine. But the World must be convinced of the same.
Your happiness, as well as mine, compels the sacrifice; and, dearest
Wharton, it shall be made! Another year, and instead of my going to
seek my affianced husband in a foreign land, he will come to claim me
in the hall of my fathers!"
Mr. Stanhope did not pass that day only, with the Pastor and his
interesting household; he remained to witness the most heart-felt
ceremony that ever took place in the little humble church that
succeeded the once magnificent abbey of Lindisfarne.
The double marriages of their beloved Louis and Alice were to be
solemnized there; and every fisherman's hut sent forth its inmates to
honour the holy ceremony.
The stars of many orders might have glared on the noble breast of
Wharton, as he followed the happy groupe under the rustic archway; but
he chose only the badge of the garter. It was bestowed on him by James
Stuart, when three of the greatest kings in Europe, signed the league
for his support; and it was the Duke's pride, doubly to acknowledge the
hand that bestowed it, by wearing it now, in the utter despair of his
fortunes.
Louis, looked so like his former self, in the brightness of unclouded
happiness, that every lip moved in rapturous blessings as he passed;
and so great was the acclaim of the honest fishermen, around this their
often venturous companion, and ever darling master; that no sense was
left unoccupied, to bestow a glance on the waving plumes of Ferdinand,
though many a benizon followed the down-cast looks of his blushing
Alice.
Mr. Athelstone stood on the steps of the altar. He began--and he
finished the holy ceremony, which was to bind so many faithful
hearts into one interest, in this world, and in the next. And when he
consigned the married pairs to the benediction of their parents, (in
the light of one of whom stood Sir Anthony Athelstone,) he raised his
devout hands, and solemnly pronounced his general blessing.
Cornelia wept in sisterly congratulation on Alice's bosom; and when
she relinquished her to the enraptured Ferdinand, her sweetest tears
dropped on the shoulder of the no less happy Louis. Wharton's arm
supported the agitated frame of his future bride, while he clasped his
friend's hand in his with a felicitation that knew no utterance. Mr.
Athelstone looked on the kindred group with the feelings of a parent;
and piously exclaimed,
"O! how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! For here, mercy
and truth are met together. Righteousness and peace have kissed each
other!" "And may such, dearest sir," said the Duke, turning his bright
countenance towards him; "be ever the Guests of the Pastor's Fire-side!"
FINIS.
