The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Pillars of the House, Vol. I (of 2), byCharlotte M. YongeThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: The Pillars of the House, Vol. I (of 2)or, Under Wode, Under RodeAuthor: Charlotte M. YongeRelease Date: November 26, 2002  [eBook #6331]This revision first posted: January 20, 2014Language: English***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PILLARS OF THE HOUSE, VOL. I(OF 2)***E-text prepared by Sandra Laythorpe and revised by Clare Graham and MarcD'Hooghe (http://www.freeliterature.org) using page images generously madeavailable by the Google Books Library Project (http://books.google.com)Note: Project Gutenberg has the other volume of this work.Volume II: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/44721THE PILLARS OF THE HOUSE;Or,Under Wode, Under Rode.byCHARLOTTE M. YONGEAuthor of 'The Heir of Redclyffe,' etc.In Two Volumes.VOL I.London:Macmillan and Co.1875.CONTENTS TO VOL. I.I. THE BIRTH-DAY GIFTII. THE PIC-NICIII. FORTUNATUS' PURSEIV. TWILIGHT AND DAWNV. WORKING FOR BREADVI. THE CACIQUEVII. THE CHESS-PLAYER'S BATTLEVIII. THE HOMEIX. THE THIRTEENX. THE FAMILY COBWEB ON THE MOVEXI. THE CHORAL FESTIVALXII. GIANT DESPAIR'S CASTLEXIII. PEGASUS IN HARNESSXIV. WHAT IT MAY LEAD TOXV. WHAT IT LED TOXVI. THE WINTER OF DISCONTENTXVII. MIDSUMMER SUNXVIII. BY THE RIVERXIX. THE HOUSE WITHOUT PILLARSXX. VALE LESTONXXI. A KETTLE OF FISHXXII. THE REAL THING AND NO MISTAKEXXIII. SMOKE-JACK ALLEYTHE PILLARS OF THE HOUSE;OR,UNDER WODE, UNDER RODE.CHAPTER I.THE BIRTH-DAY GIFT.'O I've got a plum-cake, and a feast let us make,Come, school-fellows, come at my call;I assure you 'tis nice, and we'll all have a slice,Here's more than enough for us all.'Jane Taylor.'It is come! Felix, it is come!'So cried, shouted, shrieked a chorus, as a street door was torn opento admit four boys, with their leathern straps of books over theirshoulders. They set up a responsive yell of 'Jolly! Jolly!' whichbeing caught up and re-echoed by at least five voices within, causeda considerable volume of sound in the narrow entry and narrowerstaircase, up which might be seen a sort of pyramid of children.'Where is it?' asked the tallest of the four arrivals, as he soberlyhung up his hat.'Mamma has got it in the drawing-room, and Papa has been in ever sincedinner,' was the universal cry from two fine complexioned, handsomegirls, from a much smaller girl and boy, and from a creature rolling onthe stairs, whose sex and speech seemed as yet uncertain.'And where's Cherry?' was the further question; 'is she there too?''Yes, but--' as he laid his hand on the door--'don't open the letterthere. Get Cherry, and we'll settle what to do with it.''O Felix, I've a stunning notion!''Felix, promise to do what I want!''Felix, do pray buy me some Turkish delight!''Felix, I do want the big spotty horse.'Such shouts and insinuations, all deserving the epithet of the first,pursued Felix as he entered a room, small, and with all the contentsfaded and worn, but with an air of having been once tasteful, andstill made the best of. Contents we say advisedly, meaning not merelythe furniture but the inmates, namely, the pale wan fragile mother,working, but with the baby on her knee, and looking as if care and toilhad brought her to skin and bone, though still with sweet eyes and alovely smile; the father, tall and picturesque, with straight handsomefeatures, but with a hectic colour, wasted cheek, and lustrous eye,that were sad earnests of the future. He was still under forty, hiswife some years less; and elder than either in its expression of wastedsuffering was the countenance of the little girl of thirteen years oldwho lay on the sofa, with pencil, paper, and book, her face with hermother's features exaggerated into a look at once keen and patient, allthree forming a sad contrast to the solid exuberant health on the otherside the door.Truly the boy who entered was a picture of sturdy English vigour,stout-limbed, rosy faced, clear eyed, open, and straightforwardlooking, perhaps a little clumsy with the clumsiness of sixteen,especially when conscience required tearing spirits to be subdued tothe endurance of the feeble. It was, however, a bright congratulatinglook that met him from the trio. The little girl started up: 'Yoursovereign's come, Felix!'The father showed his transparent-looking white teeth in a merry laugh.'Here are the galleons, you boy named in a lucky hour! How many timeshave you spent them in fancy?'The mother held up the letter, addressed to Master Felix ChesterUnderwood, No. 8, St. Oswald's Buildings, Bexley, and smiled as shesaid, 'Is it all right, my boy?''They want me to open it outside, Mamma!--Come, White-heart, we wantyou at the council.'And putting his arm round his little sister Geraldine's waist, whileshe took up her small crutch, Felix disappeared with her, the motherlooking wistfully after them, the father giving something between alaugh and a sigh.'Then you decide against speaking to him,' said Mrs. Underwood.'Poor children, yes. A little happiness will do them a great deal moregood than the pound would do to us. The drops that will fill theirlittle cup will but be lost in our sea.''Yes, I like what comes from Vale Leston to be still a festive matter,'said Mrs. Underwood; 'and at least we are sure the dear boy will neverspend it selfishly. It only struck me whether he would not enjoyfinding himself able to throw something into the common stock.''He would, honest lad,' said Mr. Underwood; 'but, Mamma, you are veryhard-hearted towards the rabble. Even if this one pound would provideall the shoes and port wine that are pressing on the maternal mind, thestimulus of a day's treat would be much more wholesome.''But not for you,' said his wife.'Yes, for me. If the boy includes us old folks in his festivity, itwill be as good as a week's port wine. You doubt, my sweet Enid. Hasnot our long honeymoon at Vale Leston helped us all this time?' Hername was Mary, but having once declared her to be a woman made of thesame stuff as Enid, he had made it his pet title for her.Mrs. Underwood's thoughts went far away into the long ago of ValeLeston. She could hardly believe that nine years only had passed sincethat seven-years' honeymoon. She was a woman of the fewest possiblewords, and her husband generally answered her face instead of her voice.Vale Leston had promised to be an ample provision when Edward Underwoodhad resigned his fellowship to marry the Rector's niece and adopteddaughter, his own distant cousin, with the assurance of being presentedto the living hereafter, and acting in the meantime as curate. Itwas a family living, always held conjointly with a tolerably goodestate, enough to qualify the owner for the dangerous position of'squarson,' as no doubt many a clerical Underwood had been ever sincetheir branch had grown out from the stem of the elder line, which hadnow disappeared. These comfortable quarters had seemed a matter ofcertainty, until the uncle died suddenly and with a flaw in his will,so that the undesirable nephew and heir-at-law whom he had desired toexclude, a rich dissipated man, son to a brother older than the fatherof the favourite niece, had stepped in, and differing in toto fromEdward Underwood, had made his own son take orders for the sake of theliving, and it had been the effort of the young wife ever since not todisobey her husband by showing that it had been to her the being drivenout of paradise.ASSISTANT CURACY.--A Priest of Catholic opinions is neededat a town parish. Resident Rector and three Curates. DailyPrayers. Choral Service on Sundays and Holy-days. WeeklyCommunion.--Apply to P.C.B., St. Oswald's Rectory, Bexley.Every one knows the sort of advertisement which had brought Mr.Underwood to Bexley, as a place which would accord with the doctrinesand practices dear to him. Indeed, apart from the advertisement,Bexley had a fame. A great rubrical war had there been fought out bythe Rector of St. Oswald's, and when he had become a colonial Bishop,his successor was reported to have carried on his work; and the beautyof the restored church, and the exquisite services, were so generallytalked of, that Mr. Underwood thought himself fortunate in obtainingthe appointment. Mr. Bevan too, the Rector, was an exceedinglycourteous, kindly-mannered man, talking in a soft low voice in the mostaffectionate and considerate manner, and with good taste and judgmentthat exceedingly struck and pleased the new curate. It was the moresurprise to him to find the congregations thin, and a general languorand indifference about the people who attended the church. There wasalso a good deal of opposition in the parish, some old sullen secederswho went to a neighbouring proprietary chapel, many more of erratictastes haunted the places of worship of the numerous sects, who swarmedin the town, and many more were living in a state of town heathenism.It was not long before the perception of the cause began to grow uponMr. Underwood. The machinery was perfect, but the spring was failing;the salt was there, but where was the savour? The discourses he heardfrom his rector were in one point of view faultless, but the oldScottish word 'fushionless' would rise into his thoughts wheneverthey ended, and something of effect and point was sure to fail; theywere bodies without souls, and might well satisfy a certain excellentsolicitor, who always praised them as 'just the right medium, sober,moderate, and unexciting.'In the first pleasure of a strong, active, and enterprising man, atfinding his plans unopposed by authority, Mr. Underwood had beendelighted with his rector's ready consent to whatever he undertook,and was the last person to perceive that Mr. Bevan, though objectingto nothing, let all the rough and tough work lapse upon his curates,and took nothing but the graceful representative part. Even then,Mr. Underwood had something to say in his defence; Mr. Bevan wasvaletudinarian in his habits, and besides--he was in the midst of acourtship--after his marriage he would give his mind to his parish.For Mr. Bevan, hitherto a confirmed and rather precise and luxuriousbachelor, to the general surprise, married a certain Lady Price, theyoung widow of an old admiral, and with her began a new rgime.My Lady, as every one called her, since she retained her title andname, was by no means desirous of altering the ornamental arrangementsin church, which she regarded with pride; but she was doubly anxiousto guard her husband's health; and she also had the sharpest eye tothe main chance. Hitherto, whatever had been the disappointments andshortcomings at the Rectory, there had been free-handed expenditure,and no stint either in charity or the expenses connected with theservice; but Lady Price had no notion of taking on her uncalled-foroutlay. The parish must do its part, and it was called on to do soin modes that did not add to the Rector's popularity. Moreover, thearrangements were on the principle of getting as much as possible outof everybody, and no official failed to feel the pinch. The Rectorwas as bland, gentle, and obliging as ever; but he seldom transactedany affairs that he could help; and in the six years that had elapsedsince the marriage, every person connected with the church had changed,except Mr. Underwood.Yet, perhaps, as senior curate, he had felt the alteration mostheavily. He had to be, or to refuse to be, my Lady's instrument in hervarious appeals; he came in for her indignation at wastefulness, andat the unauthorised demands on the Rector; he had to feel what it wasto have no longer unlimited resources of broth and wine to fall backupon at the Rectory; he had to supply the shortcomings of the new staffbrought in on lower terms--and all this, moreover, when his own healthand vigour were beginning to fail.Lady Price did not like him or his family. They were poor, and shedistrusted the poor; and what was worse, she knew they were betterborn and better bred than herself, and had higher aims. Gentle Mrs.Underwood, absorbed in household cares, no more thought of rivalrywith her than with the Queen; but the soft movement, the low voice,the quiet sweep of the worn garments, were a constant vexation to myLady, who having once pronounced the curate's wife affected, held toher opinion. With Mr. Underwood she had had a fight or two, and had notconquered, and now they were on terms of perfect respect and civilityon his side, and of distance and politeness on hers. She might talk ofhim half contemptuously but she never durst show herself otherwise thancivil, though she was always longing to bring in some more deferentialperson in his place; and, whenever illness interfered with his duties,she spoke largely to her friends of the impropriety of a man'sundertaking what he could not perform.One of her reductions had been the economising the third curate, whilemaking the second be always a neophyte, who received his title forOrders, and remained his two years upon a small stipend.The change last Easter, which had substituted a deacon for a priest,had fallen heavily on Mr. Underwood, and would have been heavier still,but that the new comer, Charles Audley, had attached himself warmlyto him. The young man was the son of a family of rank and connection,and Lady Price's vanity was flattered by obtaining his assistance;but her vexation was proportionably excited by his preference for theUnderwood household, where, in truth--with all its poverty--he foundthe only atmosphere thoroughly congenial to him in all the parish ofSt. Oswald's.Speedily comprehending the state of things, he put his vigorous youngshoulder to the wheel, and, full of affectionate love and admirationfor Mr. Underwood, spared himself nothing in the hope of saving himfatigue or exertion, quietly gave up his own holidays, was always athis post, and had hitherto so far lightened Mr. Underwood's toil, thathe was undoubtedly getting through this summer better than the last,for his bodily frame had long been affected by the increased amount oftoil in an ungenial atmosphere, and every access of cold weather hadtold on him in throat and chest attacks, which, with characteristicbuoyancy, he would not believe serious. He never deemed himself aughtbut 'better,' and the invalid habits that crept on him by stealth,always seemed to his brave spirit consequent on a day's extra fatigue,or the last attention to a departing cough. Alas! when every day'sfatigue was extra, the cough always departing, never departed.Yet, though it had become a standing order in the house, that foran hour after papa came in from his rounds, no one of the childrenshould be in the drawing-room, except poor little lame Geraldine,who was permanently established there; and that afterwards, even onstrong compulsion, they should only come in one by one, as quietly aspossible, he never ceased to apologise to them for their banishmentwhen he felt it needful, and when he was at ease, would renew themerriment that sometimes cost him dear.The children had, for the most part, inherited that precious heirloomof contentment and elasticity, and were as happy in nooks and cornersin bed-room, nursery, staircase or kitchen, as they could have been inextensive play-rooms and gardens.See them in full council upon the expenditure of the annual gift thatan old admiral at Vale Leston, who was godfather to Felix, was wont tosend the boy on his birth-day--that third of July, which had seemedso bright, when birth-days had begun in the family, that no name saveFelix could adequately express his parent's feelings.Mr. and Mrs. Underwood had fancies as to nomenclature; and thatstaircase-full of children rejoiced in eccentric appellations. To beginat the bottom--here sat on a hassock, her back against the wall, hersharp old fairy's face uplifted, little Geraldine, otherwise Cherry,a title that had suited her round rosiness well, till after the firstwinter at Bexley, when the miseries of a diseased ankle-joint hadset in, and paled her into the tender aliases of White-heart, orSweet-heart. She was, as might be plainly seen in her grey eyes, aclever child; and teaching her was a great delight to her father, andoften interested him when he was unequal to anything else. Her darkeyebrows frowned with anxiety as she lifted up her little pointedchin to watch sturdy frank-faced Felix, who with elaborate slownessdealt with the envelope, tasting slowly of the excitement it created,and edging away from the baluster, on which, causing it to contributefrightful creaks to the general Babel, were perched numbers 4, 6,7, and 8, to wit, Edgar, Clement, Fulbert, and Lancelot, all threehandsome, blue-eyed, fair-faced lads. Indeed Edgar was remarkable, evenamong this decidedly fine-looking family. He had a peculiarly delicatecontour of feature and complexion, though perfectly healthy; and therewas something of the same expression, half keen, half dreamy, as inGeraldine, his junior by one year; while the grace of all the attitudesof his slender lissome figure showed to advantage beside Felix's moresturdy form, and deliberate or downright movements; while Clement waspaler, slighter, and with rather infantine features, and shining wavybrown hair, that nothing ever seemed to ruffle, looked so much as ifhe ought to have been a girl, that Tina, short for Clementina, was hisschool name. Fulbert, stout, square, fat-cheeked, and permanently roughand dusty, looked as if he hardly belonged to the rest.The four eldest were day-scholars at the city grammar-school; butLancelot, a bright-faced little fellow in knickerbockers, was a pupilof whoever would or could teach him at home, as was the little girlwho was clinging to his leg, and whose name of Robina seemed to havemoulded her into some curious likeness to a robin-redbreast, with herbrown soft hair, rosy cheeks, bright merry eyes, plump form, and quickloving audacity. Above her sat a girl of fifteen, with the familyfeatures in their prettiest development--the chiseled straight profile,the clear white roseately tinted skin, the large well-opened azureeyes, the profuse glossy hair, the long, slender, graceful limbs, andthat pretty head leant against the knees of her own very counterpart;for these were Wilmet and Alda, the twin girls who had succeeded Felix,and whose beauty had been the marvel of Vale Leston, their shabby dressthe scorn of the day school at Bexley. And forming the apex of thepyramid, perched astride on the very shoulders of much-enduring Wilmet,was three years old Angela--Baby Bernard being quiescent in a cradlenear mamma. N.B. Mrs. Underwood, though her girls had such masculinenames, had made so strong a protest against their being called byboyish abbreviations, that only in one case had nature been too strongfor her, and Robina had turned into Bobbie. Wilmet's second name beingUrsula, she was apt to be known as W. W.'Make haste, Felix, you intolerable boy! don't be so slow!' cried Alda.'Is there a letter?' inquired Wilmet.'Yes, more's the pity!' said Felix. 'Now I shall have to answer it.''I'll do that, if you'll give me what's inside,' said Edgar.'Is it there?' exclaimed Cherry, in a tone of doubt, that sent anelectric thrill of dismay through the audience; Lance nearly topplingover, to the horror of the adjacent sisters, and the grave rebuke ofClement.'If it should be a sell!' gasped Fulbert.'Suppose it were,' said Felix gravely.'Then,' said Edgar, 'you can disown the old rogue Chester.''What stuff!' interposed Clement.'I'd cut him out of my will on the spot,' persisted Edgar.'But it is all right,' said Cherry, looking with quiet certainty intoher brother's face; and he nodded and coloured at the same time.'But it is not a pretty one,' said little Robina. 'Last year it wasgreen, and before that red; and this is nasty stupid black and white,and all thin crackling paper.'Felix laughed, and held up the document.'What!' cried Fulbert. 'Five! Why, 'tisn't only five shillings! thehorrid old cheat!''It's a five-pound note!' screamed Cherry. 'I saw one when Papa went tothe bank! O Felix, Felix!'A five-pound note! It seemed to take away the breath of those who knewwhat it meant, and then an exulting shout broke forth.'Well,' said Edgar solemnly, 'old Chester is a brick! Three cheers forhim!'Which cheers having been perpetrated with due vociferation, the crybegan, 'O Felix, what will you do with it?''Buy a pony!' cried Fulbert.'A rocking-horse,' chirped Robina.'Punch every week,' shouted Lance.'A knife apiece,' said Fulbert.'How can you all be so selfish?' pronounced Clement. 'Now a harmoniumwould be good to us all.''Then get some cotton, for our ears into the bargain, if Tina is toplay on it,' said Edgar.'I shall take the note to mother,' said the owner.'Oh!' screamed all but Wilmet and Cherry, 'that's as bad as not havingit at all!'Maybe Felix thought so, for it was with a certain gravity and solemnityof demeanour that he entered the drawing-room, causing his father toexclaim, 'How now? No slip between cup and lip? Not infelix, Felix?''No, papa, but it's this; and I thought I ought to bring it.'The dew at once was in the mother's eyes, as she sprang up and kissedthe boy's brow, saying, 'Felix, dear, don't show it to me. You weremeant to be happy with it. Go and be so.''Stay,' said Mr. Underwood, 'Felix will really enjoy helping us to thisextent more than any private expenditure. Is it not so, my boy? Wellthen, I propose that the sovereign of old prescriptive right shouldgo to his menus plaisirs, and the rest to something needful; but heshall say to what. Said I well, old fellow?''Oh, thank you, thank you!' cried Felix ardently.'Thank me for permission to do as you will with your own?' smiled Mr.Underwood.'You will choose, then, Felix?' said his mother wistfully, her desiresdivided between port wine for Papa, and pale ale for Geraldine.'Yes, mamma,' was the prompt answer. 'Then, please, let Wilmet and Aldabe rigged out fresh for Sundays.''Wilmet and Alda!' exclaimed Mamma.'Yes, I should like that better than anything, please,' said the boy.'All our fellows say they would be the prettiest girls in all Bexley,if they were properly dressed; and those horrid girls at Miss Pearson'slead them a life about those old black hats.''Poor dears! I have found Alda crying when she was dressing forchurch,' mused Mrs. Underwood; 'and though I have scolded her, I couldhave cried too, to think how unlike their girlhood is to mine.''And if you went to fetch them home from school, you would know how badit is, Mamma,' said Felix. 'Wilmet does not mind it, but Alda cries,and the sneaking girls do it the more; and they are girls, so one can'tlick them; and they have not all got brothers.''To be licked instead!' said Mr. Underwood, unable to help being amused.'Well, yes, Papa; and so you see it would be no end of a comfort tomake them look like the rest.''By all means, Felix. The ladies can tell how far your benefaction willgo; but as far as it can accomplish, the twins shall be resplendent.Now then, back to your anxious clients. Only tell me first how my kindold friend the Admiral is.''Here's his letter, Father; I quite forgot to read it.''Some day, I hope, you will know him enough to care for him personally.Now you may be off.--Nay, Enid, love, your daughters could not havelived much longer without clothes to their backs.''Oh, yes, it must have been done,' sighed the poor mother; 'but Ifancied Felix would have thought of you first.''He thought of troubles much more felt than any of mine. Poor children!the hard apprenticeship will serve them all their lives.'Meantime Felix returned with the words, 'Hurrah! we are to have thesovereign just as usual; and all the rest is to go to turn out Wilmetand Alda like respectable young females.--Hollo, now!'For Alda had precipitated herself down-stairs, to throttle him with herembraces; while Cherry cried out, 'That's right! Oh, do get those dearwhite hats you told me about;' but the public, even there a many-headedmonster thing, was less content.'What, all in girls' trumpery?' 'That's the stupidest sell I ever heardof!' 'Oh, I did so want a pony!' were the cries of the boys.Even Robina was so far infected as to cry, 'I wanted a ride.'And Wilmet reproachfully exclaimed, 'O Felix, you should have gotsomething for Papa. Don't you know, Mr. Rugg said he ought to have arespirator. It is a great shame.''I don't think he would have let me, Wilmet,' said Felix, looking up;'and I never thought of it. Besides, I can't have those girls makingasses of themselves at you.''Oh no, don't listen to Wilmet!' cried Alda. 'You are the very bestbrother in all the world! Now we shall be fit to be seen at the breakup. I don't think I could have played my piece if I knew every one waslooking at my horrid old alpaca.''And there'll be hats for Cherry and Bobbie too!' entreated Wilmet.'Oh, don't put it into their heads!' gasped Alda.'No, I'll have you two fit to be seen first,' said Felix.'Well, it's a horrid shame,' grumbled Fulbert; 'we have always all goneshares in Felix's birth-day tip.''So you do now,' said Felix; 'there's the pound all the same as usual.'That pound was always being spent in imagination; and the voices brokeout again.'Oh, then Papa can have the respirator!''Felix, the rocking-horse!''Felix, do get us three little cannon to make a jolly row everybirth-day!''Felix, do you know that Charlie Froggatt says he would sell that bigNewfoundland for a pound? and that would be among us all.''Nonsense, Fulbert! a big dog is always eating; but there is aconcertina at Lake's.''Tina--tina--concertina! But, I say, Fee, there's White-heart beenwishing her heart out all the time for a real good paint-box.''Oh, never mind that, Ed; no one would care for one but you and me; andthe little ones would spoil all the paints.''Yes, resumed Wilmet, from her throne, 'it would be the worry of one'slife to keep the little ones off them; and baby would be poisoned to adead certainty. Now the respirator--''Now the concertina--''Now Punch--''Now the dog--''Now the rocking-horse--''Now the cannon--''I'll tell you what,' said Felix, 'I've settled how it is to be. We'llget John Harper's van, and all go out to the Castle, with a jolly colddinner--yes, you, Cherry, and all; Ed and I will carry you--and dine onthe grass, and--'A chorus of shouts interrupted him, all ecstatic, and rendered moreemphatic by the stamping of feet.'And Angela will go!' added Wilmet.'And Papa,' entreated Cherry.'And Mamma too, if she will,' said Felix.'And Mr. Audley,' pronounced Robina, echoed by Clement and Angela. 'Mr.Audley must go!''Mr. Audley!' grunted Felix. 'I want nobody but ourselves.''Yes, and if he went we could not stay jolly late. My Lady would makeno end of a row if both curates cut the evening prayers.''For shame, Edgar!' cried the three elder girls.While Wilmet added, 'We could not stay late, because of Papa and thelittle ones. But I don't want Mr. Audley, either.''No, no! Papa and he will talk to each other, and be of no use,' saidGeraldine. 'Oh, how delicious! Will the wild-roses be out? When shallit be, Felix?''Well, the first fine day after school breaks up, I should say.''Hurrah! hurrah!'And there was another dance, in the midst of which Mr. Underwood openedthe door, to ask what honourable member was receiving such deafeningcheers.'Here! here he is, Papa!' cried Alda. 'He is going to take us all outto a pic-nic in the Castle woods; and won't you come, Papa?''O Papa, you will come!' said Felix. And the whole staircase bawled inaccordance.'Come! to be sure I will!' said his father; 'and only too glad to beasked! I trust we shall prove to have found the way to get the maximumof pleasure out of Admiral Chester's gift.''If Mamma will go,' said Felix. 'I wonder what the van will cost, andwhat will be left for the dinner.''Oh, let us two cook the whole dinner,' entreated the twins.'Wait now,' said Felix. 'I didn't know it was so late, Father.' And hecarefully helped his father on with his coat; and as a church bell madeitself heard, set forth with him.When the service was musical, Felix and his two next brothers bothformed part of the choir; and though this was not the case on thisevening, Felix knew that his mother was easier when he or Wilmet couldwatch over Papa's wraps.And Mamma herself, with one at least of the twins, was busy enough ingiving the lesser ones their supper, and disposing of them in bed, sothat the discreet alone might remain to the later tea-drinking.And 'Sibby' must be made a sharer of the good news in her lower region,though she was sure to disbelieve in Alda and Wilmet's amateur cookery.Sibby was Wilmet's foster-mother. Poor thing! Mr. Underwood had foundher in dire need in the workhouse, a child herself of seventeen, witha new-born babe, fresh from the discovery that the soldier-husband, asshe thought, and who had at least 'gone before the praste with her,'and brought her from her Kilkenny home, was previously husband toanother woman. She was tenderly cared for by Mr. Underwood's mother,who was then alive, and keeping house for the whole party at theRectory; and having come into the Vale Leston nursery, she never leftit. Her own child died in teething, and she clung so passionately toher nursling, that Mrs. Underwood had no heart to separate them, RomanCatholic though she was, and difficult to dispose of. She was not theusual talking merry Irishwoman; if ever she had been such, her heartwas broken; and she was always meek, quiet, subdued, and attentive;forgetful sometimes, but tender and trustworthy to the last degree withthe children.She had held fast to the family in their reverses, and no more thoughtof not sharing their lot than one of their children. Indeed, it wouldnot have been much more possible to send her out to shift for herselfin England; and her own people seemed to have vanished in the famine,for her letters, with her savings, came back from the dead-letteroffice. She put her shoulder to the burthen, and, with one small scrubunder her, got through an amazing amount of work: and though her greatdeep liquid brown eyes looked as pathetic as ever, she certainly wasin far better spirits than when she sat in the nursery. To be sure,she was a much better nurse than she was a cook; but as both could notbe had, Mrs. Underwood was content and thankful to have a servant soentirely one with themselves in interests and affections; and who hadthe further perfection of never wanting any society but the children's;shrinking from English gossips, and never showing a weakness, save forIrish tramps. Moreover, she was a prodigious knitter; and it was herboast that not one of the six young gentlemen had yet worn stocking orsock, but what came from her needles, and had been re-footed by her tothe last extremity of wear.Meantime, Felix and Clement walked with their father to the church.There it was, that handsome church; the evening sun in slanting beamscoming through the gorgeous west window to the illuminated walls, andthe rich inlaid marble and alabaster of the chancel mellowed by thepure evening light. The east window, done before glass-painting hadimproved, was tame and ill-executed, and there was, even sthetically,a strange unsatisfactory feeling in looking at the heavy, thoughhandsome, incrustations and arcades of dark marble that formed thereredos. It was all very correct; but it wanted life.Mr. Bevan was not there, he had gone out to dinner, and thecongregation consisted of some young ladies, old men, and three littlechildren. Mr. Audley read all, save the Absolution and the Lessons; andthe responses sounded low and feeble in the great church, though therewas one voice among them glad and hearty in dedicating and entrustingthe new year of his life with its unknown burthen.Felix had heard sayings and seen looks which, boldly as his sanguinespirit resisted them, would hang in a heavy boding cloud over his mind,and were already casting a grave shadow there.And if the thought of his fivefold gift swelled the fervour of his'Amen' to the General Thanksgiving, there was another deep heartfeltAmen, which breathed forth earnest gratitude for the possession of sucha first-born son.'That is a very good boy,' the father could not help saying to Mr.Audley, as, on quitting the churchyard, Felix exclaiming, 'Papa, may Ijust get it changed and ask about the van?' darted across the street,with Clement, into a large grocer's shop nearly opposite, where a briskevening traffic was going on in the long daylight of hot July; and hecould not but tell of the birth-day gift, and how it was to be spent.'Res angusta domi,' he said, with a smile, 'is a thing to be thankfulfor, when it has such effects upon a lad.''You must add a small taste of example to the prescription,' said Mr.Audley. 'Is this all the birth-day present Felix has had?''Well, I believe Cherry gave him one of her original designs; butbirth-days are too numerous for us to stand presents.'The other curate half sighed. He was a great contrast--a much smallerman than his senior, slight, slim, and pale, but with no look ofill-health about him; brown eyed and haired, and with the indefinablelook about all his appointments and dress, that showed he had livedin unconscious luxury and refinement all his days. His thoughts wentback to a home, where the only perplexity was how to deal with anabsolute glut of presents, and to his own actual doubts what to sendthat youngest sister, who would feel slighted if Charlie sent nothing,but really could not want anything; a book she would not read, a jewelcould seldom get a turn of being worn, a trinket would only be freshlumber for her room. Then he revolved the possibilities of making Felixa present, without silencing his father's confidences, and felt thatit could not be done in any direct manner at present; nay, that itcould hardly add to the radiant happiness of the boy, who rushed acrossthe road, almost under the nose of the railway-omnibus horses, andexclaimed--'He will let us have it for nothing, Father! He says it would be hiringit out, and he can't do that: but he would esteem it a great favourif we would go in it, and not pay anything, except just a shilling toHarris for a pint of beer. Won't it be jolly, Father?''Spicy would be more appropriate,' said Mr. Underwood, laughing, as thevehicle in question drew up at the shop door, with Mr. Harper's nameand all his groceries inscribed in gold letters upon the awning.'I'm so glad I thought of Harper's,' continued Felix. 'I asked himinstead of Buff, because I knew Mamma would want it to be covered. Nowthere's lots of room; and we boys will walk up all the hills.''I hope there is room for me, Felix,' suggested Mr. Audley.'Or,' suggested Mr. Underwood, 'you might, like John Gilpin, "ride onhorseback after we."''Felix looks non-content,' said Mr. Audley. 'I am afraid I was not inhis programme. Speak out--let us have it.''Why,' said Felix, looking down, 'our little ones all wanted to haveyou; but then we thought we should all be obliged to come home toosoon, unless you took the service for Papa.''He certainly ought not to go to church after it,' said Mr. Audley;'but I can settle that by riding home in good time. What's the day?''The day after the girls' break-up, if you please,' said Felix, stillnot perfectly happy, but unable to help himself; and manifesting quiteenough reluctance to make his father ask, as soon as they had parted,what made him so ungracious.'Only, Papa,' said Felix frankly, 'that we know that you and he willget into some Church talk, and then you'll be of no use; and we wantedto have it all to ourselves.''Take care, Felix,' said Mr. Underwood; 'large families are apt to getinto a state of savage exclusiveness.'Felix had to bear the drawback, and the groans it caused from Wilmet,Edgar, and Fulbert: the rest decidedly rejoiced. And Mr. Underwoodprivately confided the objection to his friend, observing merrily thatthey would bind themselves by a promise not to talk shop throughout theexpedition.It was a brilliantly happy week. Pretty hats, bound with dark bluevelvet, and fresh black silk jackets, were squeezed out of the fourpounds, with the help of a few shillings out of the intended hire ofthe van, and were the glory of the whole family, both of those who wereto wear them and those who were not.On Saturday evening, just as the four elder young people were aboutto sally forth to do the marketing for their pic-nic, a great hampermade its appearance in the passage, addressed to F. C. Underwood,Esq., and with nothing to pay. Only there was a note fastened to theside, saying, 'Dear Felix, pray let the spicy van find room for mycontribution to your pic-nic. I told my mother to send me what wasproper from home.--C. S. A.'Mrs. Underwood was dragged out to superintend the unpacking, whichshe greatly advised should be merely a surface investigation. Thatwas quite enough, however, to assure her that for Felix to lay in anyprovision, except the tea and the bread she had already promised, wouldbe entirely superfluous. The girls were disappointed of their cookery;but derived consolation from the long walk with the brothers, in whicha cake of good carmine and a lump of gamboge were purchased for Cherry,and two penny dolls for Robina and Angela. What would become of therest of the pound?On Sunday, the offertory was, as usual on ordinary occasions, ratherscanty; but there was one half-sovereign; and Mr. Underwood wasconvinced that it had come from under the one white surplice that hadstill remained on the choir boys' bench.He stayed in the vestry after the others to count and take care ofthe offerings, and as he took up the gold, he could not but look athis son, who was waiting for him, and who flushed all over as he methis eye. 'Yes, Papa, I wanted to tell you--I did grudge it at first,'he said hoarsely. 'I knew it was the tithe; but it seemed so muchaway from them all. I settled that two shillings was the tenth of myown share, and I would give that to-day; and then came Mr. Harper'skindness about the van; and next, when I was thinking how I couldsave the tenth part without stinting everybody, came all Mr. Audley'shamper. It is very strange and happy, Papa, and I have still somethingleft.''I believe,' said Mr. Underwood, 'that you will find the consideringthe tithe as not your own, is the safest way of keeping poverty fromgrinding you, or wealth from spoiling you.'And very affectionately he leant on his son's shoulder all the wayhome; while Mr. Audley was at luncheon at the Rectory with my Lady, andher twelve years old daughter.'Mamma,' said Miss Price, 'did you see the Underwoods in new hats?''Of course I did, my dear. They were quite conspicuous enough; but whenpeople make a great deal of their poverty, they always do break out inthe most unexpected ways.''They are pretty girls,' said the Rector, rather dreamily, 'and Isuppose they must have new clothes sometimes.''You will always find,' proceeded Lady Price without regard, 'thatpeople of that sort have a wonderful eye to the becoming--nothingeconomical for them! I am sorry for Mr. Underwood, his wife is bringingup a set of fine ladies, who will trust to their pretty looks, and bequite above doing anything for themselves.''Do you think Wilmet and Alda Underwood so very pretty, Mr. Audley?'inquired Miss Price, turning her precocious eyes upon him.'Remarkably so,' Mr. Audley replied, with a courteous setting-down tonethat was the only thing that ever approached to subduing Miss Price,and which set her pouting without an answer.'It is a great misfortune to girls in that station of life to have thatpainted-doll sort of beauty,' added my Lady; 'and what was it I heardabout a pic-nic party?''No party, my dear,' replied the Rector, 'only a little fresh air forthe family--a day in Centry Park. Felix spends his birth-day presentfrom his godfather in taking them.''Ah! I always was sure they had rich friends, though they keep it soclose. Never let me hear of their poverty after this.'Answers only rendered it worse, so my Lady had it her own way, and notbeing known to the public in St. Oswald's Buildings, did not troublethem much. Yet there was a certain deference to public opinion there,when Alda was heard pouting, 'Felix, why did you go to that horridHarper? Just fancy Miss Price seeing us!''Who cares for a stuck-up thing like Miss Price?' growled Felix.'I don't care for her,' said Edgar; 'but it is just as well to havesome notion of things, and Felix hasn't a grain. Why, all the fellowswill be asking which of us is pepper, and which Souchong? I wouldn'thave Froggatt or Bruce see me in it at no price.''Very well, stay at home, then,' said Felix.'You could have had the waggonet from the Fortinbras Arms,' said Alda.'Ay--for all my money, and not for love.''For shame, Alda,' said her twin sister; 'how can you be so ridiculous!''You know yourself, Wilmet, it is quite true; if any of the girls seeus, we shall be labelled "The Groceries."''Get inside far enough, and they will not see you.''Ay, but there'll be that disgusting little Bobbie and Lance sitting inthe front, making no end of row,' said Edgar; 'and the whole place willknow that Mr. Underwood and his family are going out for a spree in oldHarper's van! Pah! I shall walk.''So shall I,' said Alda, 'at least till we are out of the town; butthat won't do any good if those children will make themselves sohorridly conspicuous. Could not we have the thing to meet us somewhereout of town, Felix?''And how would you get Cherry there, or Mamma? Or Baby?--No, no, if youare too genteel for the van, you may walk.'CHAPTER II.THE PIC-NIC.'There, on a slope of orchard, Francis laidA damask napkin, wrought with horse and hound;Brought out a dusky loaf that smelt of home,And, half-cut down, a pasty costly made,Where quail and pigeon, lark and leveret lay,Like fossils of the rock, with golden yolksImbedded and injellied; last, with theseA flask of cider from his father's vats,Prime which I knew;--and so we sat and ate.'Tennyson.No. 8, St. Oswald's Buildings was a roomy house, which owed itscheapness to its situation, this being neither in the genteel nor thebusy part of Bexley. It was tall and red, and possessed a good manyrooms, and it looked out into a narrow street, the opposite side ofwhich consisted of the long wall of a brewery, which was joined fartheron to that of the stable-yard of the Fortinbras Arms, the principalhotel, which had been much frequented in old posting days, andtherefore had offices on a large scale. Only their side, however, waspresented to St. Oswald's Buildings, the front, with its arched 'portecochre,' being in the High Street, as it was still called, though itwas a good deal outshone by the newer part of the town.The next-door neighbours of No. 8 were on the one hand a carpenter'syard, the view of which was charming to the children, and the noisesnot too obnoxious to their parents; and on the other the Rectorygarden, which separated them from the churchyard, now of coursedisused. It had no entrance towards their lane; and to reach thechurch, it was necessary to turn the corner of the wall, and go inthrough the south porch, which opened close upon the High Street.In this old street lay the two buildings that chiefly concerned theyoung Underwoods, i.e. the two schools. That for boys was an oldfoundation, which had fallen into decay, and had been reformed andrevivified in nineteenth-century fashion, to suit the requirementsof the town. The place, though in the south of England, had becomenoted as a pottery, owing partly to the possession of large fieldsof a peculiar clay, which was so bad for vegetable growth, as toproclaim its destiny to become pots and pans, partly to its convenientneighbourhood to the rising seaport of Dearport, which was only an hourfrom it by railway. The old St. Oswald's school had been moulded underthe influence of new comers, who had upset the rules of the founder,and arranged the terms on the broadest principles of liberality,bringing, instead of the drowsy old clerical master, a very briskand lively young layman, who had a knack of conveying instruction ofmultifarious kinds such as had never occurred to his predecessor.Mr. Underwood had a certain liking for the man, and when tolerablywell, enjoyed the breaking a lance with him over his many crudeheterodoxies; but he did not love the school, and as long as he wasable had taught his boys himself, and likewise taken a few day-pupilsof the upper ranks, who were preparing for public schools. But when hisfailure of health rendered this impracticable, the positive evil ofidleness was, he felt, greater than any possible ones that might arisefrom either the teaching or the associations of the town school, and hetrusted to home influence to counteract any such dangers. Or perhapsmore truly he dreaded lest his own reluctance might partly come fromprejudice in favour of gentlemen and public schools; and he believedthat where a course seemed of absolute necessity, Providence becamea guard in its seeming perils. Indeed, that which he disapproved inMr. Ryder's school was more of omission than commission. It was thatsecularity was the system, rather than the substance of that secularity.So Felix and Edgar went to school, and were in due time followed byClement and Fulbert; and their bright wits, and the educated atmosphereof their home, made their career brilliant and successful. Mr. Ryderwas greatly pleased to have got the sons of a man whom he could not butadmire and respect, and was anxious that the boys should be the meansof conquering the antiquated prejudices in favour of exclusiveness atschool.Felix and Edgar were neck and neck, carrying off all the prizes ofthe highest form but one--Felix, those that depended on industry andaccuracy; Edgar, those that could be gained by readiness and dexterity.Both were to be promoted to the upper form; and Mr. Ryder called upontheir father in great enjoyment of their triumph, and likewise tocommunicate his confident certainty that they would do him and Bexleycredit by obtaining the most notable scholarships of the University.Mr. Underwood was not a little delighted, grateful for the cordialsympathy, and he fully agreed that his own lads had benefited by theclear vigorous teaching they had received; but though he smiled andallowed that they had taken no harm, he said good-humouredly that 'Ofcourse, he must consider that as the proof of his own powers ofcounteraction.''Exactly so,' said the schoolmaster. 'All we wish is, that each homeshould exercise its powers of counteraction. We do the teaching, youform the opinions.''Oh! are we parents still to be allowed to form the opinions?''If you will. Your house is your castle, and the dungeons there maybe what you will.''Well, I cannot have a quarrel with you to-day, Ryder! As long as Ican show up my boys as tokens of God's blessing on their home, you arewelcome to them as instances of wits well sharpened by thorough goodinstruction.'Mrs. Underwood had likewise had a congratulatory visit that was verygratifying. The girls' school, a big old red house, standing back fromthe road at the quietest end of the town, was kept by two daughters ofa former clergyman, well educated and conscientious women, whom sheesteemed highly, and who gave a real good grounding to all who cameunder their hands, going on the opposite principle to Mr. Ryder's, andtrying to supply that which the homes lacked.And they did often succeed in supplying it, though their scholars camefrom a class where there was much to subdue; and just at present theirdifficulties had been much increased by their having been honouredby the education of Miss Price. Seven governesses in succession hadproved incapable of bearing with Lady Price; and the young lady hadin consequence been sent to Miss Pearson's, not without an endeavouron her mother's part to obtain an abatement in terms in honour of theclat of her rank.There her airs proved so infectious, that, as Miss Pearson said, theonly assistance she had in lessening their evil influence was theperfect lady-likeness of the Underwood twins, and the warm affectionthat Wilmet inspired. Alda headed a sort of counter party againstCaroline Price, which went on the principle of requiting scorn withscorn; but Wilmet's motherly nature made her the centre of attractionto all the weak and young, and her uprightness bore many besidesherself through the temptation to little arts. Both sisters had prizes,Alda's the first and best; and Miss Pearson further offered to letWilmet pay for her own studies and those of a sister, by becomingteacher to the youngest class, and supervisor during the mid-dayrecreation, herself and her sister dining at school.It was a handsome offer for such a young beginner, and the mother'seyes filled with tears of pleasure; and yet there was a but--'Not come home to dinner!' cried the children. 'Can't it be Aldainstead of Wilmet? We do always want Wilmet so, and Alda would do justas well at school.'Alda too was surprised; for was not she more regular and more forwardthan her twin sister, who was always the one to be kept at home whenany little emergency made Mamma want the aid of an elder daughter?And the mother would almost have asked that Alda might be the chosengoverness pupil, if Mr. Underwood had not said, 'No, my dear, MissPearson must have her own choice. It is a great kindness, and must beaccepted as such. I suppose Robina must be the new scholar. My littlepupil will not leave me.'Geraldine only heard of the alternative, to say, 'I'll be nobody'spupil but yours, Papa.'While Robina was proportionably exalted by her preferment, and took toteasing every one in the house to hear her spelling and her tables,that she might not fulfil Edgar's prediction by going down to thebottom of the baby-class; and up and down the stairs she ran, chantingin a sing-song measure--'Twenty pence are one and eightpence,Thirty pence are two and sixpence,'and so on, till her father said, smiling, 'Compensations again, Mother:the less you teach them the more they are willing to learn.' The mothershook her head, and said the theory was more comfortable than safe, andthat she did not find Lancelot an instance of it.But there was a general sense of having earned the holiday, when thegrocery van came to the door, on a morning of glorious sunshine. Edgarand Alda, true to their promise, had walked on so far ahead as toavoid being seen in the town in connection with it; and Fulbert hadstarted with them to exhale his impatience, but then had turned backhalf-way, that he might not lose the delicious spectacle of the packingof the vehicle. A grand pack it was: first, the precious hamper; then along sofa-cushion, laid along the bottom; then Geraldine lifted in bySibby and Felix, and folded up with shawls, and propped with cushionsby Mamma, whose imagination foresaw more shaking than did the moreyouthful anticipation; then Mamma herself, not with 'little baby,' butwith Angela on her lap, and Angela's feet in all manner of unexpectedplaces; then a roll of umbrellas and wraps; then Wilmet, Fulbert,Lance, and Robina--nowhere in particular; and lastly Papa, making roomfor Clement between himself and the good-humoured lad of a driver, whohad not long ago been a member of the choir; while Felix, whom nothingcould tire on that day, dived rapidly down a complication of alleys,declaring he should be up with the walkers long before they wereovertaken by the van.Next appeared Mr. Audley, with his pretty chestnut horse, offeringin the plenitude of his good-nature to give Lance a ride, whereuponvociferous 'me toos' resounded from within the curtains; and thematter was compounded on ride and tie principles, in which theUnderwood juniors got all the ride, and Mr. Audley all the tie--ifthat consisted in walking and holding the bridle.By the time the very long and dull suburbs of Bexley were passed, withtheir interminable villas and rows of little ten-pound houses--thechildren's daily country walk, poor things!--the two elder boys andtheir sister were overtaken, the latter now very glad to condescend tothe van.'Oh, how nice to get beyond our tiresome old tether!' she said,arranging herself a peep-hole between the curtains. 'I am so sick ofall those dusty black beeches, and formal evergreens. How can you stareat them so, Cherry?'But Geraldine was in a quiet trance of delight; she had never spoken aword since she had first found a chink in the awning, but had watchedwith avid eyes the moving panorama of houses, gardens, trees, flowers,carriages, horses, passengers, nursemaids, perambulators, and children.It was all a perfect feast to the long-imprisoned eyes, and the morecharming from the dreamy silence in which she gazed. When Felix came upto the slit through which the bright eyes gleamed, and asked whethershe were comfortable and liked it, her answer was a long-drawn gaspfrom the wells of infinite satisfaction, such as set him calculatinghow many drives in a Bath-chair the remnant of his birth-day gift wouldyet produce.But there were greater delights; corn-fields touched with amber, woodssloping up hills, deep lanes edged with luxuriant ferns, greenery thatdrove the young folk half mad with delight, and made them scream tobe let out and gather--gather to their hearts' content. Only Mammarecommended not tiring themselves, but trusting that Centry Park wouldafford even superior flowers to those they passed.They reached the lodge-gate at last. They were known, for the Castlehad been long untenanted, and they, like other inhabitants of Bexley,had from time to time enjoyed themselves in the Park; but to-day therewas a shadow of demur. The gentleman who was going to buy the place waslooking over it--but surely--Horror began to spread over the inmates of the van.'But did you come by appointment, sir?' added the gatekeeper's wife,coming out; 'the gentleman's name is Mr. Underwood.'Mr. Underwood was obliged to disclaim any appointment; but he lookedround at the children's blank faces, and saw lips quivering, and eyesgazing wistfully into the paradise of green shade, and added, 'If thegentleman has not actually bought it, he could not object. We do notwish to go near the house.'Maybe Mr. Audley, who was standing near the gate, added another moresubstantial argument, for 'Oh, certainly, sir,' at once followed; andthe van was allowed to turn down a gravelled road, which skirted anextensive plantation.Every one now left it, except Mrs. Underwood, Cherry, and Angela; andthe children began to rush and roll in wild delight on the grassyslope, and to fill their hands with the heather and ling, shriekingwith delight. Wilmet had enough to do to watch over Angela in hertoddling, tumbling felicity; while Felix, weighted with Robina on hisback, Edgar, Fulbert, Clement, and Lance, ran in and out among theturf; and Alda, demurely walking by her papa, opined that it was 'veryodd that the gentleman's name should be Underwood.''Less odd than if it was Upperwood,' said her father, as if to throwaside the subject; and then, after a few moments' thought, and an oddlittle smile, as if at some thought within himself, he began to handin flowers to Cherry, and to play with little Angela. Mr. Audley hadgone to put up his horse at the village inn, and did not join the partyagain till they had reached what the children called Pic-nic Hollow--aspot where a bank suddenly rose above a bright dimpling stream with abed of rock, the wood opening an exquisite vista under its beech treesbeyond, and a keeper's lodge standing conveniently for the boiling ofkettles.Here the van was disposed of, the horses taken out and provided withfood, Cherry carried to a mossy throne under a glorious beech-tree,and the hampers unpacked by Mamma and Wilmet, among much capering anddancing of the rest of the family, and numerous rejected volunteers ofassistance. Felix and Alda were allowed to spread the table-cloth andplace the dishes, but Edgar was only entreated to keep the rest out ofthe way.Meanwhile, Geraldine sat under the silvery bole of her beech-tree,looking up through its delicate light green leaves to the blue sky,not even wanting to speak, lest anything should break that perfectionof enjoyment. Her father watched the little pale absorbed countenance,and as Mr. Audley came up, touched him to direct his attention to thechild's expression; but the outcry of welcome with which the restgreeted the new-comer was too much for even Cherry's trance, andshe was a merry child at once, hungry with unwonted appetite, andso relishing her share of the magnificent standing-pie, that Mrs.Underwood reproved herself for thinking what the poor child would be ifshe had such fare and such air daily, instead of ill-dressed mutton inthe oppressive smoke-laden atmosphere.And meantime, Lance was crowing like a cock, and the other boys werelaughing at Robina for her utter ignorance of the white-fleshed bipedshe was eating.'No, Clem, chickens have got feathers and wings, and their long neckshang down! This can't be one of them.''Perhaps it is a robin-redbreast,' said Felix.'No, nobody kills robin-redbreasts, because they covered the poorlittle children with leaves.''Will you cover me with leaves, if I am lost, Bobbie?' said Mr. Audley;but as soon as she found that his attention was gained, she returned tothe charge.'Please, did it come from your own home? and what is it, really?''Why, Bobbie, I am hardly prepared to say whether it is a Hamburg ora Houdan, or a more unambitious Dorking. Cannot you eat in comfortwithout being certified?''The species will be enough for her without the varieties,' said herfather. 'You have given us a new experience, you see, Audley, and wemay make a curious study of contrasts--not of Audley and myself, Motherdear, but of the two Underwoods who seem to be in this place togetherto-day.''Who is it?' was of course the cry; and the inquiry was in Mrs.Underwood's eyes, though it did not pass her quiet lips. It was to herthat he answered, 'Yes, my dear--Tom; I have little doubt that it ishe. He was a very rich man when last I heard of him.''Is that the man at Vale Leston?' whispered Alda to Felix. 'Oh, I hopehe is not coming here to insult us.''Bosh!' said Felix; 'that man's name is Fulbert. Listen, if you want tohear.''Twenty years ago,' continued Mr. Underwood, 'I thought myself aprodigiously fine fellow--with my arms full of prizes at Harrow,and my Trinity scholarship--and could just, in the plenitude of mypresumption, extend a little conceited patronage to that unlucky dunce,Tom Underwood, the lag of every form, and thankful for a high stool atold Kedge's. And now my children view a cold fowl as an unprecedentedmonster, while his might, I imagine, revel in 'pts de foie gras.''O Papa, but we like you so much better as you are!' cried Geraldine.'Eh, Cherry!' said Mr. Underwood, 'what say you? Shouldn't you like mebetter if I were buying that king beech-tree, and all the rest of it?'Cherry edged nearer, mastered his hand, and looked up in his face witha whole soul of negation in her wistful eyes. 'No, no, no--just as youare,' she whispered.Some mood of curiosity had come over him, and he turned aninterrogative look elsewhere.Alda spoke. 'Of course, it would be horrid not to be a clergyman; butit is a great shame.''No,' said Wilmet, 'it can't be a shame for this cousin Tom tohave earned a fortune fairly--if he has; but'--and she pressed herhands tightly together as she looked at the thin worn faces of herparents--'one can't help wishing. Why do things always go hard andwrong?' and the tears dimmed her bright eyes.'Because--they don't,' said her father, with a half-seriousquaintness that vexed her, and forced her to turn away to let the teardrop.Clement said, in his calm voice, 'How can you be all so repining andfoolish!'And Mr. Underwood, almost in lazy mischief, pursued his experiment.'Eh, Felix, you are the party most concerned--what say you?''Most concerned?' Felix looked up surprised, then recollected himself.'I don't care,' he said, with an appearance of gruff sullenness;but his father could not content himself without continuing in asemi-teasing tone, 'Don't care--eh? Why, this Centry Underwood oncebelonged to our family--that's the reason Tom is after it. If I hadnot scouted old Kedge, you would be prancing about here, a Harrovian,counting the partridges.''Don't!' broke in Felix, with a growl.'Never fear, Fee,' cried Edgar, with his hand on his brother'sshoulder; 'if one man got on in life, another may. If one only wasgrown up, and had the start----' and his blue eyes sparkled.'I did not know Care's clutch had been so tight,' sighed Mr. Underwood,half to himself, half to his wife. 'It is not safe, my gentle Enid, totry such experiments. Eh!' rousing himself, 'what's that? Have the mobthere a right to any sentiments?''Only,' cried Clement, shouting with laughter, 'Lance thought you werewanted to hold a high stool for Jack Ketch.''For a green goose!' shouted Lance, indignantly.'Oh!' cried Robina, in the tone of one who had made a scientificdiscovery, 'did the goose have a high stool to lay the golden eggs?''A most pertinent question, Bobbie, and much more reasonable thanmine,' said Mr. Underwood; while his colleague gravely answered, 'Yes,Bobbie, golden eggs are almost always laid by geese on high stools.''I've got a picture of one! It has got a long neck and long legs,'quoth Bobbie.'It is only a flamingo, you little goose yourself,' cried Clement.'Here is the golden egg of the present,' said Mr. Underwood,replenishing the boy's plate with that delicious pie. 'What's thatbeverage, Wilmet? Any horrible brew of your own?''No; it is out of Mr. Audley's hamper.''The universal hamper. It is like the fairy gifts that producedunlimited eatables. I dreaded cowslip wine or periwinkle broth.''No, no, Papa,' sighed Alda, 'we only once made cowslip tea at ValeLeston.''Vale Leston is prohibited for the day.--Master Felix ChesterUnderwood, your good health; and the same to the new Underwood ofCentry Underwood.''Shall we see him, Papa?' asked Alda.'If either party desires the gratification, no doubt it will comeabout.''Shall not you call on him, Papa?''Certainly not before he comes. Mother, some of the wonderfulbottle--ay, you covetous miser of a woman, or I'll make a libation ofit all. Audley, it must have wrung your father's butler's heart to havethrown away this port on a pic-nic. What did you tell him to deludehim?''Only what was true--that I was to meet a gentleman who was a judge ofthe article.''For shame!' he answered, laughing. 'What right had you to know that Iknew the taste of Cape from Roriz?'But his evident enjoyment of the 'good creature' was no small pleasureto the provider, though it was almost choking to meet the glisteningglance of Mrs. Underwood's grateful eyes, knowing, as she did, thatthere were three more such bottles in the straw at the bottom ofthe hamper. And when baby Angela had clasped her fat hands, and, as'youngest at the board,' 'inclined the head and pronounced the solemnword,' her father added, 'Gratias Deo, and Grazie a lei. We mustrenew our childhood's training, dear Mary--make our bow and curtesy,and say "Thank you for our good dinner."''Thank Felix for our pleasant day,' said Mr. Audley. 'Come, boys, havea swing! there's a branch too good not to be used; and Ful has alreadyhung himself up like a two-toed sloth.'Then began the real festivity--the swinging, the flower and fernhunting, the drawing, the racing and shouting, the merry calls andexchange of gay foolish talk and raillery.Mr. Underwood lay back on a slope of moss, with a plaid beneath him,and a cushion under his head, and said that the Elysian fields musthave been a prevision of this beech-wood. Mrs. Underwood, with Felixand Wilmet, tied up the plates, knives, and forks; and then themother, taking Angela with her, went to negotiate kettle-boiling atthe cottage. Geraldine would fain have sketched, but the glory and thebeauty, and the very lassitude of delight and novelty, made her eyesswim with a delicious mist; and Edgar, who had begun when she did,threw down his pencil as soon as he saw Felix at liberty, and the twoboys rushed away into the wood for a good tearing scramble and climb,like creatures intoxicated with the freedom of the greenwood.After a time they came back, dropping armfuls of loose-strife,meadow-sweet, blue vetch, and honey-suckle over delighted Cherry;and falling down by her side, coats off, all gasp and laughter, andbreathless narrative of exploits and adventures, which somehow diedaway into the sleepiness due to their previous five-mile walk. Felixwent quite off, lying flat on his back, with his head on Cherry'slittle spreading lilac cotton frock, and his mouth wide open, muchtempting Edgar to pop in a pebble; and this being prevented by tenderCherry in vehement dumb show, Edgar consoled himself by a decidedlyuncomplimentary caricature of him as Giant Blunderbore (a name derivedfrom Fee, Fa, Fum) gaping for hasty pudding.'That's a horrid shame!' remonstrated Geraldine. 'Dear old Fee, whenthe whole treat is owing to him!''It is a tidy little lark for a Blunderbore to have thought of,' saidEdgar. ''Tis a good sort of giant after all, poor fellow!''Poor!' said Cherry indignantly. 'Oh, you mean what Papa said--that heis the greatest loser of us all. I wonder what made him talk in thatway? He never did before.''I am sorry for him,' said Edgar, indicating his brother. 'He isfamous stuff for a landlord and member of parliament--plenty of witsand brains--only he wants to be put on a shelf to be got at. Whereverhe is, he'll go on there! Now, a start is all I want! Give me my onestep--and then--O Gerald, some day I'll lift you all up!''What's that?' said Felix, waking as the enthusiastic voice was raised.'Edgar lifting us all! What a bounce we should all come down with!''We were talking of what Papa said at dinner,' explained Cherry. 'Whatdid you think about it, Fee?''I didn't think at all, I wished he hadn't,' said Felix, stretchinghimself.'Why not?' said Cherry, a little ruffled at even Felix wishing Papa hadnot.'There's no use having things put into one's head.''O Felix, you don't want to change?' cried Cherry.'No,' he said; but it was a 'no' in a tone she did not understand. Thechange he saw that hardship was working was that from which he recoiled.'That's like you, Blunderbore,' said Edgar. 'Now, the very reason I amglad not to be born a great swell, but only a poor gentleman, is thatso much is open to one; and if one does anything great, it is all thegreater and more credit.''Yes,' said Felix, sitting up; 'when you have once got a scholarship,there will be the whole world before you.''Papa got a scholarship,' said Cherry.'Oh yes!' said Edgar; 'but every one knows what happens to a man thattakes Orders and marries young; and he had the most extraordinaryill-luck besides! Now, as Ryder says, any man with brains can shine.And I am only doubting whether to take to scholarship or art! I loveart more than anything, and it is the speediest.'The conversation was broken, for just then Wilmet was seen peeringabout with an anxious, careful eye.'What is it, my deputy Partlet?' asked her father. 'Which of your broodare you looking for?''I can't see Robina,' said Wilmet anxiously. 'She was swinging justnow, but neither she nor Lance is with the big boys.''Flown up higher,' said Mr. Underwood, pretending to spy among thebranches. 'Flapsy, come down! Bobbie, where are you?'A voice answered him; and in another moment Robina and Lance stood inthe glade, and with them a girl newly come to her teens, whom theypulled forward, crying, 'She says she's our cousin!''Indeed,' said Mr. Underwood: 'I am sure you are very much obliged toher.''I am Mary Alda Underwood,' said the girl abruptly; 'and I'm sure theremust be a very naughty boy here. He had put these poor little things upa tree, and run away.''No, no! He only put us up because Tina bothered about it!' screamedLance and Robina at once; 'he wasn't naughty. We were being monkeys.''Black spider-monkeys,' added Robina.'And I swung about like a real one, Father,' said Lance, 'and wastrying to get Bobbie down, only she grew afraid.''It was ten feet from the ground,' said Mary Alda, impressively, 'andthey had lost their way; but they told me who they were. I'm come downwith my father to see the place.'Mr. Underwood heartily shook hands with her, thanked her, and askedwhere her father was.'Gone out with the man to see a farm two miles off,' she said. 'He toldme I might stay in the house, or roam where I liked, and I saw you alllooking so happy; I've been watching you this long time.''Indeed!' said Mr. Underwood, 'till you captured two of us! Well, weare obliged for the introduction, especially if you are to be ourneighbour.''And my cousins will be friends with me,' continued Mary Alda. 'I'm allalone, you know.''No, I did not know,' said Mr. Underwood. 'Are you the only child?''Yes,' she said, looking wistfully at the groups around her; 'and it isvery horrid--oh dear! who is that pretty one? No, there's another ofthem!'Mr. Underwood laughed heartily. 'I suppose you mean Wilmet andAlda,' he said. 'Come, girls, and see your new cousin--Mary, did yousay?--Your name backward, Alda Mary.''Mary,' she repeated. 'Papa calls me Mary, but Mamma wants it to beMarilda all in one word, because she says it is more distinguished; butI like a sensible name like other people.'Mr. Underwood was much amused. He felt he had found a character inhis newly-discovered cousin. She was Underwood all over in his eyes,used to the characteristic family features, although entirely devoidof that delicacy and refinement of form and complexion that was soremarkable in himself and in most of his children, who were all, exceptpoor little Cherry, a good deal alike, and most of them handsome.There was a sort of clumsiness in the shape of every outline, and acoarseness in the colouring, that made her like a bad drawing of one ofhis own girls; the eyes were larger, the red of the cheeks was redder,the lips were thicker, the teeth were irregular; the figure, insteadof being what the French call lanc, was short, high-shouldered,and thick-set, and the head looked too large. She was over-dressed,too, with a smart hat and spangled feather, a womanly silk mantle andmuch-trimmed skirt, from which a heavy quilling had detached itself,and was trailing on the ground; her hands were ungloved, and showedred stumpy fingers, but her face had a bright open honest heartinessof expression, and a sort of resolute straightforwardness, thatattracted and pleased him; and, moreover, there was something in thefamily likeness, grotesque as it was, that could not but arouse afellow-feeling in his warm and open heart, which neither neglect normisfortune had ever chilled.'I think I should have known you,' he said, smiling. 'Here! let meintroduce you; here is our little lame white-hearted Cherry, and thetwins, as like as two peas. Wilmet, Alda--here!''Shall I mend your frock?' was Wilmet's first greeting, as she put herhand in her pocket, and produced a little housewife.'Oh, thank you! You've got a needle and thread! What fun!''The little ones are very apt to tear themselves, so I like to have itready.''How delicious! And you mend for them? I wish I had any one to mendfor. Please show me, and let me do it. I tried to tear the nasty thingoff, but it would not come. I wish Mamma would let me wear sensibleprint like yours.''Are you laughing at us?' said Wilmet rather bluntly.'No, indeed, not a bit,' said Marilda, or Mary Alda, eagerly. 'If youonly knew how tiresome it all is.''What is?''Why, being fine--having a governess, and talking French, and learningto dance, and coming down into the drawing-room. Then Grandmamma Kedgetells me how she used to run about in pattens, and feed the chickens,and scrub the floor, and I do so wish I was her. Can you scrub, and dothose nice things?''Not a floor,' said Wilmet; 'and we live in the town.''So have we done till now; but Papa is going to get this place, becausehe says it is family property; and I hope he will, for they willnever be able to screw me up here as they do at home. I say, which isFulbert? Won't your father punish him?''Oh, no! You should not have told, Marilda. We never tell Papa oflittle tricks of the boys.''But the little darling might have broken her neck.''Oh! life in a large family is made up of might haves,' said Alda.'Why, I do declare there's a smaller still! What a little duck!' andshe pounced upon Angela.'We have a smaller than that,' said Wilmet--'Bernard, only we left himat home.''Tell me all your names!' cried Marilda, delighted.She was perfectly happy, and chattered on in great delight in herdownright voice, as much at ease as if she had known them all her life.She shared their tea, and wanted Mr. Underwood to come and see herfather at the house; but as she could not promise his early return, andit was necessary to get the van under weigh before five, this could notbe.However, she would not leave them till they were all packed into thevan, and then only parted with repeated kisses and auguries of manyfuture meetings; so that the children looked down a vista of unlimitedenjoyment of Centry Park. Edgar, little gentleman as he was, saw her asfar back on the way as he could venture.CHAPTER III.FORTUNATUS' PURSE.'Out, base mechanical churl!'--Shakespeare.Weeks went on, and nothing more was heard of 'Marilda' except thewishes and wonderings of the children. Alda decided that she was oneof the heartless fine ladies one heard of in books--and no wonder,when her father was in trade, and she looked so vulgar; while Wilmetcontended against her finery, and Cherry transferred the heartlessnessto her cruel father and mother, and Robina never ceased to watch forher from the window, even when Felix and Edgar for very weariness hadprohibited the subject from being ever mentioned, and further checkedit by declaring that Marilda looked like a cow.There was plenty besides to think of; and the late summer and earlyautumn rolled cheerily away. The wonderful remnant of Felix's birth-daygift was partly applied to the hire of a chair for Geraldine upon everyfavourable evening; and as the boys themselves were always ready toact as horses, they obtained it on moderate terms, which made the sumhold out in a marvellous manner. And not only were these drives delightunimaginable to the little maid, but the frequent breaths of pure airseemed to give her vigour; she ate more, smiled more, and moved withless pain and difficulty, so that the thought of a partial recoverybegan to seem far less impossible.The children trooping about her, she used to be drawn to the nearestbit of greensward, tree, or copse, and there would occupy herselfwith the attempt to sketch, often in company with Edgar; and with afew hints from her father, would be busied for days after with thefinishing them, or sometimes the idealizing them, and filling them withthe personages she had read of in books of history or fiction. She wasa sensitive little body, who found it hard not to be fretful, when toldthat it was very ill-natured to object to having her paints daubed overher drawings by Lance, Robina, and Angel--an accusation often broughtagainst her by rough, kindly Sibby, and sometimes even by Wilmet in anextremity; while Mamma's subdued entreaty, that she would do somethingto please the little ones, if it could be without mischief to herself,always humiliated her more than anything else, and made her ready toleave all to their mercy, save for deference to Edgar, and gratitude toFelix. Robina would look on soberly enough in admiration; but Lance'snotions of art were comic, and Fulbert's were arbitrary, and both wereimperiously carried out with due contempt for the inferior sex, andwere sure to infect both the little sisters.Then, of course, so many holiday boys were hard to keep in order.Clement had a strong propensity in that direction; he was a grave,quiet boy, without much sense of the absurd, and was generally thevictim of Edgar's wit; but, on the other hand, he was much in thehabit of objecting to anything Edgar or Fulbert proposed, and therebygiving forbidden or doubtful amusements double zest. He was never inmischief, and yet he was never an element of peace.All this, however, was mitigated when the holidays ended, and Lancewas allowed to follow his brothers to school, while Bobbie importantlytrotted in the wake of her sisters. Mamma and Cherry felt it no smallcomfort to have no one at home who did not sleep away two or three ofthe morning hours; and the lessons that the little girl delighted toprepare for her father went on in peace--the arithmetic, the French,the Latin, and even the verses of Greek Testament, that he always saidrested him.And he was 'quite well,' he said himself; and though his wife neverconfirmed this reply, he was everywhere as usual--in church, in schoolsof all kinds, in parish meetings, by sick-beds, or in cottages, asbright and as popular as ever, perhaps the more so that he was moretransparently thin, and every stranger started at the sound of hiscough; though the Bexley people had grown weary of repeating the sameaugury for four or five years, and began, like 'my Lady,' to call it'constitutional.'So came the autumn Ember Week; and Mr. Audley had to go to receivePriests' Orders, and afterwards to spend the next fortnight with hisparents, who complained that they had not seen him once since he hadsettled at Bexley. The last week was the break-up of summer weather,and Mr. Bevan caught cold, and was rheumatic; there were two funeralson wet and windy days, and when Mr. Audley, on Lady Price's entreatingsummons, wrenched himself from a murmuring home, and, starting by anearly train, arrived half through the St. Michael's Day Service, it wasto see Mr. Underwood looking indeed like some ethereal ascetic saint,with his bright eyes and wasted features, and to hear him preach inextempore--as was his custom--a sermon on the blessedness of angelhelps, which in its intense fervour, almost rapture, was to many as ifit came from a white-winged angel himself. Mr. Audley glided into hisown place, and met Felix's look of relief. The sermon was finished,and the blessing given; but before he could descend the steps, thecough had come on, and with it severe hmorrhage. They had to sendone startled boy for Mrs. Underwood, and another for the doctor, andit was an hour before he could be taken home in a chair. No one everforgot that sermon, for it was the last he ever preached. He was veryill indeed for several days, but still hopeful and cheerful; and as theweather mended, and the calm brightness of October set in, he rallied,and came downstairs again, not looking many degrees more wan and hecticthan before, with a mind as alert as usual, and his kind heart muchgratified by the many attentions of his parishioners during his illness.During the worst, Mrs. Underwood had been obliged to keep one of theelder girls at home--Wilmet at first, both by her own desire and thatof Alda; but it was soon made a special matter of entreaty by MissPearson, that the substitution might not take place; the little classwas always naughty under Alda, and something the same effect seemed tobe produced on Angela and Bernard. They made so much less disturbancewhen entrusted to Cherry, that the mother often sent Alda to sit bypapa, even though she knew he liked nothing so well as to have hislittle pupil's soft voice repeating to him the Latin hymns she loved tolearn on purpose. Alda read or sang to him very prettily, and they werevery happy together; but then Wilmet could do that as well, and alsomind the babies, or do invalid cookery, and supplement Sibby's defects,and set the mother free for the one occupation she cared for most--theconstant watching of that wasted countenance.But all was better. He had been able to collect his children fortheir evening's Bible lesson and Sunday Catechism, and to resume thepreparation of Edgar and Geraldine for their Confirmation, though itwas at least a year distant, and even had spoken of sending for othersof his catechumens. Wilmet and Alda were both at school, the twobabies out with Sibby, Mamma at work, Papa dreaming over a Comment onthe Epistle to the Philippians, which was very near his heart, and healways called his holiday work, and Geraldine reading on her littlecouch when there was a sharp ring at the bell, and after an interval,the girl who daily came in to help, announced 'Lady Price.'Even my Lady had been startled and softened by the reality of Mr.Underwood's illness, and remorseful for having coddled her husband athis expense; she had sent many enquiries, some dainties, and a goodmany recipes; and she had made no objection to Mr. Bevan's frequent andaffectionate visits, nor even to his making it obvious that howeverlittle his senior curate might do that winter, he would not accept hisresignation for the present.It was enough to make Mr. Underwood feel absolutely warm and gratefulto his old tormentor, as he rose, not without some effort, held outhis hand to her, and cheerily answered her inquiries for his cough.She even discussed the berries in the hedges, and the prospects of amild winter, in a friendly, hesitating tone; and actually commended Mr.Underwood's last pupil-teacher, before she began--'I am afraid I amcome upon a disagreeable business.'Mr. Underwood expected to hear of his own inefficiency; or perhapsthat Mr. Audley had adopted some habit my Lady disapproved, or thatthe schoolmaster was misbehaving, or that some Christmas dole wasto be curtailed, and that he would have to announce it because Mr.Bevan would not. He was not prepared to hear, 'Are you aware that--inshort--perhaps you can explain it, but has not your son Felix beenspending a good deal of money--for him, I mean--lately?''Felix had a present from his godfather,' said Mr. Underwood, not atall moved, so secure was he that this must be an exaggeration.'Last summer, I heard of that. It was laid out on a pic-nic,' said LadyPrice, severely.'It was intended to be so spent,' said the curate; 'but people wereso good-natured, that very little actually went that way, and theremainder was left in his own hands.''Yes, Mr. Underwood, but I am afraid that remainder has been made tocover a good deal of which you do not know!'Mrs. Underwood flushed, and would have started forward. Her husbandlooked at her with a reassuring smile. My Lady, evidently angeredat their blindness, went on, 'It is a painful duty, Mr. Underwood,especially in your present state; but I think it due to you, as thefather of a family, to state what I have learned.''Thank you. What is it?''Have you reckoned the number of times the chair has been hired?'and as he shook his head, 'That alone would amount to more than apound. Besides which, your daughters have been provided with books andmusic--fruit has been bought--all amiable ways of spending money, nodoubt; but the question is, how was it procured?''Indeed,' said Mr. Underwood, still pausing.'And,' added the lady, 'the means can, I am afraid, be hardly doubted,though possibly the boy may have done it in ignorance. Indeed, one ofhis sisters allowed as much.''What did she allow, Lady Price?''That--that it was won at play, Mr. Underwood. You know Mr. Froggattgives his boy an absurd amount of pocket-money, and when she was taxedwith this, your daughter--Alda is her name, I believe--allowed that--''Papa, Papa!' breathlessly broke out Cherry, who had been forgottenon her little sofa all this time, but now dashed forward, stumpingimpetuously with her crutch--'Papa, it's all Alda, how can she be sohorrid?''What is it, my dear?' said Mr. Underwood. 'You can explain it, I see.Tell Lady Price what you mean, Geraldine,' he added gravely, to composethe child, who was sobbing with excitement and indignation.'O Lady Price!' she cried, facing about with her hair over her face,'he earned it--he earned every bit of it! How could any one think hedid not?''Earned it? What does that mean, little girl?' said Lady Price, stillseverely. 'If he did the boy's exercises for him--''No, no, no,' interrupted Geraldine, 'it was old Mr. Froggatt. He askedFelix to look over the papers he had to print for the boys' work at theGrammar School, because it is all Latin and Greek, and Charles Froggattis so careless and inaccurate, that he can't be trusted.'The faces of the father and mother had entirely cleared; but Lady Pricecoughed drily, saying, 'And you did not know of this arrangement?'Geraldine's eyes began to twinkle with tears. 'I don't know what Felixwill say to me for telling now,' she said.'It must have come to light some time, though concealment is always aproof of shame,' began Lady Price in a consoling tone that filled thelittle lame girl with a fresh passion, drawing up her head.'Shame! Nobody's ashamed! Only Mamma and Felix and Wilmet never willbear that Papa should know how terribly we do want things sometimes.'And Geraldine, overpowered by her own unguarded words, ran into hermother's arms, and hid her face on her shoulder.'Thank you, Lady Price,' said Mr. Underwood gravely. 'I am glad mylittle girl has been able to satisfy you that Felix has honestly earnedwhatever he may have spent.''If you are satisfied,' returned the lady, 'it is not my affair; but Imust say I should like to know of such transactions among my children.''Sometimes one is glad to have a boy to be perfectly trusted,' said Mr.Underwood.'But you will speak to him?''Certainly I shall.'Lady Price felt that she must go, and rose up with an endeavour toretract. 'Well, it is a relief to Mr. Bevan and me to find your son notconsciously in fault, for it would have been a most serious thing. Andin such a matter as this, of course you can do as you please.'To this Mr. Underwood made no reply, as none was necessary, but onlysaw her out to the door in that extremely polite manner that alwaysmade her feel smallest; and then he dropped into his chair again, witha curl of the lip, and the murmur, 'Not consciously!''O Papa, Papa!' cried Cherry.'Dear Felix!' said the mother, with tears in her eyes; 'but what canAlda have been saying?'Cherry was about to speak again, but her father gently put her aside.'A little quietness now, if you please, my dear; and send Felix to mewhen he comes in. Let me have him alone, but don't say anything to him.'There was no need to send Felix to his father, for he came in of hisown accord, radiant, with a paper containing a report of a publicmeeting on Church matters that his father had been wishing to see.'Thanks, my boy,' said Mr. Underwood; 'where does this come from?''From Froggatt's, father. It was only fourpence.''But, Felix, repeated fourpences must exhaust even that Fortunatus'purse of Admiral Chester's.'Felix coloured. 'Yes, Papa, I wanted to tell you; but I waited till youwere better.''You will hardly find a better time than the present,' said MrUnderwood.'It is only this,' said Felix, with a little hesitation. 'Youknow there's a good deal of printing to be done for the schoolsometimes--the questions in Latin and Greek and Algebra, and evenwhen Mr. Ryder does have the proofs, it wants some one who reallyunderstands to see that the corrections are properly done. Old Smithused to do it, by real force of Chinese accuracy, but he has been illfor some time, and Mr. Froggatt can't see to do it himself, and Charliewon't, and can't be trusted either. So one day, when I was reading inthe shop, Mr. Froggatt asked me to see if a thing was right; and itwent on: he asked me after a time to take anything I liked, and I didget some school books we all wanted; but after that, just when youwere ill, I could not help telling him I had rather have the money. OFather!' cried the boy, struck by a certain look of distress, 'did I dowrong?''Not in the least, my boy. Go on; what does he give you?''Exactly at the rate he gave Smith for doing the same work,' saidFelix: 'it always was an extra for being so troublesome. It was sevenshillings last week--generally it comes to three or four and sixpence.''And when do you do it?''I run in after I come out of school for half an hour. Last SaturdayI corrected a sheet of the Pursuivant, because Mr. Froggatt had to goout, and that made it more. And, Father, Mr. Froggatt says that poorold Smith will never be fit for work again.''Then I suppose these welcome earnings of yours will end when he has asuccessor?'Felix came nearer. 'Papa,' he said, 'Mr. Froggatt told me that ifCharlie would only have taken to the work, he would have done withoutanother man in Smith's place, and got him gradually into editing thepaper too. He said he wished I was not a gentleman's son, for if Ihad not been so I should have suited him exactly, and should be wortha guinea a week even now. And, Father, do not you really think I hadbetter take it?''You, Felix!' Mr. Underwood was exceedingly startled for the moment.'You see,' said Felix rather grimly, leaning his head on themantelshelf, and looking into the fire, 'any other way I can only be anexpense for years upon years, even if I did get a scholarship.'His face was crimson, and his teeth set. Mr. Underwood lay back in hischair for some seconds; then said in a low voice, 'I see you know allabout it, Felix; and that I am going to leave you as heavy a burthen asever lad took on willing shoulders.'Felix knew well enough, but his father had never uttered a word ofdespondency to him before, and he could only go on gazing steadfastlyinto the fire with an inarticulate moan.Mr. Underwood opened the first leaf of a volume of St. Augustine,beside him, a relic of former days, the family shield and mottowithin--namely, a cross potent, or crutch-shaped, and the old Englishmotto, 'Under Wode, Under Rode.''Under wood, under rood,' he repeated. 'It was once but sing-song tome. Now what a sermon! The load is the Cross. Bear thy cross, and thycross will bear thee, like little Geraldine's cross potent--Rod andRood, Cross and Crutch--all the same etymologically and veritably.''Don't call them a burthen, pray!' said Felix, with a sense both ofdeprecation and of being unable to turn to the point.'My boy, I am afraid I was thinking more of myself than of you. I aman ungrateful fool; and when a crutch is offered to me, I take hold ofit as a log instead of a rood. I did not know how much pride there wasleft in me till I found what a bitter pill this is!'Felix was more crimson than ever. 'Ought I not--' he began.'The ought is not on your side, Felix. It is not all folly, I hope;but I had thought you would have been a better parson than your father.'There were tears in the boy's eyes now. 'There are the others; I may beable to help them.''And,' added Mr. Underwood, 'I know that to be a really poor priest,there should be no one dependent on one, or it becomes, "Put me intoone of the priest's offices, that I may eat a piece of bread." It islowering! Yes, you are right. Even suppose you could be educated,by the time you were ordained, you would still have half these poorchildren on your hands, and it would only be my own story over again,and beginning younger. You are right, Felix; but I never saw theimpossibility so fully before. I am glad some inward doubt held me backfrom the impulse to dedicate my first-born.''It shall be one of the others instead,' said Felix in his throat.Mr. Underwood smiled a little, and put his finger on the verse in hisbeloved Epistle--'Look not every man on his own things but every manalso on the things of others.''You really wish this. Do you consider what it involves?' he said.'I think I do,' said Felix in a stifled voice.'This is not as if it were a great publisher,' continued Mr. Underwood,'with whom there would be no loss of position or real society; but alittle bookseller in a country town is a mere tradesman, and though aman like Audley may take you up from time to time, it will never be onan absolute equality; and it will be more and more forgotten who youwere. You will have to live in yourself and your home, depending onno one else.''I can stand that,' said Felix, smiling. 'Father, indeed I thought ofall that. Of course I don't like it, but I don't see how it is to behelped.''Sit down, Felix: let us go over it again. I suppose you don't knowwhat our subsistence is at present.''I know you have 250 a year from Mr. Bevan.''Yes, I had 200 at first, and he added the 50 when the third curatewas given up. That goes with me, of course, if not before. On the otherhand, my poor good uncle, the wisest thing he ever did, made me insuremy life for 5000, so there will be 150 a year to depend on, besideswhat we had of our own, only 2,350 left of it now. I have had tobreak into it for the doctor's bills, but at least there are no debts.Thank God, we have been saved from debt! I think,' he continued, 'thatprobably it will have to be brought down to twenty-two hundred beforeyou have done with me. On the whole, then, there will be about 180 ayear for you all to live upon. Are you understanding, Felix?'For the boy's anxious look had gone out of his face, and given place toa stunned expression which was only dispelled with a sudden start byhis father's inquiry. 'Yes, yes,' he said recalling himself.'I have left it all absolutely to your mother,' said Mr. Underwood.'She will depend more and more on you, Felix; and I have made up mymind to expect that no help will come to you but from yourselves.Except that I hope some of you may be educated by clergy orphanschools, but you are too old for that now. Felix, I believe it may beright, but it is very sore to break off your education.''I shall try to keep it up,' said Felix, 'in case anything should everturn up.''A guinea a week!' said Mr. Underwood, thoughtfully. 'It would make youall not much worse off than you are now, when I am out of the way. Andyet--' A violent cough came on. 'We must wait, Felix,' he said, when hehad recovered himself. 'I must have time to think; I will speak to youto-morrow.'Felix left him, very grave and subdued. He buried himself in his tasksfor the next day, hardly looked up or smiled at little Bernard's mostearnest attempts at a game of play, and had not a word for even Cherry,only when Wilmet begged anxiously to know if he thought Papa worse, heanswered that he believed not particularly so.Alda was sent to carry some tea to her father that evening. As sheset it down on the table before him, he said gently, 'My dear, I wantto know what has been passing among you and your school-fellows aboutFelix.''Oh, nothing, Papa,' said Alda rather hastily. 'Some nonsense or otheris always going on.''Very true, no doubt; nor do I wish to be informed of general nonsense,but of that which concerns you. What have you been saying or hearingsaid about Felix?''Oh, it's nonsense, Papa. Some of the girls will say anythingdisagreeable.''You need not have any scruples on Felix's account, Alda; I knowexactly what he has done. I want you to tell me what is being said--oryou have allowed to be said--about it.''That horrible Miss Price!' was all the answer he got.He sat upright--laid on Alda's wrist a long bony burning hand, whoseclasp she did not forget for weeks, and forcing her to look at him,said, 'Did you allow it to be believed that your brother Felix was agambler?''Papa! I never said so!' cried Alda, beginning to sob.'Command yourself, Alda; I am not fit for a scene, and I may not beable to speak to you many times again.'These words--far more new and startling to Alda than to herbrother--appalled her into quietness.'What did you say, Alda? or was it the deceit of silence?'She hung her head, but spoke at last.'I only said boys had ways and means! They did tease and plague so.I do believe Carry Price counts every grape that goes into thishouse--and they would know how I got my new music--and little Robinawould tell--and then came something about Mr. Froggatt; and if theyknew--''If they knew what?''Papa, you have no idea how nasty some of them are.''My poor child, I am afraid I have some idea by seeing how nasty theyare making you! Gambling more creditable than honest labour!'Alda had it on the tip of her tongue to say winning things was notgambling, but she knew that argument would be choked down; and she alsoknew that though she had spoken truth as to her words, she had allowedremarks to pass without protest, on the luck and licence that the modelboy allowed himself, and she was bitterly displeased with the treacheryof Miss Price.'These old rags of folly don't look pretty on other folk,' he sighedpleasantly. 'Alda, listen to me. What I have heard to-day gives me morefears for you than for any one of my children. Did you ever hear thatfalse shame leads to true shame? Never shuffle again! Remember, nothingis mean that is not sin, and an acted falsehood like this is sin andshame both--while your brother's deed is an honour.'Alda was obliged to go away murmuring within herself, 'That's all true:it is very good of Felix, and I should not have equivocated, I know;but those stupid girls, how is one to live with them?'Felix was not quite dressed the next morning when his mother came tothe door of the attic that he shared with Edgar and Fulbert.'He wants to speak to you before church, Felix. It has been a very badnight, and the sooner this is settled the better.''O Mother, I am very sorry--''It can't be helped, my dear boy. I think it will really be a greatrelief to him.''And you, Mother, do you mind?''Dear Felix, all minding, except to have you all well, and fed andclothed, was worn out of me years ago. I can't feel anything in it butthat it will keep you by me, my dear good helpful boy.'Felix's heart leapt up, as it had not done for many a long day; but itsoon sank again. The children had never been admitted to their father'sroom in the early morning, and Felix thought he must be suddenly worsewhen he saw him in bed propped by pillows, pale and wearied; but theusual bright smile made him like himself.'All right, old fellow,' he said brightly. 'Don't come up to me. I'mincog. till I'm up and dressed. Are you in the same mind?''Yes, Father.''Then ask Mr. Froggatt to do me the favour of coming to speak to me anytime after eleven o'clock that may suit him. I must understand what heoffers you. The nonsense is conquered, Felix; more shame for me that ithas followed me so far; but the sense remains. I must try to be surethat this sacrifice of yours is a right one to be accepted. Any way, myboy, I thank and bless you for it, and God will bless such a beginning.There's the bell, be off,' he concluded.And, Papa,' blurted out Felix suddenly, 'would you please bephotographed. I have the money for it. Pray--'Mr. Underwood smiled. 'Very well, Felix; that is, if I am ever capableof getting up all the stairs to Coleman's sky-parlour.''Oh, thank you!' and Felix ran away.Mr. Froggatt came in due time. He was an elderly portly man, wellshaven and smooth-faced, intensely respectable, having been broughtup to inherit an old hereditary business as bookseller, stationer,and publisher of a weekly local paper, long before Bexley had brokenout into its present burning fever of furnaces. He was a very goodreligious man, as Mr. Underwood well knew, having been his greatcomforter through several family troubles, which had left him and hiswife alone with one surviving and woefully spoilt son, who hated thetrade, and had set his heart upon being a farmer--chiefly with a viewto hunting. Mr. Froggatt was conscious of having been too indulgent,but the mother and son were against him; and the superior tone ofeducation that the son had received at the reformed grammar school hadonly set him above the business, instead of, as had been intended,rendering him more useful in it.Good Mr. Froggatt, an old-fashioned tradesman, with a profound feelingfor a real gentleman, was a good deal shocked at receiving Mr.Underwood's message. He kept a reading-room, and was on terms of acertain intimacy with its frequenters, such as had quite warranted hisfirst requests for Felix's good-natured help; and it had been reallyas a sort of jesting compliment that he had told the young gentlemanthat he wished he would take Smith's place, little expecting to see howearnestly the words were caught up, how the boy asked whether he reallymeant it; and when, on further consideration, he allowed that it mightbe possible, begging him to wait till his father could be spoken to.Poor as he was, Mr. Underwood had never lost general respect. Somethingthere was in his fine presence and gentlemanly demeanour, and stillmore in his showing no false shame, making no pretensions, and neverhaving a debt. Doctors' bills had pressed him heavily, but he hadsacrificed part of his small capital rather than not pay his way; andthus no one guessed at the straits of the household. Mr. Froggatt hadnever supposed he would entertain for a moment the idea of letting hiseldest son, a fine clever and studious lad, undertake a little countrybusiness, and yet the old bookseller had come to wish it very much onhis own account. As he explained to Mr. Underwood, he loved his oldbusiness, and knew that with more education he should have been ableto make more of it. His elder son had died just as intelligence andenergy were opening up plans that would have made both the shop and thenewspaper valuable and beneficial; while Charles's desertion left themto decline with his father's declining years, and in danger of beingsupplanted by some brisk new light. Felix Underwood was indeed veryyoung, but he had already proved his power of usefulness, and a veryfew years would make him capable of being a right hand to the old man,and he might in time make a position for himself. Mr. Froggatt wouldotherwise ere long be forced by his own infirmity, to dispose of thebusiness at a disadvantage, and this would, he confessed, go to hisheart. Mr. Underwood felt greatly reconciled to the project. There wasreal usefulness in the work, great means of influencing men for good,and though there would be much of mechanical employment, for which itwas a pity to give up the boy's education, yet it was a stepping-stoneto something better, and it gave present and increasing means ofmaintenance. There was less temptation in this way of life than inalmost any that could be devised, and it would give Mrs. Underwood thecomfort of a home with him. The great difficulty for the future was,that Felix was never likely to have capital enough to purchase, orbecome partner in, the business; but Mr. Froggatt explained that if hegained experience in the editing of the Pursuivant, he would be alwaysable to obtain profitable employment, and that it was possible thathe might eventually take the business, and pay an annual sum out ofthe profits to the Froggatt family, unless, indeed, something shouldturn up which would keep him in his natural station. Such was the hopelurking in the father's heart, even while he thankfully closed with theoffer; and Felix was put in the way of studying book-keeping till theNew Year, when he was to enter upon his duties and his salary.Mr. Audley was greatly troubled. It was with incredulous vivacity thathe inquired of Mr. Underwood if it were indeed true that Felix hadaccepted such prospects.'Quite true,' said Mr. Underwood. 'You need not argue it with me,Audley; my own mind has said all you could say seven times over.''I should not venture on interference; but could you not let me try todo--something?''And welcome, my dear fellow: there are so many to be done for, that itis well one can do for himself.''But Felix--Felix out of them all!''As the voice I want to silence has said a thousand times! No; Felixseems capable of this, and it is not right to withhold him, and throwhis education upon the kind friends who might be helping the otherboys--boys whom I could not trust to fend for themselves and others, asI can that dear lad.''What he might be--''Who knows whether he may not be a greater blessing in this work thanin that which we should have chosen for him? He may be a leaven forgood--among the men we have never been able to reach! My dear Audley,don't be a greater ass about it than I was at first!'For the young curate really could not speak at first for a rush ofemotion.'It is not only for Felix's sake,' said he, smiling at last, 'but theway you take it.''And now, I am going to ask you to do something for me,' added Mr.Underwood. 'I have left this magnificent estate of mine entirely to mywife, appointing her sole guardian to my children. But I have begunto think how much has been taken out of her by that shock of leavingVale Leston, and by that wonderful resolute patience that--that I shallnever be able to thank her for. I scarcely dare to let her know that Isee it. And when I look on to the winter that is before her,' he added,much less calmly, 'I think she may not be long after me. I must add aguardian. Once we had many good friends. We have them still, I hope,but I cannot lay this on them. Our cousin Tom Underwood does not seemdisposed to notice us, and his care might not be of the right kind. Ouronly other relation is Fulbert Underwood.''Who drove you from Vale Leston?''Who did what he had every right to do with his own,' said Mr.Underwood. 'But he is not the style of man to be asked, even if I couldsaddle him with the charge. Probably twelve children to bring up onseven thousand pounds--a problem never put before us at Cambridge.''Do you honour me by--' asked the younger man, much agitated.'Not by asking you to solve that problem! But let me add your name.What I want is a guardian, who will not violently break up the home anddisperse the children. I believe Felix will be a competent young headif he is allowed, and I want you to be an elder brother to him, and lethim act.''You cannot give me greater comfort.''Only, Audley, this must be on one condition. Never let thisguardianship interfere with any higher work that you may be called to.If I thought it would bind you down to Bexley, or even to England, Ishould refrain from this request as a temptation. Mind, you are onlyasked to act in case the children should lose their mother, and thenonly to enable Felix to be what I believe he can and will be. Or, as itmay be right to add, if he should fail them, you will know what to do.''I do not think he will.''Nor I. But there are ways of failing besides the worst. However, I donot greatly fear this illness of mine taking root in them. It has notbeen in the family before; and I am nearly sure that I know when I tookthe infection, four or five years ago, from a poor man in Smoke-jackAlley, who would let no one lift him but me. They are healthy youngthings, all but dear little Cherry, and I hope they have spirits tokeep care from making them otherwise. You will say a kind word to mylittle Cherry sometimes, Audley. Poor little woman, I am afraid it mayfall sorely on her, she is of rather too highly strung a composition,and perhaps I have not acted so much for her good as my own pleasure,in the companionship we have had together.'So the will was altered, though without the knowledge of anyone butMrs. Underwood and the witnesses; and Mr. Audley felt himself boundto remonstrate no further against Felix's fate, however much he mightdeplore it.Nobody was so unhappy about it as Edgar. The boy was incredulous atfirst, then hotly indignant. Then he got a burnt stick, and aftershutting himself up in his attic for an hour, was found lying on thefloor, before an awful outline on the whitewash.'What is it, old fellow?' asked Felix. 'What a horrid mess!''I see,' said Lance. 'It is Friday grinning at the savages.''Or a scarecrow on the back of a ditch,' said Felix. 'Come, Ed, tell uswhat it is meant for.'Edgar was impenetrable; but having watched the others out of the house,he dragged Geraldine up to see--something--'Oh!' she cried. 'You've done it!''To be sure! You know it?''It is Achilles on the rampart, shouting at the Trojans! O Edgar--howbrave he looks--how his hair flies! Some day you will get him in hisgod-like beauty!''Do you think he has not got any of it, Cherry?' said Edgar, gazingwistfully. 'I did see it all, but it didn't come out--and now--''I see what you mean,' said Cherry, screwing up her eyes; 'it is in himto be glorious--a kind of lightning look.''Yes, yes; that's what I meant. All majesty and wrath, but no strain. OCherry--to have such things in my head, and not get them out! Don't youknow what it is?' as he rolled and flung himself about.'Oh, yes!' said Cherry from her heart. 'Oh! I should so like to do onetouch to his face, but he's so big! You did him on a chair, and I couldnot stand on one.''I'll lift you up. I'll hold you,' cried Edgar.The passion for drawing must have been very strong in the two children;for Geraldine was most perilously, and not without pain, raised to achair, where, with Edgar's arms round her waist, she actually workedfor ten minutes at Achilles' face, but his arm she declined. 'It is notright, Eddy! look--that muscle in his elbow can never be so!''I can't see the back of mine, but you can,' said Edgar, lifting herdown, and proceeding to take off his coat and roll up his shirt-sleeve.'That's the way. Oh! but it is not such an angle as that.''Achilles' muscles must have stood out more than mine, you know. I'llget a look at Blunderbore's. O Cherry, if I were but older--I know Icould--I'd save Felix from this horrible thing! I feel to want to roarat old Froggy, like this fellow at the Trojans.''Perhaps some day you will save him.''Yes; but then he will have done it. Just fancy, Gerald, if thatpicture was as it ought to be--as you and I see it!''It would be as grand as the world ever saw,' said the little girl,gazing through her eye-lashes at the dim strokes in the twilight. 'OEdgar, many a great man has begun in a garret!''If it would not be so long hence! Oh! must you go down?''I heard some one calling. You will be a great artist, I know, Edgar!'It was pleasanter than the other criticism, at bed-time.'Hollo! Man Friday does not look quite so frightful!' said Felix.'I'm sure I won't have him over my bed,' said Fulbert, proceeding torub him out; and though, for the moment, Achilles was saved by violentmeasures of Edgar's, yet before the end of the next day, Fulbert andLance had made him black from head to foot, all but the whites of hiseyes and his teeth; Robina and Angela had peeped in, and emulated theterror of the Trojans, or the savages; and Sibby had fallen on theyoung gentleman for being 'so bold' as to draw a frightful phookaupon their walls, just to frighten the darlints. Indeed, it was longbefore Angela could be got past the door at night without shuddering,although Achilles had been obliterated by every possible method thatFelix, Clement, or Sibby could devise, and some silent tears of Cherryhad bewailed the conclusion of this effort of high art, the outline ofwhich, in more moderate proportions, was cherished in that portfolio ofhers.Another work of art--the photograph--was safely accomplished. Thephotographer caught at the idea, declaring that he had been so oftenasked for Mr. Underwood's carte, that he had often thought of beggingto take it gratis. And he not only insisted on so doing, but he camedown from his studio, and took Mr. Underwood in his own chair, underhis own window--producing a likeness which, at first sight, shockedevery one by its faithful record of the ravages of disease, unlightenedby the fair colouring and lustrous beaming eyes, but which, by-and-by,grew upon the gazer, as full of a certain majesty of unearthly beautyof countenance.The autumn was mild, and Mr. Underwood rallied in some measure, so assometimes even to get to church at mid-day services on warm days.It was on St. Andrew's Day that he was slowly walking home, leaningon Felix's arm, with the two elder girls close behind him, when Aldasuddenly touched Wilmet's arm, exclaiming, 'There's Marilda Underwood!'There indeed was the apparition of Centry Park, riding a pretty pony,beside a large and heavily-bearded personage. The recognition wasinstantaneous; Marilda was speaking to her companion, and at the samemoment he drew up, and exclaiming, 'Edward! bless me!' was off hishorse in a moment, and was wringing those unsubstantial fingers in acrushing grasp. There was not much to be seen of Mr. Underwood, forhe was muffled up in a scarf to the very eyes, but they looked out oftheir hollow caves, clear, blue, and bright, and smiling as ever, andsomething like an answer came out of the middle of the folds.'These yours? How d'ye do!--How d'ye do!--Mary, you don't get off tillwe come to the door!--Yes, I'll come in with you! Bless me! bless me!Mary has been at me ever so many times about you, but we've been hadabroad for masters and trash, and I left it till we were settled here.'It was not many steps to the door, and there Wilmet flew on to prepareher mother and the room, while Alda stood by as her cousin was assistedfrom her horse by the groom, and the new-comer followed in silence,while Felix helped his father up the steps, and unwound his wraps,after which he turned round, and with his own sunny look held out hishand, saying, 'How are you, Tom? I'm glad to see you--How d'ye do, MaryAlda? we are old friends.--Call your mother, one of you.'The mother was at hand, and they entered the drawing-room, where, asthe clergyman sank back into his arm-chair, the merchant gazed withincreasing consternation at his wasted figure and features.'How long has this been going on?' he asked, pointing to him andturning to Mrs. Underwood, but as usual her husband answered for her.'How long have I been on the sick list? Only since the end ofSeptember, and I am better now than a month ago.''Better! Have you had advice?''Enough to know how useless it is.''Some trumpery Union doctor. I'll have Williams down before you are aday older.''Stay, Tom. Thank you, most warmly, but you see yourself the bestadvice in the world could tell us no more than we know already. Are youreally master of old Centry Underwood? I congratulate you.''Ay. I'm glad the place should come back to the old name. Mrs.Underwood and myself both felt it a kind of duty, otherwise it wentagainst the grain with her, and I'm afraid she'll never take to theplace. 'Twas that kept us abroad so long, though not from want ofwishes from Mary and myself. The girl fell in love with yours at firstsight.''To be sure I did,' said the young lady. 'Do let me see the littleones, and your baby.''Take your cousin to see them in the dining-room, Alda,' said themother; the order that Alda had been apprehending, for the dining-roomwas by many degrees more shabby than the drawing-room; however, shecould only obey, explaining by the way that little Bernard, beingnearly two years old, was hardly regarded as a baby now.Wilmet was in effect making him and Angela presentable as to the hands,face, hair, and pinafore, and appeared carrying the one and leading theother, who never having closely inspected any one in a riding-habitbefore, hung back, whispering to know whether 'that man was a woman.'Marilda was in raptures, loving nothing so well as small children, andvery seldom enjoying such an opportunity as the present; and the twobabies had almost the whole of the conversation adapted to them, tillAlda made an effort.'So you have been on the Continent?''Oh yes; it was such a horrid bore. Mamma would go. She said I musthave French masters, and more polish, but I don't like French polish. Ihope I'm just as English as I was before.''That is undeniable,' said Felix, laughing.'Didn't you care for it? Oh! I should like it so much!' cried Alda.'Like it? What, to hear French people chattering and gabbling all roundone, and be always scolded for not being like them! There was a poordog at the hotel that had been left behind by some English people, andcould not bear the French voices, always snarled at them. I was justlike him, and I got Papa to buy him and bring him home, and I alwayscall him John Bull.''But wasn't it nice seeing places, and churches, and pictures?' askedGeraldine.'That was the most disgusting of all, to be bothered with staring atthe stupid things. Mamma with her Murray standing still at them all,and making me read it out just like a lesson, and write it after, whichwas worse! And then the great bare shiny rooms with nothing to do. Theonly thing I liked was looking at a jolly little old woman that soldhot chestnuts out in the street below. Such dear little children inround caps came to her! Just like that,'--endeavouring to convert herpocket-handkerchief into the like head-gear for Robina.'I have always so wanted to come here,' she continued, 'only I amafraid Mamma won't like the place. She says it's dull, and there's nogood society. Is there?''I am sure we don't know,' said Wilmet.'Lots of people are coming to stay with us for Christmas,' addedMarilda, 'and you must all of you come and have all the fun with us.''Oh, thank you! how charming!' cried Alda. 'If Papa will but be wellenough; he is so much better now.''He must come for change of air,' said Marilda. 'You can't think howpleased my father was to hear I had met you. He talked all the way homeof how clever your father was, and how wickedly Cousin Fulbert at ValeLeston had served him, and he promised me when I came here I shouldhave you with me very often. I would have written to tell you, only Ido so hate writing. This is much better.'Marilda seemed to have perfectly established herself among them beforethe summons came to her; and as the children herded to the door, herfather turned round and looked at the boys inquiringly. 'There,' saidMr. Underwood, 'this is Felix, and this is Edgar, sixteen and fourteen.''Bless me, what a number, and as much alike as a flock of sheep,'again exclaimed the cousin. 'One or two more or less would not makemuch odds--eh, Edward?--Mary, what kissing all round?--D'ye know themall?--I'll look in to-morrow or next day, and you'll give me youranswer, Edward.'They were off, and at Mr. Underwood's sign Felix followed him intothe sitting-room, to the great excitement of the exterior population,who unanimously accepted Alda's view, that one of them was going tobe adopted. Their notion was not so much out as such speculationsgenerally are, for Mr. Underwood was no sooner alone with Felix andhis mother, than he said, 'You are in request, Felix; here's anotheroffer for one of you--the very thing I once missed. What say you to aclerkship at Kedge Brothers?''For one of us, did you say, Father?''Yes; the answer I am to give to-morrow is as to which. You have thefirst choice.''Do you wish me to take it, Father?''I wish you to think. Perhaps this is the last time I shall have anydecision to make for you, and I had rather you should make your ownchoice; nor, indeed, am I sure of my own wishes.''Then,' said Felix decidedly, 'I am sure I had better not. Edgar wouldnot, and must not, go to my work; there would be nothing coming in forever so long, and it would be a shame to throw old Froggy over.''I rather expected this, Felix. I told Tom you were in a mannerprovided for, but when he found you had a turn for business, he was themore anxious to get you.''I've got no turn that I know of,' said Felix, rather gloomily; 'but wecan't all of us set up for gentlemen, and Edgar is the one of us allthat ought to have the very best! Such a fellow as he is! He is sureof the prize this time, you know! I only don't think this good enoughfor him! He ought to go to the University. And maybe when Mr. Underwoodsees--''Not impossible,' said the sanguine father, smiling; 'and, at anyrate, to get put in the way of prosperity early may make his talentsavailable. It is odd that his first name should be Thomas. Besides,I do not think your mother could get on without you. And, Felix,' helowered his voice, 'I believe that this is providential. Not only assecuring his maintenance, but as taking him from Ryder. Some thingshave turned up lately when he has been reading with me, that havedismayed me. Do you know what I mean?''A little,' said Felix gravely.'I know Ryder would be too honourable consciously to meddle with aboy's faith; but the worst of it is, he does not know what is meddling,and he likes Edgar, and talks eagerly to him. And the boy enjoys it.''He does,' said Felix, 'but he knows enough to be on his guard. Therecan't be any harm done.''Not yet! Not but what can be counteracted, if--Felix, you cannotguess how much easier it makes it to me to go, that Edgar will not beleft in Ryder's hands. As to the younger ones, such things do not comedown to the lower forms. And they will be eligible for clergy orphans.Audley spoke of a choristership for Clement in the clergy-house atWhittingtonia. Was there ever such a raising up of friends and helpers?I am glad to have seen Tom Underwood, hearty, kindly--sure to be alwaysa good friend to you all. What did you think of the girl, Felix?''She is a jolly sort of girl,' said Felix; 'not like ours, you know,Father, but not half a bad fellow.'Mr. Underwood smiled thoughtfully, and asked, 'Have you seen enough ofher to judge how she is brought up?'It was treating his son so much more as a friend than as a boy, thatFelix looked up surprised. 'I should think her mother wanted to makeher no end of a swell,' he said, 'and that it would not take.'Mr. Underwood lent back thoughtfully. In truth, his cousin had, in hisoutburst of affection and remorse at long unconscious neglect, declaredhis intention of taking home one of the girls to be as a sister to hisMary, and then, evidently bethinking himself of some influence at home,had half taken back his words, and talked of doing something, bringinghis wife to see about it, &c.And when Mr. and Mrs. Underwood were again alone, they discussed theprobabilities, and considered whether if the offer were made they wouldaccept it. Mr. Underwood had only seen his cousin's wife once, in hisprosperous days, when he had been at the wedding, and his impressionwas not that of perfect refinement. There was reason to think from thewords of her husband and daughter that there was a good deal of thenouveau riche about her, and Mrs. Underwood did not know how to thinkof trusting a daughter in a worldly, perhaps irreligious, household.But Mr. Underwood was a good deal touched by his cousin's warmth andregret; he believed that the family kept up religious habits; hethought that Providence had brought him friends in this last hour, andhis affectionate sanguine spirit would not hesitate in accepting thekindness that provided for another of the children he was leaving. Shetrusted him as sure to know best; and, after her usual mode, said nomore, except 'Wilmet would be safest there.''You could spare her least.''Yes, indeed, it would be losing my right hand; but poor Alda--''Poor Alda! but consider if there is not worse evil in keeping heramong girls who hurt her, if they do not Wilmet. Beauty and woundedvanity are dangerous in a place like this.''Dangerous anywhere!''Less so in a great house, with that good honest Mary Alda, and Tom,who will look after her in the main, than here, or as a governess, withan inferior education.''It may be so. I know I can spare her better than her sister.''Wilmet is doing something for herself too--as Alda cannot, it seems.Justice settles the point, dearest, as it did between the boys--thatis, if we have the offer.'Perhaps the mother still had a lurking hope that the offer would not bemade. Her instinct was to keep all her brood round her; but, silent anddeferential woman that she was, she said nothing, and resolved to bethankful for what so eased her husband's mind.The handsome carriage tore up to the door, and violet velvet andfeathers descended, Mary Alda sprang after, and then came her father,and hampers on hampers of game, wine, and fruits ensued; while Marildaseized on Alda, and turned of herself into the dining-room, bearing abox of sweets. 'Where are the little ones? Little Bobbie, here; and allthe rest.'Not many calls were needful to bring a flock to share the feast, withcries of joy; but Marilda was not yet satisfied.'Where's the other of you?' she said to Alda. 'I don't know you wellapart yet.''Wilmet's in the kitchen,' thrust in Lancelot, 'ironing the collars forSunday.''Lance!' uttered Alda indignantly.'Oh! what fun! do let me go down and see! I should so like to iron.''But, Marilda--your Mamma--''Oh nonsense, come along, show me the way. That's right, Robins, onlyyour hands are so sticky. What, down here!--Oh, Wilmet, how d'ye do?what delicious work! do you always do it?''Generally, if Sibby is busy.''Do let me try.'And she did try for ten minutes, at the end of which the mother's voicewas heard calling for Edgar, who, turning crimson, went upstairs,leaving the others standing about the tidy kitchen, fresh sanded forSaturday.'What, not you!' said Marilda, pausing in her smoothing operations, andlooking at Felix.'No,' said he. 'I have got my work.''Oh! don't talk of it,' said Alda. 'I can't bear it. I didn't think hewas in earnest, or that Papa would let him.'Marilda turned full round. 'What, you won't go and be my father'sclerk, and be one of Kedge and Underwood, and make a fortune?'Felix shook his head.'And what is your work instead?''Printing,' said Felix stoutly. 'It gives present payment, and we can'tdo without it.'Both Marilda's hands seized on his. 'I like you!' she said. 'I wish Iwere you.'They all laughed, and Felix coloured, more abashed than pleased.Lance--to make up for his ignominious rescue at their lastmeeting--performed a wonderful progress, holding on by his fingers andtoes along the ledge of the dresser; and Marilda, setting her back (abroad one) against the ironing-board, went on talking.'And do you know what besides?' looking round, and seeing they didnot. 'One of you girls is to come and live with me, and be my sister.I wanted to have this little darling Angela to pet, but Mamma wouldn'thave her, and I did so beg for Geraldine, to let her have a sofa and apony-carriage! I do want something to nurse! But Mamma won't hear ofanybody but one of you two great ones, to learn and do everything withme; and that's not half the use.''But is it really?' cried Alda.'Yes, indeed! You'll be had up for her to choose from--that is, if shecan. How exactly alike you are!''She won't choose me,' said Wilmet. 'Hark, there's Edgar coming down.'Edgar ran in, with orders to the twins to go into the drawing-room.Wilmet hung back. 'I will not be the one,' she said resolutely. 'LetAlda go alone.''No,' said Felix, 'it is what you are told that you've got to do now.Never mind about the rest! Let us all come out of this place.' And itwas he who took off his sister's ironing apron as they went up to thedining-room together, while Marilda cried eagerly, 'Well, Edgar?''Well,' said Edgar, not in the enchanted voice she expected; 'it isvery good of your father, and what must be must.''Don't you like it?' said Marilda, half hurt; and Edgar, always a boyof ready courtesy, answered, 'Yes, yes, I'm no end of grateful. I'llget rich, and go abroad, and buy pictures. Only I did hope to paintthem.''Paint pictures!' cried Marilda. 'What, rather than be a merchant! Dosuch stupid useless things, only to bother people with having to stareat them, when you could be making money?''There's no reason one should not make money with pictures,' saidEdgar; 'but I'd rather make delight! But it can't be helped, and I amvery glad to have done with this horrid place.'Meantime Wilmet and Alda found themselves before a large, florid,much-dressed lady, with a most good-natured face, who greeted them with'Good morning, my dears! Just as Marilda told me, so much alike as tobe quite romantic. Well, no doubt it is a pity to separate between you,but my Marilda will be a true sister. She has spoken of nothing else.Are you willing, either of you, my dears?''Ay!' chimed in Mr. Thomas Underwood; 'we'll make you happy whicheverit is! You shall be in all respects like our own child; Mary would seeto that, if we didn't.''As to choice,' said the lady, 'there's none that I can see--prettygenteel girls both, that will do us credit, unless it is their ownfault. Excellent governess, London masters--you may be assuredeverything shall be done for her.''Shall we toss up which it shall be?' laughed her husband.'No,' said Mr. Underwood gently. 'We think that this one,' laying hishand on Alda's arm, 'will value these advantages, and is not quite sucha home-bird as her sister. I hope you will find a grateful good childin Alda Mary, and a kind sister to Mary Alda.'The tears came into Alda's eyes, as her father seemed thus making herover; a great rush of affection for all at home, and contempt for MaryAlda in comparison with her own twin, seemed to take away any elation,as Mr. and Mrs. Tom Underwood kissed her, and welcomed her, anddeclared they should like to take her home at once.'You shall have her soon,' said Mr. Underwood. 'Let me keep her forChristmas Day.'And for Christmas Day he did keep her, though at the bottom of Alda'sheart there were strong hopes of invitations to join the festivitiesat Centry Underwood. Indeed, such a party was insisted on by Marilda,one that was to include all the little ones, and make them happier thanever they had been in their lives. It was to be on Twelfth Day, butMrs. Underwood hinted to the twins that they had better not talk to theyounger ones about it, for she scarcely believed they would go. Shehad never before spoken out that conviction which had long crushed herdown, and Wilmet's whole soul seemed for the moment scared away by thisfresh intimation of the condition in which their father stood; whileAlda vehemently repeated the old declaration that he was better. Hesaid he was better. Alas! such a better as it always was.'How well you ought to be!' said Mr. Audley one day at the reiteration,'better every day!''Yes, and best of all at last!' was the reply, with a sweet smile.For he was very happy. The partial provision for the four eldestchildren, two by their own exertions, two through friends, hadevidently been received by him as an earnest of protection and aidfor the rest, even to the babe whom he scarcely expected ever tosee in this world. He said it would be ungrateful not to trust, andhe did trust with all his heart, cheered as it was by the tardycordiality of his cousin, and the indefinable love of kindred thatwas thus gratified. Thomas Underwood poured in good things ofall kinds on the invalid and his house, fulfilled his promise ofcalling in further advice, and would have franked half the familyto Torquay--Nice--Madeira--if the doctors had given the slightestencouragement. It could be of little ultimate avail; but the wineand soup did give support and refreshment bodily, and produced muchgratitude and thankfulness mentally, besides lightening some of Mrs.Underwood's present cares.No one was more anxious to help than Mr. Ryder; he had been assiduousin his inquiries and offers of service ever since the attack atMichaelmas; and it was evident that he really venerated the Curate,while he was a severe and contemptuous judge of the Rector. But when,after a brilliant examination, he became aware that he was to loseboth the elder Underwoods at once, his mortification was great; hecame to call, and Mr. Underwood had again to undergo an expostulationon Felix's prospects, and an offer of keeping him free of expense.The school-fee was a mere trifle, but Mr. Ryder would willingly haveboarded and lodged the boy himself--for the benefit of his authority,as he said, over younger boarders.'I am afraid,' said Mr. Underwood, kind and grateful as usual, 'thatthere are too many younger boarders here for Felix to be spared. No,thank you; I am sincerely obliged to you, but the hard cash is anecessary consideration.''And you can sacrifice such a boy's prospects--''Bread and cheese must be earned, even at the cost of prospects. Hecannot afford to wait to make his labour skilled.''Forgive me, Mr. Underwood, but I cannot think it is right to throwaway his abilities.''You can allow that it is a less wrong than to leave the rest to debtor starvation.''You should trust--''I do trust; but I can do so better when I humble what is nothingbut pride and vanity in me, after all. I was foolish enough about itat first, but I am quite content now that my boy should do his duty,without being curious as to where it is to be done.''You will tell me a schoolmaster's vanity is concerned; and I allow itis, for I looked to your sons to raise the reputation of the school;but perhaps it is only put off a little longer. Will you let me haveClement or Fulbert, on the terms I proposed for Felix?''No, Ryder; with many, many thanks, much feeling of your generouskindness--it cannot be.''You do not trust me.' This was said with as much indignation as couldbe shown to a man in Mr. Underwood's condition.'No. Your very kindness would make the tone I regret in you moreperilous. Do not think Felix ungrateful, Ryder; the desire is mine--andremember, it is that of a man who is dying, and who really loves andvalues you greatly. It is that the younger boys should, as soon as maybe, go to schools where older systems prevail.'Mr. Ryder was exceedingly mortified, and though he tried hard toconceal the full extent of his annoyance, he could not help saying,'You know how I respect your motives; but let me say that I doubt yourfinding any place where the ideas you deprecate are not to be found.And--pardon me--may not the finding their progress obstructed by yourscruples, the more indispose your sons to them?''I hope not,' said Mr. Underwood, calmly. 'I hope it may show themhow strong the approach of death makes that faith--nay, ratherassurance--with which your party are tampering.''You are not doing me justice, Mr. Underwood. You know that my faithand hope are at the core the same as your own. All our question is whatoutworks are untenable.' Again he spoke hotly, but Mr. Underwood'sgentleness seemed to silence him.'And that there should be any such question proves--alas!--the utterdifference between our belief. Ryder, you are a young man, and as Ibelieve and trust verily in earnest; and some day, I think, you willunderstand what faith is. Meantime, your uncertainties are doing moremischief than you understand--they pervade all your teaching more thanyou know. I dread what they may do to such as have not your moralsense to restrain them and bring them back, as I pray--I hope ever topray--it may be with you. Thank you for all your kindness, actual andintended, to my boys.'Then rising from his chair, while Mr. Ryder remained uncertain howto speak, he signed to him to remain still while he sought in hisbook-case and returned with a small old copy of Jeremy Taylor's 'HolyLiving and Dying;' then sitting down again, wrote the schoolmaster'sname in it, above his own 'Under-wode, Under-rode' stamp. 'Keep it,Ryder! I do not say that you will care for it now, but some day I thinkyou will, and if I am allowed to know of it, it will be joy.'Mr. Ryder could only wring the hand that held it out to him, and with agreat effort say, 'Thank you.' He saw that Mr. Underwood was too muchtired to prolong the conversation; but he wrote a note of warm thanksthat evening, promising to do whatever lay in his power for the boys,that their father would not think dangerous for them; and he added,that whatever he should for the future think or say, such an exampleas he had now seen was a strong weight on its own side. It was warmlyand tenderly put, and like everything that befell him, gratified Mr.Underwood.A very happy man he had been, as he sincerely told those who would havegrieved over him, and not without some remorse.'Yes,' as he said to Mr. Audley, who watched him like a son, 'it isindeed the Lord who hath led me all my life through. I never had a wantor a care unfulfilled till nine years ago. Then, just as I had becomesluggish and mechanical in fixed habits of easy country work, camethis thorough change, break, and rousing. I tell you, I can never bethankful enough for the mercy. Not to leave them all provided for, asthe saying is, would I go back to be such a priest as I was becoming.Happy--yes, I have been much happier here, since no choice was left mebut working up to my strength.''And beyond it,' said Mr. Audley, sadly.'If so--well; so much the better!' he said. 'It is a blessing to beallowed to be spent in that service. And for the children, I wish onlyfor work and goodness for them--and for that I may well trust my goodMaster.'CHAPTER IV.TWILIGHT AND DAWN.'Two Angels, one of Life and one of Death,Passed o'er the village as the morning broke;The dawn was on their faces; and beneathThe sombre houses capped with plumes of smoke.'Longfellow.'Don't, Ful!''That's nothing to you, Clem.''I say, this won't do. I must have some light.''Indeed, Ed, we must not light a candle before five o'clock.''Pish!''Oh please, Edgar, don't stir the fire. If you knew how few coals thereare!''Stuff!''No, I won't have it done if Wilmet says not;' and Felix reared up inthe gloom, and struggled with his brother.'Felix--Edgar--Oh, don't.''Hsh--sh-- Now you girls are worse than all, screaming in that way.'A few moments' silence of shame. It had been a weary, long, wet day,a trial under any circumstances to eleven people under seventeen, onthe 4th of January, and the more oppressive in St. Oswald's Buildings,because not only had their father been in a much more suffering statefor some days past, but their mother, who had hoped to keep up for someweeks longer, had for the last two days been quite unlike herself. Inthe sick-room she was as tender and vigilant as ever in her silentway, but towards her children a strange fretful impatience had set in,almost a jealousy of their coming near their father, and an intoleranceof the least interruption from them even for the most necessary cause.Moreover, the one friend and helper who had never failed them before,Mr. Audley, had not been seen since he had looked in before earlyservice; and altogether the wretchedness and perplexity of that dayhad been such, that it was no wonder that even Felix and Wilmet hadscarcely spirits or temper for the only task that seemed at presentleft them, the hindering their juniors from making themselves obnoxious.'Wilmet, do you think we shall go to the party at Centry Park?'reiterated Fulbert.'Do hold your tongue about that. I don't believe there's the leastchance,' said Alda fretfully.'And I don't know how you can think of such a thing,' added Cherry.'I want to see Cousin Marilda's Christmas tree,' whined Robina.'Do ask Mamma again,' entreated another voice.'I shall do no such thing,' said Wilmet, with absolute crossness in hertone.Robina began to cry.'Come here, Bobbie,' said Cherry's voice in the dark end of the room;'I'll tell you a story.''I know all Cherry's stories, and they're rubbish,' said Fulbert.'This is quite a new one. There was once a little match-girl--''Bosh! I know that little brute, and I hate her,' broke in Fulbert.'Hold your tongue,' said Clement; 'but--''Oh no, don't let us have the match-girl,' cried several voices.'Why can't you be good? There was once an old giant that lived in acave--''I hate old giants,' said Cherry's critical public; and her voice grewmelancholy.'But this one had but one eye. Come, do listen; papa told me. He wasin an island--' but the voice grew mournful, and was broken by a cry.'Oh! Fulbert hurt me!''Fulbert, for shame! What is it, Angel dear?''I only laid hold of her pudding arm,' growled Fulbert. 'Oh! I say,Felix, that's too bad!''Hold your row, I say,' said Felix, after his application of fist law.'Hollo! what's that?' and he sprang to his feet with Angela in hisarms, as the door was opened by a hand groping, and Mr. Audley's voicesaid, 'Darkness visible.'There was a general scrambling up all over the floor, and Edgar rushedacross to light a candle. Wilmet alone had not stirred, as Bernard layasleep across her lap. The flash of the match revealed a mass of lightdisordered heads, and likewise a black figure in the door-way.'Here is a kind helper for you, Wilmet,' said Mr. Audley, 'from St.Faith's, at Dearport. You must call her Sister Constance.'Wilmet did rise now, in some consternation, lifting her little brother,whose hand was still in the locks, the tangling of which had been hissolace. There was a sweet warm kiss on her brow, and her lost net waspicked up, her hair coiled into it by a pair of ready tender hands, butshe faltered, 'Oh, thank you. Does Mamma know?''She was there when I got a sort of consent from your father,' said Mr.Audley.'She has not said a word,' said Alda, half resentfully. 'We have hardlybeen in all day except just to fetch and carry.''Never mind,' said the Sister, 'it is much better that she did notthink about it. Now, my dear, don't! I won't have anything done for me.You don't know how we Sisters sleep on nothing when we do sleep.''But you'll have some tea,' said Alda, the only smooth-haired one ofthe party.'When you do, perhaps, thank you. Will you come to me, my dear?'relieving Felix from Angela. 'What is your name?' and the child, thoughordinarily very shy, clung to her at once; while she, moving over toCherry, found her in tears, shook up her cushion, arranged her rug,and made her comfortable in a moment. A sense came over them all thatthey had among them a head on whom they might rest their cares; and asthe black bonnet and veil were taken off, and they saw a sweet fairmotherly face beaming on them from the white plain-bordered cap, theygathered round with an outpouring of confidence, small and great, whileMr. Audley went upstairs to announce what he had done. He presentlyreturned, saying, 'All right! Perhaps you had better come up at once.'There they sat, on either side of the hearth, he pillowed up and in adressing-gown, more entirely the sick man than he had ever before givenup himself to be. Mrs. Underwood rose, and with tears in her eyes,mutely held out her hand, while her husband at once recognised SisterConstance as Lady Herbert Somerville, the wife of the late rector ofDearport. He had last met her when, some six or seven years before,he had been invited to preach at festivals at Dearport, and had seenher the sunbeam of her house. He knew that her husband, who was aconnection of Mr. Audley's, had since died of the same malady as hisown, and had left her, a childless widow, together with all else he hadto leave, to the Sisterhood they had already founded in the seaporttown. But his greeting was, 'This is very good in you; but surely itmust be too painful for you.''The Superior saw how much I wished it,' she said.'You are like Alexandrine de la Ferronays,' he said, remembering herlove for tending a consumptive priest for her husband's sake.'I am always wishing that I were!' she said.So they perfectly understood each other; and poor Mrs. Underwood, whohad, in her new and extraordinary petulance, fiercely resisted thedoctor's recommendation of a nurse, found herself implicitly relyingon and trusting Sister Constance with a wonderful sense of relief--arelief perhaps still greater to the patient himself, who had silentlyendured more discomforts, and made more exertions than she knew, ratherthan tire her or vex her by employing even son or daughter, and who wasbesides set free from some amount of anxiety.Indeed the widow had too perfect a sympathy to interfere with thewife's only comfort. When it could safely be done, she left the twoalone together, and applied herself to winning the hearts and soothingthe spirits of the poor children downstairs, and suggesting andcompounding new nourishing delicacies.She even persuaded Mrs. Underwood to go to the next room for a night'srest while she sat up, and learnt--what the silent wife had never toldany one--how trying the nights were even to that spirit! At first thepatient liked to talk, and drew out much of the hidden treasure ofher spirit respecting her husband, who, though ailing for years, hadfinally passed away with only the immediate warning of a week--thefinal cause being harass from the difficulties from those above andbelow him that beset an earnest clergyman of his way of thinking.What struck her, as it did all, was Mr. Underwood's perfect absence ofall care, and conviction that all the burthen was taken off his hands.Her own husband had, as she could not help telling him, found it hardto resign himself to leaving his plans half carried out to instrumentswhich he had but half formed. He had wished with all his might tolive, and though he had resigned himself dutifully, it had been with areal struggle, and a longing for continued service rather than rest,a hope that he should more efficiently serve, and much difficulty inrefraining from laying all about him under injunctions for the future.Mr. Underwood half smiled. 'I am neither head nor principal,' he said.'Plans have been over long ago. I am only tired out, too tired to thinkabout what is to follow. If I live three days longer I shall have justhad my forty years in the wilderness, and though it has blossomed likea rose, I am glad to be near the rest.'And then he asked for the Midnight Office; and afterwards camefitful sleep, half dreamy, half broken by the wanderings of slightfeverishness and great weakness; but she thought her attendance wouldnot be very brief, and agreed mentally with what Mr. Audley hadtold her, that the doctor said that the end might yet be many weeksaway. When in the dark winter's morning the wife crept back again toher post, and all that could be done in those early hours had beeneffected, Sister Constance went to the half-past seven o'clock servicewith Felix and Clement, imparting to them on the road that the Superiorof St. Faith's was expecting to receive some of the least of thechildren in the course of the day, to remain there for the present.Both boys declared it would be an infinite relief, but they doubtedexceedingly whether either father or mother would consent to lose sightof them, since the former never failed to see each child, and give ita smile and kiss, if no more. If they were to be sent, Felix supposedthere was no one but himself to take them; nobody with whom they wouldbe happy could be spared, nor did he show any repugnance to the notionof acting pre de famille to three babies on the railway.It was quickly settled. Mr. Underwood at once confessed the exceedingkindness, and declared it to be much better for everybody. 'Do you notfeel it so, Mother?'She bent her head in assent, as she did to all he said.'Having them back will be good for you,' he added persuasively;and again she tried to give a look of response. So they werebrought--Robina, Angela, and Bernard--and each stood for a moment ona chair at his bed-side. The two little ones he merely kissed andblessed; but to Robina he said a few more words about being good, andminding Mamma and Felix.'Oh yes, papa! And they'll have a Christmas tree! and I'll save all mybon-bons to make your cough well.'He watched wistfully as the bright heads passed out of sight, and thelong struggling cough and gasping that followed had all the pangs ofparting to add to their burthen. Half the family escorted Felix and hischarge to the station; and in the quiet that followed, Sister Constancehad a good sleep on Wilmet's bed, as much, she said, as she everrequired; and she came from it all freshness and brightness, making thedinner-time very charming to all the diminished party, though Wilmetfelt greatly lost without the little ones; and afterwards she earnedthe warmest gratitude from Edgar and Geraldine by looking over theirdrawings and giving them some valuable hints--nay, she even devisedthe new and delightful occupation of ship-building for those threeinconvenient subjects, Clement, Fulbert, and Lancelot. Upstairs ordown, all was gentle cheerfulness and patience wherever she went.Felix came home about five o'clock, and his mother was persuadedto go to lie down while he amused his father with the account ofthe children's exemplary behaviour, and of their kind welcome atSt. Faith's, where he had been kept to dine, feeling, as he said,'uncommonly queer' at first, but at last deciding, to the greatdiversion of his father, that the sisters were a set of jolly oldgirls, but not one equal to 'our Sister Constance.' Then he hadseen the church, and was almost bewildered with the beauty of thedecorations; and Mr. Underwood, though saying little, evidently muchenjoyed his boy's refreshment and pleasure. He certainly seemed noworse, and Mr. Audley was allowed, what he had often asked before, tosit up with him.But there was much to render it a long, anxious, restless night ofa sort of semi-consciousness, and murmuring talk, as if he fanciedhimself at Vale Leston again. However, when Felix crept in, about fouro'clock in the morning, anxious at the sounds he heard, he found himasleep, and this lasted for two or three hours; he woke refreshed, andpresently said, 'Epiphany! put back the curtain, that I may see thebright and morning star.'The morning star was shining in the delicate dawn full in view, and helooked at it with quiet pleasure. 'Mother,' he said, then recollectinghimself; 'ah, she is resting! Thank you, Audley.'At that moment a little cry through the thin wall made him start andflush.'Is it so?' he murmured; 'thank God! That is well!' But his chestheaved grievously as he panted with anxiety, and his two watchershesitated what to do, until the door was slightly opened, and beforethe intended sign could be made to Felix, the breathless exclamation,'How? what?' brought Sibby's half-scared mournful countenance forward.'How is she, Sibby? don't fear to say,' he said, more collectedly.'Nicely, sir, as well as can be expected; but--''The baby? Alive--I heard--''Yes, sir; that is--O Sir, it is two; and it would be a mere mercy ifthey are taken, as they look like to be--twins, and coming like this!'Perhaps Sibby was a little more lamentable, because, instead of lookingshocked, he clasped his hands in eager thanksgiving, as he lookedupwards.Sister Constance followed at the same moment, saying in a far moreencouraging voice, 'She is doing very well.''It is another great mercy,' he said. 'Much better than longer waitingon me. Will these Twelfth-day gifts live? Or do I take them with me? Atleast, let me baptize them--now at once,' he spoke earnestly. 'My fulltwelve, and one over, and on Twelfth-day.'Sister Constance had better hopes of the babes than Sibby, but thiswish of his was one not to be withstood for a moment; and she went tomake ready, while Mr. Audley went down for the little Parian font,and Felix and Sibby arranged the pillows and coverings. Mr. Underwoodlooked very bright and thankful. 'Birth-day gifts,' he said, 'what arethey? You have not told me, Sibby.''Boy and girl, sir,' she said, 'poor little dears!''Jealous for your old twins, Sibby?' he said, smiling.'Ah! sir, they came in a better time.''Better for them, no doubt; but this is the best for these,' heanswered brightly. 'See, Sibby, can't you be thankful, like me, thatyour mistress is sheltered from what would try her? I can bear it allbetter without her to see.'Sibby's only reply was a gush of tears, and presently all was madeready; Geraldine was quietly helped into the room by Edgar, and placedin her usual station by the pillow, and the boys stood against thewall, while the two babes, tiny and scarcely animate things, werecarried, each by one of the elder pair; and the father, as whitelyrobed as if he had been in his surplice, held out his hands, and smiledwith his kindly lips and clear shining blue eyes full of welcome.'Has your mother any wishes about names?' he asked. 'Wilmet--what--?''No, Papa, I think not;' but her eyes were brimming over with tears,and it was plain that something was suppressed.'My dear, let me hear; I am not to be hurt by such things.''It is--it is only--she did say, when we came for them, that we werethe children of joy--these are the children of sorrow,' murmuredWilmet, uttering the words with difficulty.'I thought so,' he said; then after a brief pause, 'Now, Audley--'For Mr. Audley said all the previous prayers, though with a voice ashard to control as Wilmet's had been. Then Wilmet held her charge closeto her father, for, almost inappreciable as the weight was, he couldonly venture to lay one arm round that grasshopper burthen, as with hislong thin fingers he dashed the water. 'Theodore Benjamin, I baptizethee.' Alda brought the other. 'Stella Eudora.' Then the two hands werefolded over his face, and they all knelt round till he moved and smiled.'Give them to me again,' he said.It was for the father's kiss and blessing now.'They look life-like,' he said. 'You will keep them. Now mind me.Charge her never to think of them as children of sorrow, but of joy.She will remember how nearly you were called Theodore, Felix. Take himas God's gift and mine--may he be a son of your right hand to you.'The boy did take the babe, and with a deep resolve in his heart, thathis duty to these helpless ones should be his first thought on earth.He did not speak it, but his father saw the steadfast wistful gaze, andit was enough.Alda ventured to ask, 'Is Eudora a gift too, Papa?''Yes. A happy gift. For so she is! Let her be a little Epiphany Star toyou all! Tell Mother that I call them a double joy, a double comfort!Poor little maid!' and he kissed her again, 'will no one welcome her,but the father who is leaving her?''O Papa! You know how we will love them,' sobbed Wilmet.'I think I do, my dear;' and he smoothed the glossy hair; 'but withlove comes joy, you know.''It is very hard now,' broke from the poor girl.'Very,' he said tenderly; 'but it will if you make the burthen ablessing--the cross a crutch--eh, my Cherry? Now, a kiss each, and go,I am tired.'He was tired, but not apparently worse.Edgar and his three juniors started off directly after church in questof ice where they might behold skating, and practise sliding; andWilmet, with a view to quiet, actually ventured on the extravagance ofproviding them with a shilling, that they might forage for themselves,instead of coming home to dinner.She regretted Edgar's absence, however, for when Mr. Bevan came in tohold the Epiphany Feast in the sick chamber, her father asked for Edgarand Geraldine, and looked disappointed that the boy was gone. But hemurmured, 'Maybe it is best!' and when the little girl came in, flushedand awe-struck, he took her hand, and said, 'May not I have this littleone--my last pupil--to share the feast with me? Willing and desirous,'he smiled as he held her, and she coloured intensely, with tears in hereyes.There could be no denial, and his judgment at such a moment could onlybe accepted by the Rector; and the child herself durst not say one wordof her alarm and awe. Papa knew. And never could she forget that heheld her hand all the time that she leant--for she could not kneel--byhis bed. Her elder brother and sisters were there too, and he kissedand blessed each tenderly afterwards, and Sister Constance too kneltand asked his blessing. Then he thanked Mr. Bevan warmly, and called ita most true day of brightness. They heard him whispering to himself,'Arise, shine, for thy Light is come;' and the peaceful enjoymentseemed so to soothe him, that he was not, as usual, eager to get up.It was only towards the early dusk that a restlessness came on, and anincrease of the distress and oppression of breath, which he thoughtmight be more bearable in his chair; and Mr. Audley, who had just comein, began with Felix to dress him, and prepare to move him. But just asthey were helping him towards the chair, there was a sort of choke, agasping struggle, his head fell on Felix's shoulder, the boy in terrormanaged to stretch out a hand and rang the bell; but in that secondfelt that there was a strange convulsive shudder, and--'Felix!' Mr. Audley's low voice sounded strange and far away. 'I dobelieve--'The figure was entirely prone as they lifted it back to the bed. Theyneeded not the exclamation of Sibby to reveal the truth. It was onlyan exclamation, it would have been a shriek if Felix had not graspedher wrist with a peremptory grasp. But that bell had been enough; therehad been a sound of dismay in the very tinkle, and Sister Constance wasin the doorway.'Felix,' she said, understanding all, 'you must go to her. Sheheard--she is calling you. You cannot conceal it; be as quick and quietas you can,' she added, as the stunned boy went past her, only hearing,and that as through a tempest, the feeble voice calling his name. Hestood by the bed-side; his mother looked into his white face, and heldout her hands; then as he bent down, clasped both round his neck. 'Hetrusted you,' she said.He sank on his knees as she relaxed her grasp, and hid her head beneaththe clothes. A few holy words of commendation of the soul departedsounded from the other room; then at Sister Constance's touch of hishand, he quitted the room.Presently after, Felix was sitting in the large arm-chair in thedining-room, with his sister Geraldine on his lap, his arms round her,her arms tightly clasped round his neck, her hair hanging looselydown over his shoulder, her head against him, his face over her, ashe rocked himself backwards and forwards with her, each straining theother closer, as though the mechanical action and motion could allaythe pain. The table was all over baby-things, which numerous neighbourshad sent in on the first news of the twins that morning, and whichthe girls had been inspecting; but no one--nothing else was to beseen--when Mr. Thomas Underwood, on his way from the station, findinghis knock unheard, and the door ajar, found his way to the room.'What is this? How is your father?'Felix raised his face, still deeply flushed, and rising, placed hissister in the chair.'What, worse! You don't say so,' said Mr. Underwood, advancing.'He is gone!' said Felix, steadily, but in an unnatural voice. 'Quitesuddenly. Not very long ago,' he began, but he felt unable to guess forwhat space of time he had been rocking Cherry there.'Dead! Edward Underwood! Bless me!' said Mr. Underwood, taking off hishat, passing his hand over his forehead, and standing horror-struck. 'Ihad no idea! You never sent over to say he was worse.''He was not; it came on just now,' said Felix, holding by themantelpiece.He groaned. 'Poor Edward! Well,' and he was forced to put hishandkerchief to his eyes. He spoke more gently after that. 'Well, thisis a sudden thing, but better than lingering on. Your poor mother,would she like to see me?''She was confined last night.''Bless me! bless me! What a state of things! Have you got any one to bewith you?''Yes; a lady from Dearport,' said Felix.'Humph. Which are you? not my boy?''No, I am Felix. Oh, poor Edgar!' he added, still bewildered.And it was at this moment that trampling steps were heard, making Felixspring forward with an instinct to silence them; but at the thresholdthe sight of his face brought conviction to Edgar; and with a louduncontrollable cry, tired and hungry as he was, he seemed to collapseinto his brother's arms, and fainted away.'My poor boy!' exclaimed his cousin, coming to Felix's help, andhimself lifting Edgar to the sofa. Of the other boys, Clement ran forwater, Fulbert rushed out of sight, and Lancelot laid his head on achair choking with tears.Felix and Clement were, poor children! used enough to illness toattend to their brother with a collectedness that amazed their cousin;and without calling for help, Edgar came shuddering and tremblingto himself, and then burst into silent but agonising sobs, verypainful to witness. He was always--boy as he was--the most easilyand entirely overthrown by anything that affected him strongly; andMr. Thomas Underwood was so much struck and touched by his exceedinggrief, especially now that he looked on him as his own property, thatafter putting in some disjointed sentences of 'There--there--You'llalways have a father in me--Don't, my boy--I tell you, you are my sonnow,'--which to Felix's mind made it more intolerable, he said, 'I'lltake him home now--it will be all the better for him and for every one,poor lad! So many--''The three younger ones were sent to Dearport yesterday,' said Felix;'but Edgar--''To Dearport! Eh! To whom?''The Sisters,' said Felix.A gruff sound followed. 'Come, come, my dear lad, 'tis bad enough, butI'll do my best to make up to you. It will be much the best way foryou to come out of this,' he added, glancing round the dreary firelessroom, which his entrance had reminded Felix to darken.'Thank you,' began Felix, not in the least supposing Edgar could go;'but now--''It is not like a stranger,' added his relation. 'Be a sensible lad.One out of the way is something under the circumstances. Stay--whom canI see? I will give orders for you,' he added.'Mr. Audley and Sister Constance are seeing about things, thank you,'said Felix. 'I'll fetch Mr. Audley,' he added, as another trying gruntat the other name fell on his ear, and he put his arm round Geraldine,and helped her away.Mr. Audley came, having just parted with the doctor, who had explainedthe sudden termination as what he had of late not thought improbable,and further shown that it had been most merciful, since there mightotherwise have been weeks, if not months, of much severer suffering. Hehad just looked in at the wife, but she had hardly noticed him, and hesaw no dangerous symptoms about her, except an almost torpid calmness.Mr. Thomas Underwood saw Mr. Bevan, and made it clearly understood thathe made himself responsible for all expenses, including mourning forthe whole family. He even offered to have the funeral at Vale Leston,'if it were only to shame Fulbert Underwood;' but the wife was in nostate to be asked, and the children shrank from the removal, so it wasdecided that Edward Underwood should sleep among those for whom he hadspent his life, and where his children's lot for the present would becast.The cousin carried Edgar back to Centry with him; the boy seemed toounhappy not to be restless, and as if he were ready to do anything toleave his misery behind him.The others remained with their preparations, and with such consolationas the exceeding sympathy and kindness of the whole town could affordthem. Their mother remained in the same state, except when roused byan effort; and then there was an attention and presence of mind abouther that gave anxiety lest excitement should be bringing feverishness;but she always fell back into her usual state of silence, such that itcould be hardly told whether it were torpid or not.They looked out that half-finished comment on the Epistle to thePhilippians. It stopped at the words--'Yea, and if I be offered uponthe sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with youall.'Mr. Audley took those words for his text on the Sunday, and, notwithout breaking down more than once, read as much of the comment asthere was time for, as the happy-hearted message of the late pastor,for whom indeed there were many tears shed. It seemed to suit withthat solemn peace and nobleness that seemed like the 'likeness of theResurrection face,' bringing back all the beauty of his countenance ashe lay robed in his surplice, with a thorny but bright-fruited cross ofholly on his breast, when his children looked their last, ere partingwith what remained of that loved and loving father.Poor little Geraldine spent that worst hour of her life sitting by hermother's bed. She had been helped by Felix to that Feast which had beenspread for the mourners in the church in early morning; but afterwardsshe was forced to remain at home, while the white-robed choir, thebrother clergy of all the neighbourhood, and the greater part of theparish met their pastor for the last time in the church.There the first part of the service took place; and then--Cherry couldjust fancy she could hear the dim echo of the Dies Ir, as it wassung on the way to the cemetery. It was a very aching heart, poorchild! full of the dull agony of a longing that she knew could never besatisfied again, the intense craving for her father.She missed him more really than any of them, she had been so much hiscompanion; and she was the more solitary from the absence of Edgar,who had always been her chief partner in her pursuits. His departurehad seemed like a defection; and yet she had reproached herself for sofeeling it when he had run upstairs, on arriving with Mr. Underwood,looking paler, more scared and miserable, than any of them; and hewas sobbing so much when he took his place in the procession, thatWilmet had made Felix take Alda, that she might support him. None ofhis mother's steady reserve and resolute stillness had descended tohim, he was all sensibility and nervousness; and Geraldine, thoughwithout saying this to herself, felt as if 'poor Edgar' might reallyhave been nearly killed by the last few days of sadness, he could beardepression so little. She could hardly have gone through them but forSister Constance's kindness, and that rocking process from Felix,which she and he called 'being his great baby.' And now, when hermother looked up at her, held out a hand, and called her Papa's dearlittle Cherry, drawing her to lay her cheek by hers on the pillow,there was much soothing in it, though therewith the little girl felta painful doubt and longing to know whether her mother knew what waspassing; and even while perfectly aware that she must not be talked tonor disturbed, was half grieved, half angry, at her dropping off intoa slumber, and awakening only upon little Stella's behalf. Those fewwords to Geraldine had been the only sign that day of perception of anyexistence in the world save that of the twins.So the time went by, and the little bustle of return was heard; SisterConstance came in, kissed Geraldine, and helped her down that she mightbe with Edgar, who was to return with the cousin, whispering to herby the way that it had been very beautiful. It was a day of brightsunshine, high wind, and scant sparkling feathery stars of snow, thatsat for a moment shining in their pure perfectness of regularity on theblack, and then vanished. 'So like himself,' Sister Constance said.Geraldine found her four elders and the three little boys all togetherin the dining-room; and while Wilmet anxiously asked after Mother,the others, in a sort of sad elation, told of the crowds present,the number of clergy--Mr. Ryder, too, came home from his holiday onpurpose--the sobbing people, and the wreaths of camellias and of holly,that loving hands had made, and laid upon the coffin. And then the lasthymn had been so sweet and beautiful, they all seemed refreshed andcomforted except Edgar, who, coming fresh back to the desolation of thehouse, was in another paroxysm of grief.'But, Edgar,' said Alda timidly, 'you like being there, don't you?''As if one could like anything now!''Well! but, Eddy dear, you know what I mean. It is not bad being there.''Not so bad as being at home. Oh!' and a terrible fit of sobbing cameon, which made the other children stand round rather appalled; whileFelix, hesitating, said,'It is no good going on in this way, Edgar. Father would say it was notright; and you are upsetting poor little Cherry.''It is worse for him, because he has been away,' said Cherry, fondlinghim.'Yes,' said Edgar between his sobs 'It did not seem so there.''And are they kind?''Oh, yes. Marilda let me sit in the school-room, and I had books,and things to copy; such an angel, Cherry, I'll bring it to you nexttime--my copy, I mean.'Here there was a summons from the other room for Felix.'Yes,' said Edgar, a good deal re-invigorated by having somethingto tell; 'I suppose they are going to tell him what is settled. Mr.Underwood wrote to the man at Vale Leston, and he won't do anything forus; but they are going to try for the Clergy Orphan for one of you twolittle boys.''Oh!' there was a great gasp.'And about me?' asked Alda.'You are to come when we all go to London--to meet us at the station.There's a new governess coming, and you will start both together withher; and I think you'll beat Marilda, for she knows nothing, and won'tlearn.''I hope she won't be jealous.''I don't think it is in her! She's very jolly.''But I can't go till Mamma is better.'Wilmet felt they were falling into a gossiping kind of way that jarredon her, and was glad of a summons upstairs.Mr. Thomas Underwood saw Alda before he returned home, told her she washis other daughter, and should join them on their way to London; and hefurther made arrangements about the christening, contingent, of course,on the mother's consent, and on the possibility of taking the verysmall delicate babies to the church. He made very extensive promises ofpatronage for the future, with a full and open heart, and looked as ifhe should like to adopt the whole family on the spot.For the convenience of our readers we subjoin the first page ofthe family Bible.Edward Fulbert Underwood married August 1st, 1837--Mary WilmetUnderwood.Felix Chester  .  .  .  born, July  3rd, 1838.Wilmet Ursula }Alda Mary     }.  .  .    "   Aug. 11th, 1839.Thomas Edgar.  .  .  .    "   Oct. 6th, 1840.Geraldine.  .  .  .  .    "   Oct. 25th, 1841.Edward Clement .  .  .    "   Nov. 23rd, 1842.Fulbert James  .  .  .    "   Jan. 9th, 1844.Lancelot Oswald.  .  .    "   May  16th, 1846.Robina Elizabeth  .  .    "   Feb. 20th, 1848.Angela Margaret.  .  .    "   Sept. 29th, 1851.Bernard  .  .  .  .  .    "   Dec. 1st, 1852.Stella Eudora    }Theodore Benjamin}.  .    "   Jan. 6th, 1854.CHAPTER V.WORKING FOR BREAD.'Parson's lass 'ant nowt, an' she weant 'a nowt when 'e's dead;Mun be a guvness, lad, or summut, an' addle her bread.'Tennyson.'Tell, little one,' said Mr. Rugg, the doctor, as he found Geraldineon the landing-place outside her mother's room, and spoke to her ina voice that to her reluctant ears, as well as to those of SisterConstance, who followed him, sounded all the more vulgar because it waslow, wheedling, and confidential; 'you are always about the house, youknow everything--what accident has your mamma met with?'Cherry's face grew set.'She has, then,' said the doctor, looking at Sister Constance. 'Ithought so. Now, be a good child, and tell us all about it.''I cannot,' she said.'Come, don't be silly and sulk. No one will punish you; we know it wasan accident; out with it.''My dear,' said Sister Constance, 'this is a pity. Much may depend onyour speaking.'Cherry began to cry very piteously, though still silently.'Yes, yes, we see you are sorry,' said Mr. Rugg, 'but there's nothingfor it now but to let us hear the truth.'She shook her head violently, and brow and neck turned crimson.Mr. Rugg grew angered, and tried a sharper tone. 'Miss Geraldine, thisis regular naughtiness. Let me hear directly.'The flush became purple, and something like 'I won't' came from behindthe handkerchief.'Leave her to me, if you please,' said Sister Constance gently; 'Ithink she will tell me what is right to be told.''As you please, Lady Somerville,' said Mr. Rugg, who, since he haddiscovered her title, was always barbarously misusing it; 'but thething must be told. It is doing Mrs. Underwood a serious injury to letchildish naughtiness conceal the truth.'Constance put her arm round the little girl, a tiny weight for thirteenyears old, and took her into the room where she had last seen herfather. She was sobbing violently, not without passion, and the moredistressingly because she carefully stifled every sound, and the poorlittle frame seemed as if it would be rent to pieces. 'Cherry, dearchild, don't,' said Constance, sitting down and gathering her into herarms; 'do try and calm yourself, and think--''He--he--I won't tell him!' sobbed the child. 'He's a bad man--he tellsstories. He said he would not hurt me--when he knew he should mostterribly. Papa said it was very wrong. Papa was quite angry--he calledit deceiving, he did! I won't tell him!''My dear child, is there anything to tell? Don't think about him, thinkabout what is good for your mother.''She told me not,' sobbed Cherry, but not with the anger there had beenbefore. 'No, no, don't ask me; she told me not.''Your mother? My dear little girl, whatever it is, you ought to sayit. Your dear mother seems to be too ill and confused to recollecteverything herself, and if it is not known whether she has been hurt,how can anything be done for her?'Cherry sat upon her friend's lap, and with a very heaving chest said,'If Felix says I ought--then I will. Papa said we should mind Felix--like him.''I will call Felix,' said Sister Constance.Mr. Rugg looked very impatient of the delay; but Felix, who had justcome in to dinner, was summoned. He came at once, and was soon standingby Geraldine's chair.'Yes, Geraldine, I think you ought to tell,' he said, as the loyallittle thing gazed up at her new monarch. 'What did happen?''It was on the day after New Year's Day,' said Geraldine, now speakingvery fast. 'You were all at church, and she came out of--this roomwith Bernard in her arms--and called to me that I might come and sitwith--him, because she was going down to the kitchen to make somebeef-tea. And just then she put her foot into a loop of whip-cord, andfell. She could not save herself at all, because of Bernard; but shewent backwards--against the steps.''Did she seem hurt at the time?''I did not think so. She pulled herself up by the baluster before Icould get up to help her, and she never let Bernard go all the time--hedid not even scream. She only said, "Now mind, Cherry, do not say oneword of this to Papa or anybody else," and she told me she wasn't hurt.Oh! was she really?' as the Sister left the room.'I wonder whose the string was,' said Felix vindictively.'Oh, never mind! He'll be so sorry! Oh! I hope she won't be very muchvexed at my telling!''She will not mind now!' said Felix; 'it was only not to frighten Papa.'And Felix had his little sister in that one position where she felta sort of comfort--like a baby in his arms to be rocked--when SisterConstance returned with the doctor. He spoke without either the angeror the persuasive tone now, and Cherry could bear it better, though sheslipped off her brother's lap instantly, and stood up in dignity.'So your Mamma told you to conceal this mishap. That is some excuse.Now, tell me, how far did she fall?''Not more than four steps, I am sure--I think three.''And backwards?''Yes.''Do you think she struck her head?''Yes, the back of it.''Ah! And she spoke and moved at once, not like one stunned?''Oh no, not at all. She got up and made the beef-tea.''The 2nd of January! That must have been about the time you began toobserve that change of manner--the irritability your sister remarked,'said the doctor, turning to Felix.He nodded, angry as he had been with Alda for remarking it.All that the doctor further said was, that he must have anotherexamination now that he knew a little more about the case; and he wentaway with Sister Constance, saying to her, 'Mrs. Underwood is a lady ofwonderful fortitude and resolution, and really they are the worst kindof patients.'It was now more than a fortnight since that 6th of January whichsaw the birth of the twins and the death of their father, and Mrs.Underwood still lay quiet and almost torpid in her bed, seldomspeaking, hardly ever originating anything, and apparently taking nointerest whatsoever in anything outside her room; and yet there was nosymptom unfavourable to her recovery to be detected. Within the lastday or two they had tried to rouse her; papers had been brought to herto sign, and she did so obediently, but she did not follow the subject:she did not refuse, but did not second, any proposal for her beginningto sit up; and this was the more remarkable, as, being a woman of muchhealth and energy in her quiet way, she had always recovered rapidly,and filled her place in the family alarmingly soon. The nurse had begunto suspect that besides the torpor of mind there was some weakness oflimb; and with the new lights acquired, Mr. Rugg had no difficulty incoming to the conclusion that there was a slight concussion of thespine, causing excitement at first, and now more serious consequences;and though he did not apprehend present danger, he thought completerecovery very doubtful.'So they are almost worse than orphans,' said Sister Constance, whenthe Curate went down from reading to the invalid, and she could tellhim the verdict.'Do they know?''The fact? There is no need to lay the future on the shoulders of thepresent.''A very dark present. I feel as if a great bright sun, warming andinvigorating, had gone out of my life. Yet I knew him but two years.''I can understand it, though I knew him but two days.''I hope he may have been the making of me,' sighed Mr. Audley. 'Heought to be.''I think he has been,' said she, smiling. 'There is some differencebetween you and the boyish young deacon that came here two years ago.''Who thought life without shooting barely endurable by the help ofcroquet! I trust so! He was very patient and tolerant--made holidaysfor me that first summer which it cuts me to recollect.''To live and share in a great sorrow does make a great step in life,'said Constance, thoughtfully looking at the much graver and moreearnest brow of her husband's young cousin; 'and you were a comfort tothem all as no one else could be.''Must you go?' he said. 'I wanted to consult you. I am thinking ofgiving up my present lodgings to this Mowbray Smith, who is coming ascurate, and coming here.''Here! My dear Charles!''I thought I had heard legends of twelve foot square?''Not with thirteen children. Besides, we were seasoned!''Stay; you don't understand. There are three rooms on this floor. PoorMrs. Underwood will hardly want to occupy these two just yet. I takethem, and put in some furniture--live to myself, but let them board andlodge me. They may as well have what is to be made by it as any oneelse.''But can they? And, forgive me, Charles, are you prepared for thecookery here? Really, some of those children have appetites so small,that I can't bear to see them at dinner.''That's the very point. They all say the invaluable Sibby is as good anurse as she is bad as a cook. Now, if they have no help, Wilmet muststay at home to look after her mother and the twins; and that is notfit for such a young girl. Now, my coming might enable them to get someone who knows the use of meat and fires, and would send upstairs theonly woman who would undertake such a charge as that must be.''I don't like to say a word against it. It seems excellent for them.''I would not live with them, but I should be there to help. I couldkeep Felix up in his Latin, and--''Only one suggestion more, Charles. If you do not stay here long?''Well--if not, every week I am here is so much tided over; and just atthis time the charge must be heaviest. Those boys may be disposed ofafter a time.''I wish we could keep those two little girls at St. Faith's, but thereis no place yet for children of their class. I am wanted there thisday week, and I cannot say but that I shall be glad to leave you here.Only, I recollect your mother's feelings.''Mothers must draw in the horns of their feelings when their sons areordained,' he said, laughing. 'I shall consult that notable person,Wilmet.'Wilmet started and blushed with pleasure. It would be so much lessdreary; and, poor girl! she was feeling as if she were half rentasunder at the thought of Alda's going. So good for Felix, too. Onlyshe must ask Mamma. And she did ask Mamma, and, to her great pleasure,Mrs. Underwood listened, and said, 'It is very kind.''And shall it be, Mamma?''I shall like for you to have some one in the house. Yes, my dear, Ithink--' then she paused. 'My dear, you and Sibby and Sister Constancehad better talk it over. I do not seem able to consider it. But SisterConstance will tell you. My dear Wilmet, I am afraid you must have agreat deal laid on you.''Oh, never mind, Mamma; I like doing things. Besides, you are so muchbetter.''I'll try to help you more,' added Mrs. Underwood wistfully. 'Whichroom did you say?'And she listened, and even made a few suggestions, as Wilmet explainedhow she thought of making a sitting-room upstairs, and giving the twodownstairs front ones to Mr. Audley, using the back room for the boysand children; she was altogether so much more open to comprehension,and ready to speak, that Wilmet was full of hope and assurance that shewas really mending.When Sister Constance came in, the readiness to converse continued.She consulted her friend on the scheme, and its expedience for Mr.Audley, saying that she feared he would be uncomfortable; but she couldnot reject so great a help for her children. She had even thought ofthe advantage of keeping Sibby upstairs to attend on the babies andherself--work not fit to rest entirely on Wilmet, though the good girlhad fully counted on giving up her work at school.It was evident that the examination by the doctor and Wilmet'sconsultation had thoroughly roused her, and she was as clear-headedas ever. Indeed, it seemed to Sister Constance that she was a littleexcited, and in that mood in which the most silent and reserved peoplesuddenly become the most unreserved.She was asked at last what Mr. Rugg thought of her, and SisterConstance in reply asked whether she remembered her accident. Shethought a little. 'Why--yes--I believe I did slip on the stairs; but itdid not hurt me, and I forgot it. Does he think anything of it?''I think he fears you gave yourself a shock.''Not unlikely,' she said in an indifferent tone, and did not speakagain for some minutes; then said, 'Yes, I see! I am thankful it didnot tell on me sooner,' and her look brought the tears into Constance'seyes.'It told more than you did,' said Constance, endeavouring at a smile.'Not on the babies,' she said; 'and he never knew it, so there is noharm done! Thank God!'She lay a little longer, and Constance thought her going into her usualstate of torpor; but she roused herself to say, 'Would you kindly lookinto that desk? You will find a green book.''Yes.''Please tear out the leaves, and burn it for me. I would not have oneof the children see it on any account.'Constance began to obey, and saw that it was a diary. 'Are you sure itought to be done?' she asked. 'Might it not be better to wait till youare better?''I cannot tell that I shall be much less helpless. I know how thingslike this go,' she said.Constance was still reluctant, and Mrs. Underwood added, 'I will tellyou. It is nothing good, I assure you. When we drove from the door atVale Leston, the home of all our lives, he turned to me and said,"Now, Mary, that page is shut for ever. Let us never speak a word tomake the children or ourselves feel turned out of paradise." And Inever did; but, oh! I wrote it. There are pages on pages of repiningsthere--I could not let them see it!''Nay, but you were resigned.''Resigned! What of that? I held my tongue! It was all I could do! Inever knew things could be worse till I saw it was killing him, andthen all I could do was still to keep silence.'There was an agony in her voice that Constance had never heard therebefore.'Silence was, no doubt--as things were--an exceeding kindness to him,'said Constance, 'and one that must have cost you much.''Once--once, so tenderly, with tears in his eyes, he did beg me as afavour not to complain, or talk of Fulbert Underwood! I did not; butI never could be the companion I was before to him. He was alwayshappy, he did believe me so; but I could often only smile. If I talked,it could only have been of his health and our cares.''You kept him happy by taking the weight so entirely to yourself.''Perhaps; if he had only known how miserable it made me, we might havemoved to a healthier place; but after that one time, I never could vexhim or trust myself. To hear him console me and grieve for me, wasworst of all.'Constance began to see how the whole woman, brought up to affluence,had been suddenly crushed by the change; and almost the more so forher husband's high and cheerful resolution, which had forced backher feelings into herself. Her powers had barely sufficed for thecares of her household and her numerous family, and her endurance hadconsisted in 'suffering, and being still.' No murmur had escaped, butonly by force of silence. She had not weakened his energies by wordor look of repining; but while his physical life was worn out by toiland hardship, her mental life had almost been extinguished in care,drudgery, and self-control; and all his sweetness, tenderness, andcheerfulness had not been able to do more than just to enable her tohold out, without manifesting her suffering. Enid had been a verysuitable name for her; though without a Geraint in any respect to blamefor what she underwent, she had borne all in the same silent and almosthopeless spirit, and with the same unfailing calm temper: but outsideher own house, she had never loved nor taken real interest in anythingsince the day she drove from the door of Vale Leston; she had merelyforced herself to seem to do so, rather than disappoint her eagerhusband and children.And now, how much of her torpor had been collapse, how much the effectof the accident, could not be guessed. She herself was greatly rousedfor the present, dwelt on the necessity of trying to get up the nextday, and was altogether in a state excitable enough to make the Sisteranxious.Other troubles too there were that evening, which made all feel thateven though Mr. Audley was to live to himself, his presence in thehouse would be no small comfort.Fulbert, never the most manageable of the party, had procured a pieceof wood from the good-natured carpenter, and was making a sparrow-trapon an improved plan, when Wilmet, impatient to have the room clearfor Mr. Audley to come for the final decision--as he was to do in theevening--anxious to clear away the intolerable litter, and with moreanxiety for Fulbert's holiday task than for the sparrows, ordered himto bed--ten minutes too early, and in too peremptory a tone.Fulbert did not stir.'Fulbert, I say, clear up that litter, and go to bed.''Don't you hear, Fulbert?' said Felix, looking up from his book.Fulbert gave a pull to the newspaper that was spread under his works onthe table, and sent all his chips and saw-dust on the ground.'O Fulbert! how naughty!' broke out Alda.'Fulbert, are you going to mind?' asked Wilmet. 'Please remember.''I shall go in proper time,' growled Fulbert.'That is not the way to speak to your sister,' interposed Felix, withauthority.Fulbert eyed him defiantly all over.Felix rose up from his chair, full of wrath and indignation. Therewas quite difference enough in their size and strength to give himthe complete mastery, for Fulbert was only ten years old; but Wilmet,dreading nothing so much as a scuffle and outcry, sprang up, imploring,'O Felix! remember, Mamma is wide awake to-night. Let him alone--pray,let him alone.'Felix was thoroughly angry, and kept his hands off with exceedingdifficulty. 'Little sneak,' he said; 'he chooses to take advantage.''He always was a sneak; his nose is the shape of it,' said Edgar.As Felix and Wilmet had the sense to let this amiable observation drop,Edgar contented himself with making some physiognomical outlines ofsneaks' noses on a slate; and silence prevailed till the church clockstruck the half-hour, when Clement got up, and taking the slate, wherehe had been solacing himself with imitating Edgar's caricatures, he wasabout to make it an impromptu dust-pan, and went down on his knees tosweep up Fulbert's malicious litter, but was rewarded with a viciouskick on the cheek. It was under the table, out of sight; and Clement,like a true son of his mother, made no sign, but went off to bed like aSpartan.'Fulbert,' said Lance, rising to follow his example, 'it is time now.'He still sat on; and Felix, in intolerable wrath and vexation, foundhimself making such deep bites into a pencil, that he threw it from himwith shame, just as Mr. Audley's bell sounded, and he ran down to lethim in.'Now, Ful,' said Wilmet coaxingly, 'please go--or Mr. Audley will see.''Let him.'Mr. Audley was there in a moment, and the next, Alda, in all the ruffleof offended dignity, was telling him that Fulbert was in one of histempers, and would attend to nobody. Fulbert's back looked it. Itevidently intended to remain in that obstinate curve till midnight.'I am sorry,' said Mr. Audley, 'I thought no one would have added tothe distress of the house! What is it, Fulbert?' he added, laying hishand on his shoulder, and signing to Alda to hold her peace.'They bother,' said Fulbert, in the sulky tone; but still, as heregarded the new-comer as less of an enemy than the rest--'I'd havegone at half-past eight if they would let a fellow alone.''Then the fellow had better give them no right to bother,' saidMr. Audley. 'Come, Fulbert, no ship can sail unless the crew obey.No mutiny. Here's your captain ready to shake hands and wish yougood-night.'Fulbert could not face Mr. Audley's determined look, but he was notconquered. He took up his tools and his trap, gave a final puff tospread his sawdust farther, and marched off without a single good-night.'He has the worst temper of us all,' cried Alda.'You should be very cautious of provoking him,' said Mr. Audley.'I am afraid it was my fault,' sighed Wilmet.'Nonsense,' said Felix; 'he is an obstinate little dog. I wish I waslicking him. I hope he is not pitching into Clem!''Clem is the biggest,' said Alda.'Yes, but he is much the meekest,' added Wilmet.'Tina's meek sauce is aggravation, itself,' observed Edgar. 'I shouldhope he was catching it!''He is certainly not slow to put in his oar,' said Mr. Audley; 'did youhear of his performance in the vestry the other day?''No. I hope he did not make an unusual ass of himself,' said Felix.'He and Mowbray Smith had last Tuesday's Evensong nearly to themselves,when Master Clem not only assisted Smith in putting on his hood, butexpressed his doubts as to the correctness of it (never, of course,having seen any bachelor's but Oxford or Cambridge), and further gavehim some good advice as to his manner of intoning.''I hope he won't go on in that way at St. Matthew's!' exclaimed Wilmet.'It is lucky he is going so soon,' said Mr. Audley. 'I doubt if MowbraySmith will ever get over it!''Regular snob that he is,' said Edgar; 'just one of my Lady's sort!What did he do? Go crying to her?''O Edgar!' remonstrated Wilmet.'Well, Mettie, if even our spiritual pastors will be snobs, one musthave the relief of expressing one's opinion now and then.''I should say it was better to keep any such fact out of one's mind asmuch as might be,' said Mr. Audley, feeling himself unable to deny whathad been so broadly expressed.'And we, at any rate, had better drop talking of snobs,' said Felix.'Hollo, Felix! I am sure you for one would not be a snob if you hadturned chimney-sweeper, and let Tom Underwood nail me to his office;he'll never make one of me!''I trust so,' said Felix; 'but it is not the way to keep from it tothrow about the word at other folks.''What's that?' cried Alda. 'Really, that boy must be falling upon someof them.'It was Lance, in great deshabille, who, opening a crack of the door,called cautiously, 'Wilmet, please come here.'Wilmet hastily obeyed, saying anxiously, as the door was shut, 'Nevermind, dear Lance, he's in a horrid mood; but do bear it, and not makeFelix more in a rage.''Bosh about Ful,' said Lance unceremoniously. 'It is Cherry; she iscrying so upstairs, and Clem and I can't get a word out of her.'Cherry, though older than the boys, had to precede them in vanishingfor the night, as her undressing was a long operation dependentupon Sibby. Wilmet ran up in haste, and did indeed find poor littleGeraldine with her face smothered under the clothes in an agony ofweeping, very serious for so frail a little creature.'Cherry! Cherry, dear, don't! Are you feeling solitary? Are you missinghim? Oh, don't! Yes, dear, 'tis so sad; but we all do love you so.'Wilmet would have kissed and fondled her, but the child almost thrusther away.'Not that. Oh, not that! I wish it was.''My dear Cherry, you can't have been naughty!''Yes, yes! indeed I have. And now--''I can't think--O Cherry, if you would only tell me what you mean!'cried Wilmet, aghast.And with agonised sobs, Cherry whispered, 'Mr. Rugg--O Mettie--suchthings as I said about him to Sister Constance--I made sure I hadforgiven--long ago--and now--now, after that.'If Wilmet had not known how deeply both Geraldine and her father hadresented what Mr. Rugg had meant as a little friendly gloss to saveterror before a painful operation, she would have been utterly at aloss. And now, she found herself incapable by any argument or caress ofsoothing her sister's sense of heinous offence; for that rite, of whichshe had partaken with her father, had required charity with all men,and now she found she had been deceitful--she hated Mr. Rugg all thetime. Oh, what should she do! how could she be so wicked!Wilmet tried to tell her that she had not known how it was at the time,but this seemed no comfort; and it was plain that that day's solemnityhad lessened the inequality between the two girls so much, that forWilmet to console her as a child was vain; and indeed, her invalidstate and constant companionship with her father had rendered herreligious feeling much more excitable, and more developed, than were asyet Wilmet's; and meantime, this piteous sobbing and weeping was doinggreat bodily harm.Wilmet at last, hearing a door open as if the nurse were taking SisterConstance's place, ran down to take counsel with that kind friend onthe way. She whispered her trouble on the stairs, and the Sister wassoon kneeling over the little bed; but her comfort was not persuadingthe child to think less of the fault, but promising that she shouldtell all to Mr. Audley to-morrow.Nay, seeing that even this was too long hence for the 'weary soul, andburdened sore,' to look forward to--indeed, that the preparation forthe interview would be sleep-destroying--she said, 'Then you shall seehim at once, my dear.'Wilmet opened her eyes in dismay. That little attic, bare of all butbeds, was her thought; but Sister Constance, ever an effective woman,had the little black frock, the shoes and stockings, on in no time, andthrowing a shawl over all, actually gathered the small light frame upinto her arms, and carried her down to the fire in the room now vacatedby the nurses and babies. And there she fetched Mr. Audley to her. 'Itwill not do,' she whispered on the way to Wilmet, 'to treat her as achild now.''He always made so much of her,' sighed Wilmet.'Yes; and now she is a Communicant.'They left her to Mr. Audley, and presently, when the door openedagain, it was he who was carrying her upstairs again; and when SisterConstance had taken possession of her, she whispered, 'Yes, thank you.He says I may come on Sunday, and I think it is forgiven. I shall saya prayer about charity always now!' And with a deep sigh, the worn-outlittle penitent lay down to her sleep.'O Mr. Audley, it is plain we cannot do without you,' sighed Wilmet, asshe came down, not without tears in her eyes.And then came the conference upon ways and means, rooms and attendance.Mr. Audley had parted with his horse and groom in the autumn, observingthat they ate their heads off; and the terms he now proposed forlodging, board, and attendance were what Felix and Wilmet would haveknown to be wondrously liberal but for their inexperience, especiallyas he meant to send in some, at least, of the furniture. He was to havehis meals, at his own times, in his sitting-room; and Sister Constancehad a person in her eye at Dearport, who was likely to do well in thekitchen, and not quarrel with Sibby.Wilmet had made up her mind that she must remain at home all day, andhad even told Miss Pearson so; but that good lady had refused to accepther resignation, and had come to Mr. Bevan about it; and now both theSister and the Curate united in telling her that she ought not, as longas it was possible, to give up this means of improving herself, as wellas lessening the family burthen. To give up her education now would beto sink into a housewifely drudge, who would hardly be able to maintainherself when the younger ones would be getting out into the world; andas Geraldine must stay at home to be a companion to her mother, therewas no need for her being also always in attendance, while Sibby wasequal to the charge. Indeed, Mrs. Underwood herself had said somethingthat showed her to contemplate Wilmet's remaining at school.'You must,' said Felix decidedly. 'Why, you might as well turnnursery-girl at once.''I should like it,' said Wilmet. 'I shall be miserable atschool--always thinking something is going wrong. And Cherry can neverbear with the babies! Oh! please don't tell me I must.''I tell you to begin,' said Sister Constance. 'You can always give itup if you feel that the need lies at home; but I think the few hours'change every day--for duty's sake, mind--will give you vigour not to beworn down by the home cares.''But Cherry will have them always! She who cares for books and drawingso much more than I!''Yes; but if you go on learning, you can teach her,' said SisterConstance.'Oh!' cried Wilmet; 'Cherry knows more than I do.''Little Cherry is the cleverest of us all,' added Felix.'Still,' said the Sister, 'the mere going over your work with youwill give her change and interest. I do feel strongly convinced, dearWilmet, that to shut yourself up with her, without gathering anythingfrom elsewhere, would be very bad for both.''We must see how Mamma is, and how Cherry gets on,' was all that Wilmetwould say, but the arrangement was made, and was to take effect in tendays' time, when Mr. Mowbray Smith was coming to be second curate, andSister Constance must change places with the three absent children, andAlda would be gone to her adopted home.Then Mr. Audley took leave; and as Felix went to the front door withhim, he said, 'Forgive me, Felix; but I am a younger brother myself,and I do hope you do not mean to assert your authority by licking.'Felix coloured a little; and though he spoke respectfully, it was withsome little annoyance. 'There is nothing else that does with Fulbert.''Stay, Felix; I am not questioning that he may be the sort of boy forwhom flogging may be good from some one.''He is!' said Felix. 'He never will behave himself till he has felt hismaster! It has been so at school; and once, even my father made himselfquite ill for a week with having to flog Fulbert for disobedience. Itsettled him; but he is not like the others--Clem and Lance are not anytrouble; but--I know it will come to it sooner or later; Ful will nevermind me or Wilmet till I have done it once.''And when his strength is equal to yours?''Then I hope he will have more sense.''Yes, Felix; but what if by forcing him into dogged submission by yourbodily strength you have lost his confidence, and have no moral powerover him? Things that can be borne from a father come very differentlyfrom a brother.'Felix was quite crimson now. 'But what shall I do, Mr. Audley, when hedefies Wilmet, and teases Cherry and the little ones?''Try all you can with his better sense, but don't anger him by tones ofauthority. What you think needful rule may seem to him domineering. Andif necessary, call me. My blows will not leave the after rankling thatyours will, even if they are necessary.'Felix sighed. He was not desirous of beating his brother in the main;but being unhappily master of the house, he was unwilling not to be soentirely. He wished Mr. Audley good-night, not in his most perfectlycordial tone.However, the next morning he had brought himself to thank Mr. Audley.'Thank you, Felix,' said the Curate; 'it is a great relief to me. I wasafraid you thought you were going to bring a meddling fellow in uponyou.'Felix coloured, and with an effort--for which Mr. Audley liked him thebetter--said, 'I know I shall always deserve what advice you give me,and I hope another time I may take it better than the last.'Soon after, one train carried away four of the young Underwoods tobegin life elsewhere. The Thomas Underwoods had desired that Alda andEdgar should meet them at the station, and at Felix's entreaty hadalso undertaken to convoy Clement, who, thanks to Mr. Audley, wasto be a chorister, and live in the clergy-house at St. Matthew's,Whittingtonia. It would have been Fulbert, only unluckily he hadno ear, and so he was left at home, while Lady Price, Mrs. ThomasUnderwood, and all the ladies they could enlist in their service,canvassed desperately, and made the cards of 'Fulbert James andLancelot Oswald, sons of the Rev. Edward Fulbert Underwood, THIRTEENchildren,' a weariness to every friend of a subscriber to clergy-orphanschools. Robina was not quite old enough to stand for the likeelection; but Sister Constance had negotiated with a lady who haddevoted herself to educating children of better birth than means, andthe little girl was to be dropped at the nearest station to her schoolat Catsacre. It had all been settled in a wonderfully short time, bySister Constance and Mr. Audley, with full though helpless acquiescencefrom Mrs. Underwood. They felt it well to lessen the crowd of childrenin the house, and the responsibilities of the elder ones, and acted atonce.As to Alda, she was too miserable at home not to be ready to followEdgar, though she had at first implored to stay and help Wilmet tilltheir mother was about again; but the Thomas Underwoods were unwillingto consent to this--and after all, Alda was more apt to cry than tobe of much real use. Sister Constance saw that she was only anotherweight on her sister's hands, and that, terrible as the wrench would bebetween the twins, Wilmet would be freer when it was once over. PoorWilmet! she had felt as if she could hardly have lived over these weekssave for fondling the younger twins, and waiting on her mother. She wasalmost passive, and ran up and downstairs, or prepared the wardrobesof the departing children, just as she was bidden, all in one quietmaze of grief. The tears seemed to be always in her eyes, very oftendropping, and yet they never hindered her, and she never uttered a wordof deprecation or complaint; only she could not eat, and a kiss wouldbring down a whole shower; and at night, the two sisters would holdeach other tight, and cry and kiss themselves to sleep.So had come the last day--the last for all four. Robina, who had onlyjust come back from St. Faith's, was grave, puzzled, and awestruck,clinging chiefly to Lancelot, and exchanging confidences in cornerswith him, in which they were probably much less childish than theyshowed themselves to the outer world. Clement was very grave andunhappy; but seemed to be most distressed at parting with Harry Lamb,a favourite school-fellow of his own quiet stamp, with whom he spentall available time. Alda and Wilmet were hand in hand at every possiblemoment, and if possible cheek to cheek--each felt as if herself was cutin two.Then Edgar, who had only come home for that farewell Sunday, hadanother of his paroxysms of sorrow at the changes at home, which hecontrived to forget when at Centry. All that was becoming in a mannerusual to the others was a shock to him, and he was so very miserablethe whole day, that he treated every attempt of the others to cheerhim as a mere token of their hardness of heart. He went in to see hismother, and was so overcome at finding her no better, that he rushedaway, and threw himself on a sofa as if he was going to faint; and whenat church he saw his father's place filled up he fell into such a fitof sobbing, that half-a-dozen smelling-bottles were handed across theseats.However, he had recovered himself on Monday morning, and made it hisparticular request that nobody would come bothering to the station,to make them look like Fulbert's canvassing-card of the thirteenchildren--and as the mention of it always affronted Fulbert deeply, itwas plain that he would be no good company. However, Felix had beenallowed an hour from his business for that very purpose, and he simplysaid, 'Nonsense, Edgar, I shall take Robin down.' Wilmet submitted,though with a great pang. She had no assurance that she should notbreak down, and a crying match at the station--oh no! It might makeBobbie roar all the way.So Alda clung round her neck and Geraldine's in their own littleparlour, and wished her mother good-bye, scarcely knowing whether itwere with a full understanding how many were parted from the wing thatnow seemed unable to shelter them; and then Wilmet went up and quietlylay down by her mother on her bed, feeling as if there was nothing shecared for in all life, and as if youth, hope, and happiness were goneaway from her for ever, and she were as much widowed as her mother. Shewas even past crying--she could do nothing but lie still. But then hermother's hand came out and stroked her; and presently one of the babiescried, and Wilmet was walking up and down the room with it, and allactivity with her outward senses, though her heart felt dead. Meantime,the luggage went in the omnibus, the four children walked up togetheronly escorted by Felix, and were passed on their way by the prancingand thundering carriage from Centry.But the sense of usefulness that came gave strength and energy to Felixand Wilmet Underwood as the first excitement passed away, and theybetter understood their tasks.Of the absent ones they heard good accounts. Alda was altogether onewith her cousin's family, and seemed to be completely on an equalitywith Marilda; and Edgar had been sent by Thomas Underwood to acquiremodern languages under the care of an Englishman who took privatepupils at Louvaine, whence Edgar despatched most amusing letters andclever sketches. Clement was in great favour, both musically andmorally, at St. Matthew's; and little Robina was reported to havebewailed her home with floods of nightly tears, but to have soonsettled down into the bonnie little pet of the elder girls.Except for the separation, the cloud had hardly fallen on these, buttheir departure had made a great hole in the hitherto unbroken family;and while Felix and Wilmet, by the loss of their contemporaries, seemedplaced at a point far away from the others, Geraldine was conscious ofmuch loneliness. The twins had always consorted together, and regardedher as a mere child, and her chief companions had been her father andEdgar, so that she seemed left at an equal distance both from the elderand younger party.Then the world around her was so busy, and she could do so little. Sheslept in a little inner room beyond the large nursery, where Wilmetkept guard over Angela and Bernard; and long before six o'clock, shealways heard the call pass between the eldest brother and sister; andknew that as soon as he was dressed, Felix--it must out--was cleaningthe family boots, including those of the lodger, who probably supposedthat nature did it, and never knew how much his young landlord had donebefore joining him in his early walk to St. Oswald's.Meantime Wilmet conducted the toilette of the two little children, andgave the assistance that Cherry needed, as well as discharging some ofthe lighter tasks of the housemaid; leaving the heavier ones to Sibbyand Martha, a stout, willing, strong young woman, whom Sister Constancehad happily found for them, and who was disqualified, by a loutishmanner and horrible squint, from the places to which her capabilitiesmight have raised her.Then Wilmet helped her sister downstairs, and a visit was paid to themother and the twins, who were Sibby's charge for the night. Mrs.Underwood was still in the same state. It was indeed possible torouse her, but at the expense of much suffering and excitement; andin general, she was merely tender, placid, and content, mechanicallybusied about her babies, and responding to what was said, but entirelyincapable of any exertion of body, and as inactive in mind as in limb.Wilmet attended to her while Sibby went to her breakfast, returningwith that of her mistress in time to send Wilmet down to preside atthe family meal, a genuine Irish dish of stir-about--for which all hadinherited a taste from their father's Irish mother. Only Cherry was toodelicate for such food, and was rather ashamed of her cup of tea andslice of bread.However, this was one of the few times when she could hope she wasuseful; for when Felix was gone to the printing-office, the boys tothe grammar-school, and Wilmet, first to the kitchen, and then to MissPearson's, she remained with bowl and cloth to wash up in her ownpeculiarly slow and dainty way, never breaking but always dreaming,while Angela carried them one by one, first to her, then to the kitchen.'Now Cherry.'Mr. Audley's door opened, he would step forward and take the well-wornbooks in one hand, and hold the doors open with the other as Cherrytardily hopped in, and perched herself by the table. Her confirmationstudies had been left in his charge; and then followed a little Greek,some Latin, a page or two of French, the revision of an exercise, andsome help in Euclid and fractions--all studies begun with her father,and both congenial and useful to her, as the occupation that (nextto drawing) best prevented her from feeling the dreary loneliness ofher days; for though he could seldom give her more than an hour, thepreparation--after he had helped her upstairs--occupied her during thewhole period of tranquillity while the younger children slept. Angelaappeared first, and did some small lessons, cat-and-dog readings, andeasy hymns, then was generally content to sit on the floor in Mamma'sroom, admiring or amusing the twins. Then Cherry, according to hersense of duty, drew or worked. There was a horrible never-endingstill-beginning basket of mending in the family, which Wilmetreplenished every Saturday; and though Mrs. Underwood's instinct forpiecing and darning had revived as soon as she was taken out of bed,her work now always needed a certain revision to secure the boys fromthe catastrophe of which Wilmet often dreamt--appearing in public inragged shirt-sleeves! Geraldine knew that every stitch she left undonewould have to be put in by her sister in late evening or early morning,and therefore often wrenched herself from the pencil and paints thatbest beguiled her thoughts from the heart-ache for her father, and thecraving for Edgar, or the mere craving for light, air, liberty, andusefulness. Her only excuse to her own conscience for allowing herselfher chief pleasure was, that it was her way of helping an old womanwho kept a stall of small wares on market days, and could sometimesdispose of little pictures on domestic and Scriptural subjects, ifhighly coloured, glazed with gum, and bound with bright paper--pickingsand stealings, as Felix called them, gleaned from advertisements andpacking-boxes at Mr. Froggatt's; but these did not allow much scope forthe dreams of her fancy.Nor had she much choice when Bernard once awoke and came down, in allthe unreasoning tyranny of two years old, when it was an even chancewhether he would peaceably look at the old scrap-book, play withAngela, or visit Mamma; or be uproarious, and either coalesce withAngela in daring mischief, fight a battle-royal with her, or be violentwith and jealous of the twins. The urchin had found out that when onceCherry's crutch was out of her reach she could not get at him; and hehad ridden off upon it so often, before committing any of his worstmisdemeanours, that Cherry always lay down on it to secure it. Afterall, he was a fine, affectionate, impetuous little fellow, but with avery high, proud, unmanageable will; and she was very fond and proud ofhim; but never more so than when he slept till dinner-time.That was the hour which brought Felix home to help Sibby to carry hismother into the sitting-room, pay a little court to the babies, andenliven Cherry with any chance scrap of news or occupation. Best of allwere the proofs of that unfinished comment on the Epistle to Philippi,which was being printed by subscription of the congregation, and theclergy of the diocese. It always did Mrs. Underwood good to have theseread aloud to her by her little daughter, and she could sometimesfind a clue to the understanding of sentences that had puzzled even Mr.Audley.The two school-boys never appeared till dinner was imminent; andthen--one unuttered wish of poor Cherry was that Mr. Audley could havedined with them; but he kept to his own hours, and they were late.Whereby dinners on five days of the week were apt to be something onthis fashion. Bell-ringing--Felix helping Geraldine to her seat, Angelatrotting after; a large dish of broth, with meat and rice, and anotherof mashed potato; no sign of the boys; Angela lisping Grace; Sibbywaiting with a tray.Felix filled a soup-plate for his mother, and a basin for Bernard. 'Wemust begin, I suppose,' and he helped his sisters and himself.'Here, Angel, push over your plate; I'll cut that.--How did you get onto-day?''Very well; the only mistake I made I found out before Smith saw it. Iknow all the stationery and steel pens apart now, and haven't made amistake for a week. Yesterday Bartlett junior came in, he stood likea post before Mr. Froggatt till he caught sight of me, and then heshouted out, "O Blunderbore, you know! What is it that Collis wants?"''And did you?''When he said it was a horrid sum-book all little a's and b's.--Whathave you been doing, Cherry?''I have begun an abstract of the first Punic--'The door flew open with a bounce, and two hot, wild-locked boys, dusteverywhere except in their merry blue eyes, burst in, and tumbledon their chairs. 'I say--isn't it a horrid sell? we ain't to have aholiday for Squire's wedding.--Come, Fee, give us some grub.''You have not said Grace,' said Cherry.Lance, abashed, stood up and bowed; Fulbert looked grim, and mumbledsomething.'You have not washed your hands,' added Felix.'Bosh! What's the good?' said Fulbert.'They'll be as jolly dirty again directly,' said Lance.'But you would be more decent company in the meantime,' said Felix.At that moment there was a splash in his plate, a skip-jack made of thebreast-bone of a chicken had alighted there with a leap.'There's Felix's master come after him,' cried Fulbert, and Lance wentoff into choking laughter.'Boys, how can you?' broke out Cherry.'Look at Blunderbore fishing out his master!' was Fulbert's answer.'The frog is in the bog,And Felix is squeamish,'chanted Lance.'Bad rhyme, Lance,' said Felix, who could bear these things much betterfrom the younger than the elder. Indeed, he scarcely durst notice themin Fulbert, lest he should be betrayed into violence by letting out histemper.'I say!' cried Lance, struck by a new idea, 'what prime stuff it isfor making a fort!' and he began to scrape the more solid parts of hisplateful to one side.'Oh, I say, isn't it?' echoed Fulbert: 'but I've eaten up the best partof my castle;' and he grasped at the ladle.'No, I thank you,' said Felix, putting it on the other side. 'While Iam here, you don't play tricks with that.'Fulbert swallowed a spoonful in a passion, but a bright thought struckLance, who always cared much more for fun than for food. 'I say,we'll empty it all into one, and eat it down.''You horrid boys!' plaintively exclaimed Cherry, almost crying--forthis return to savage life was perfect misery to her. 'I can't bear it.''I will not have Cherry tormented,' said Felix, beginning to be veryirate.'We ain't doing anything to Cherry,' said Lance, amazed.'Don't you know it spoils Cherry's appetite to see you so disgusting?''Then she'll have the more next time,' said Fulbert. 'Get along,Captain--you've splashed my face!''Hurrah! the red-hot shot! The rice is the cannon-balls! Where's somebread?''O Lance!' entreated Cherry; 'no waste--think of Wilmet and the bills.''We'll eat it every bit up,' asseverated Lance; but Fulbert growled,'If you bother any more, I shall crumble the whole lot out at window.''It is wicked to waste bread,' lisped Angela, and Martha at that momentappeared to fetch the tureen for the kitchen dinner.'Can't you eat any more, Cherry?' asked Felix gloomily.'Not a bit, thank you,' she said.'We've not done!' shouted the boys, seizing on her scarcely-tasted andhalf-cold plate.'You must finish after. Come, Cherry!' Then, as they left the room, andshe laid her head on his shoulder--'Little ruffians!' he said under hisbreath.'Oh, never mind, Felix. I don't--at least I ought not to mind--theydon't mean it.''Lance does not, but I think Fulbert does. He'll make me thrash himwithin two inches of his life, before he has done. And then there's noone to take me in hand for it. It is horridly bad for them, too, tolive just like young bears.'But he smoothed his brow as he came into the room where his mother was,and amused her till his time was up.Mr. Froggatt had explained to his father long ago, that Felix's workwould not be that of a clerk in a great publishing house, but veritablythat belonging to the country bookseller and printer, and that he mustgo through all the details, so as to be thoroughly conversant withthem. The morning's work was at the printing-house, the afternoon'sat the shop. The mechanical drudgery and intense accuracy needed inthe first were wearisome enough; and moreover, he had to make his waywith a crusty old foreman who was incredulous of any young gentleman'scapabilities, and hard of being convinced that he would or could beuseful; but old Smith's contempt was far less disagreeable to himthan the subdued dislike he met with from Redstone, the assistant inthe shop, a sharp, half-educated young man, who had aspired to thevery post of confidence for which Felix was training--and being farless aware of his own utter unfitness for it than was Mr. Froggatt,regarded the lad as an interloper; and though he durst not treat himwith incivility, was anxious to expose any deficiency or failure onhis part. Having a good deal of quickness and dexterity, he couldact as a reporter, draw up articles of a certain description for thenewspaper, and had, since the death of Mr. Froggatt's eldest son, beenabsolutely necessary to him in carrying on the business; and now, itwas a matter of delicate discretion on the master's part to avoidhurting the feelings of the assistant, whom a little more would havemade his tyrant, and a dread of the appearance of favouritism madeit needful to keep Felix thoroughly in a subordinate post, till realsuperiority of mind and education should assert itself over elder yearsand mere familiarity with detail. This reserved ill-will of Redstone'shad much increased the natural discomfort of appearing behind thecounter to former acquaintance, and had rendered the learning theduties there doubly troublesome and confusing; though, in recalling theday's doings, there was some amusement in contrasting the behaviour ofdifferent people, some--of whom Mr. Ryder was the type--speaking tohim freely in his own person, others leaving him as an unrecognizedshop-boy; and a third favouring him with a horrid little furtive nod,which he liked least of all. But though awkward and embarrassed atfirst, use soon hardened him, and made the customers indifferent, sothat by the spring he had begun to be useful, and to feel no particularexcitement about it.The worst of his business was that it kept him so late, that he hadbut a very short evening, and no time for exercise. He was on his feetmost of the day, but indoors, and his recreation chiefly consistedin choir-practice twice a week. Not that he missed more positiveamusement; the cares of life and Edgar's departure seemed to have takenthe boyish element of frolic out of him; and left him gravely cheerfulindeed, but with no greater desire of entertainment than could findvent in home conversation, or playing with the little ones.Wilmet and the two boys were at liberty full two hours before him. Thelatter generally stayed out as long as light and hunger permitted.Mr. Audley continually stumbled on them playing at marbles, racingheadlong in teams of pack-thread harness with their fellows, upsettingthe nerves of quiet folk--staring contentedly at such shows as requiredno outlay, or discontentedly at the outside of those that demanded thepennies they never had. They were thorough little street-boys; and allthat he could do for them was to enforce their coming in at reasonablehours, and, much to their sister's relief, cause their daily lessons tobe prepared in his room. Otherwise their places in their classes wouldhave been much less creditable.Wilmet's return was always Geraldine's great relief, for the afternoonof trying to amuse her mother, and keep the peace between the children,was almost more than she was equal to; though, on fine days, Sibbyalways took out the two elder babies, with an alternate twin, for anhour's air, and Mr. Audley daily visited the invalid. Mr. Bevan did sotwice a week, with a gentle sympathising tone and manner that was morebeneficial than Lady Price's occasional endeavours to make her 'rouseherself.' Miss Pearson and a few humbler friends now and then lookedin, but Mrs. Underwood had been little known. With so large a family,and such straitened means, the part of the active clergyman's wife wasimpossible to her; she had shrunk from society, and most people knewnothing more of her than that the faded lady-like figure they used tosee among her little flock at church, was Mrs. Underwood.Wilmet's coming home was always a comfort; and though to her it wasrunning from toil to care, the change was life to her. To have beeneither only the teacher or only the housewife might have weighed overheavily on her; but the two tasks together seemed to lighten eachother. She had a real taste and talent for teaching, and she andher little class were devoted to one another, while the elder girlsloved her much better since Alda had been away. The being with them,and sharing their recreation in the middle of the day, was no doubtthe best thing to hinder her from becoming worn by the depressingatmosphere around her mother. She always brought home spirits andvigour for whatever lay before her, brightening her mother's face,dispelling squabbles between Angela and Bernard, and taking a load ofcare from Geraldine.There was sure to be some anecdote to enliven the home-keepers, or somequestion to ask Cherry, whose grammar and arithmetic stood on firmerfoundations than any at Miss Pearson's, and who was always pleased tohelp Wilmet. The evening hours were the happiest of the day, only theyalways ended too soon for Cherry, who was ordered up by Sibby as soonas her mother was put to bed, and had, in consequence, a weary lengthof wakeful solitude and darkness--only enlivened by the reflection fromthe gas below--while Felix and Wilmet sat downstairs, she with hermending, and he either reading, or talking to her.On Saturday, which she always spent at home, and in very activeemployment in the capacities of nurse, housemaid, or even a slighttaste of the cook and laundress, the evening topic was always theaccounts--the two young heads anxiously casting the balance--proud andpleased if there were even a shilling below the mark, but serious andsad under such a communication as, 'There's mutton gone up anotherhalf-penny;' or, 'Wilmet, I really am afraid those boots of mine cannotbe mended again;' or again, 'See what Lance has managed to do to thisjacket. If one only could send boys to school in sacking!''Are not there a few pence to spare for the chair for Cherry? She willcertainly get ill, if she never goes out now spring is coming on.''Indeed, Felix, I don't know how! If there is a penny over, it iswanted towards shoes for Bernard; and Cherry begs me, with tears in hereyes, not to let her be an expense!'Poor Geraldine! the costing anything, and the sense of uselessness,were becoming, by the help of her nightly wakefulness, a most terribleoppression on her spirits. Her father was right. His room had been ahot-bed to a naturally sensitive and precocious character, and thechange that had come over her as time carried her farther and fartheraway from him, affected her more and more.Her brother and sister, busy all day, and scarcely ever at home, hardlyknew what was becoming a sore perplexity to Mr. Audley.A young tutor, not yet twenty-six, could not exactly tell what to dowith a girl not fourteen, who fell into floods of tears on the smallestexcuse.'No, no, Cherry--that is not the nominative.'The voice faltered, struggled to go on, and melted away behind thehandkerchief. Then--'O Mr. Audley, I am so sorry--''That's exactly what I don't want you to be, Cherry.''Oh, but it was so careless,' and there was another flood.Or, 'Don't you see, Cherry, you should not have put the negative signto that equation. My dear Cherry, what have I said?''Oh, oh--nothing. Only I did think--''We shall have you a perfect Niobe, if you go on at this rate, Cherry.Really, we must not have these lessons, if they excite you so much.''Oh! that would be the worst punishment of all!' and the weepingbecame so piteously violent, that the Curate looked on in distressedhelplessness.'I know it is very tiresome of me; I would help it, if I could--indeedI would.' And she cried the more because she had cried.Or, as he came in from the town, he would hear ominous sounds, that hiskind heart would not let him neglect, and would find Cherry sitting onthe landing-place in a paroxysm of weeping. She always crept out of hermother's room on these occasions, for the sight of tears distressedand excited Mrs. Underwood; and the poor child, quite unable, in herhysterical condition, to drag herself alone up that steep stair,had no alternative but to sit, on what Mr. Audley called her stoolof repentance, outside the door, till she had sobbed herself intoexhaustion and calm--or till either Sibby scolded her, or he heard herconfession.She had been 'so cross' to Bernard, or to Angel--or, once or twice,even to Mamma. She had made an impatient answer when interrupted in herlessons or in a dream over a drawing; she had been reluctant to exertherself when wanted. She had scolded fretfully--or snatched things awayangrily, when the little ones were troublesome; and every offence ofthis sort was bewailed with an anguish of tears; that, by weakening herspirits and temper, really rendered the recurrence more frequent. 'Theone thing they trust to me, I fail in!'He was very kind to her. He did not yield to the mannish loathingfor girlish tears that began to seize on him, after the first two orthree occasions. He thought and studied--tried comfort, and fancied itrelaxed her--tried rebuke, and that made it worse; tried the showingher Franois de Sales' admirable counsel to Philothe, to be 'douxenvers soi,' and saw she appreciated and admired it; but she was notan atom more douce envers soi when she had next spoken peevishly.At last he fairly set off by the train, to lay the case before SisterConstance.'What is to be done, when a child never does anything but cry?'Sister Constance listened to the symptoms, and promptly answered, 'Giveher a glass of port wine every day, before you let her out of yourroom.''If I can!''Tell her they are my orders. Does she eat?''I imagine not. I heard Felix reproaching her with a ghoul's dinner ofa grain of rice.''Does she sleep?''She has told me a great deal of midnight meditation on her owndeficiencies.''She must be taken out of doors somehow or other! It is of no use toreason with her; the tears are not temper, or anything else! PoorCharlie! it is an odd capacity for you to come out in, but I suppose noone else can attend to her.''No, poor child, she is rather worse than motherless! Well--I will findsome excuse for taking her out for a drive now and then; I don't knowhow to speak to the others about having the chair for her, for they arebarely scraping on.''Poor children! Well, this year is probably the worst. Either they willget their heads above water, or there will be a crisis. But they doscrape?''Yes. At Lady-day there was great jubilation, for the rent was paid,the taxes were ready, there was not a debt; and there was seven-penceover, with which Felix wanted to give Cherry a drive; but Wilmet, whois horribly prudent, insisted that it must go to mend Fulbert's brokenwindow.''Well--poor Wilmet! one can't blame her. How does she treat Cherry'stears?''I don't think she has much pity for them. Felix does much betterwith Cherry; he rocks her and pets her; though, indeed, she hardlyever breaks down when he is there; but even his Sundays are a gooddeal taken up--and I always hunt him out for a walk on the Sundayafternoons.''Is he still in the choir and teaching at the Sunday school?''Yes--though it is not Mowbray Smith's fault.''What, is your colleague what you apprehended?''My Lady could not have found a curate more to her mind, or more imbuedwith her dislike to all that bears the name of Underwood. I own itis hard to have one's predecessor flung constantly in one's teeth,and by the very people who were the greatest thorns to dear Underwoodhimself. Then Clem, who is a born prig, though a very good boy, gavesome of his little interfering bits of advice before he went away, andit has all been set down to Felix's account! One Sunday, Smith made acomplaint of Felix having the biggest boys in the school. It was theconsequence of his having taken them whenever his father could not,till it came to his having them entirely. He always took great painswith them, and there was a fellow-feeling between him and them thatcould hardly be with an older person. I said all this--too strongly,most likely--and the Rector put in a mild word, as to his goodness incoming at all. Smith thought there was nothing wonderful in liking whatministered to his conceit; and at last it came out that a baker's boyhad met Felix and Smith consecutively in the street, and only touchedhis hat to one, and that the wrong one.''I should have been only thankful that he touched his hat to anybody.''That is the very remark by which I put my foot in it; but my Lady washorrified, and the consequence was, that it fell to me to advise Felixto resign the class. I never hated a piece of work so much in my life,for he had worked the lads well, and we both knew that there would bean end of them. Moreover, Felix has some of the true Briton about him,and he stood out--would give up the class if the Rector ordered him,but would relinquish Sunday-school altogether in that case; and the twogirls were furious; but, after one Sunday, he came to me, said thathe found hostility poisoned his teaching, gave up, and accepted theyounger ones.''Of course the boys deserted.''Which has not softened Smith, though it has made him tolerate Felixin the choir. His voice is of very little use at present; but he issuch an influence, that we should be glad of him if he could not sing anote, and he clings to it with all his heart. I believe music is aboutthe only pleasure he has, and it excites his mother too much to haveany at home. We have little Lance in the choir now, with a voice like athrush in a dewy morning.'Mr. Audley acted on the port-wine prescription, to the horror anddismay of Cherry, who only submitted with any shadow of philosophy onbeing told that the more she cried the more necessary she rendered it;but on the Saturday, Sister Constance suddenly knocked at Mr. Audley'sdoor. She had been talking the matter over with the Superior; and theresult was, that she had set off on a mission to see for herself, andif she thought it expedient, to bring Geraldine back with her. Shehad chosen Saturday as the time for seeing Wilmet, and was preparedto overlook that the stairs were a Lodore of soap, this being Sibby'scleaning day, while Wilmet kept guard over the mother and the twins.Geraldine was in the sitting-room, writing a Latin exercise, with agreat pucker in her forehead whenever Angela looked up from her woodenbricks to speak to her. And though the sharp little pinched face wasall one beam of joy as the visitor came in, Sister Constance saw atonce that the child's health had deteriorated in these last months.She sat down, and with Angela on her lap, questioned anxiously. Cherryhad no complaints--she always was like this in the spring. How was herfoot? As usual, a falter. Was it really? Well, yes, she thought so.And then, as the motherly eyes looked into hers, there came a burst ofthe ready tears; and 'Oh, please don't talk about it--please don'task.''I know what you are afraid of,' said Sister Constance, remembering herhorror of the Bexley medical attendant, 'but is it right to concealthis, my dear child?''I don't think I do,' said Cherry pitifully. 'You know Sibby does itevery night, and it only aches a little more now. And if they did findit out, then they would have him, and there would be a doctor's bill,and, oh! that would be dreadful!'Sister Constance saw that the question of right or wrong would beinfinitely too much for Geraldine, and drew off her mind from it totell of the good accounts of Robina from Catsacre, and Clement fromWhittingtonia; but when presently Wilmet was so far free as to come inwith only the boy-baby in her arms, and take the guest up to take offher bonnet, it was the time for entering on the subject.'Cherry? do you think her looking ill? She always is poorly in thespring, you know.''I do not like what I hear of her appetite, or her sleep, or herspirits.''Oh! but Cherry is always fanciful, you know. Please, please don't putthings in her head.''What kind of things do you mean?''Fancying herself worse, I mean, or wanting things. You know we must beso careful, and Mamma and the babies--''My dear, I know you have many to care for, and it is hard to strikethe balance; but somehow your voice sounds to me as if Geraldine werethe one you most willingly set aside.'Wilmet did not like this, and said, a little bit hastily, 'I am sureGeraldine has everything we can give her. If she complains, it is verywrong of her.''She has not said one word of complaint. Her grief and fear is only ofbeing a burden on you. What brought me here was, that Mr. Audley wasanxious about her.'Wilmet was silent, a little abashed.'Did you know that her ankle is painful again?''Sister Constance,' said Wilmet, 'I don't think you or Mr. Audley knowhow soon Cherry fancies all sorts of things. She does get into whinystates, and is regularly tiresome; and the more you notice her, theworse she is. I know Mamma thought so.''My dear, a mother can venture on wholesome neglect when a sister'sneglect is not wholesome. I am not accusing you of neglect, mind; onlyyou want experience and sympathy to judge of a thing with a frame likeCherry's. Now, I will tell you what I want to do. I am come to take herback with me, and get her treated by our kind doctor for a month or so,and the sea air and rest will send her back, most likely, in a muchmore cheery state.''Indeed!' cried Wilmet, startled; 'it is very good, but how could we dowithout her? Mamma and the children! If she could only wait till theholidays.''Let her only hear you say that, Wilmet, and it will do her more goodthan anything.''What--that she is of use? Poor little thing, she tries to be; but ifMarilda could have had her way, and taken her instead of Alda, it wouldhave been much better for her and all. Ah! there's Felix. May I callhim in?'Felix, dashing up to wash his hands, smooth his hair, and dress himselffor the reading-room work instead of the printing-office, had muchrather these operations had been performed before he was called to theconsultation in the nursery; but he agreed instantly and solicitously,knowing much better than Wilmet what the dinners were to Cherry, andtalking of her much more tenderly.'Yes, poor little dear, she always breaks down more or less in thespring; but I thought she would mend when we could get her out more,'he said. 'Do you think her really so unwell, Sister Constance?''Oh, no, no!' cried Wilmet, fearfully.'Not very unwell, but only so that I long to put her under our gooddoctor, who comes to any one in our house, and who is such a fatherlyold gentleman, that she would not go through the misery the thought ofMr. Rugg seems to cause her.''Dr. Lee?' asked Felix. 'Tom Underwood sent him to see my father once.I remember my father liked him, but called it waste for himself, onlylonged for his opinion on Cherry. Thank you, I am sure it is thegreatest kindness.''But, Felix, how can she before the holidays?' cried Wilmet.'Well, Mamma does not want her before dinner; and as to the kids, whycan't you take Angel to school with you? Oh, yes, Miss Pearson will letyou. Then Mr. Audley, or Mr. Bevan, is always up in the afternoon, andyou come home by four.''Perhaps I could earlier on days when the girls go out walking,' saidWilmet. 'If it is to do Cherry good, I don't like to prevent it.'Wilmet had evidently got all her household into their niches, and thedisarrangement puzzled her. A wonderful girl she was to contrive as shedid, and carry out her rule; but Sister Constance feared that a littledryness might be growing on her in consequence, and that, like manymaidens of fifteen or sixteen, while she was devoted to the little, shewas impatient of the intermediate.So when they went down, and Cherry heard of the scheme, and imploredagainst it in nervous fear of leaving home and dread of new faces,Wilmet, having made up her practical mind that the going was necessary,only made light of that value at home which was Cherry's one comfort,and which made herself feel it so hard to part with her, that this verywant of tact was all unselfishness.Felix was much more comfortable to Cherry when he made playful facesat the bear-garden that the dining-room would become without her,and showed plainly that he at least would miss her dreadfully. Stillshe nourished a hope that Mamma would say she should not go; butMamma always submitted to the decrees of authority, and Wilmet andFelix were her authorities now. Sister Constance felt no misgivinglest Wilmet were hardening, when she heard the sweet discretion andcheerful tenderness with which she propounded the arrangement to thesick mother, without giving her the worry of decision, yet stilldeferentially enough to keep her in her place as the head of the family.Yet it was with unnecessarily bracing severity that Wilmet observedto Geraldine, 'Now, don't you go crying, and asking questions, andworrying Mamma.''I suppose no person can be everything at once, far less a girl offifteen,' thought Sister Constance, as she drove up to the station inthe omnibus with Cherry, who was too miserable and bewildered to crynow; not that she was afraid of either the Sister or the Sisterhood,but only because she had never left home in her life, and felt exactlylike a callow nestling shoved out on the ground with a broken wing.In two months more the omnibus was setting her down again, much nearerplumpness, with a brighter face and stronger spirits. She had been veryfull of enjoyment at St. Faith's. She had the visitor's room, withdelightful sacred prints and photographs, and a window looking out onthe sea--a sight enough to fascinate her for hours. She had been outevery fine day on the shore; she had sat in the pleasant community-roomwith the kind Sisters, who talked to her as a woman, not a baby; shehad plenty of books; one of the Sisters had given her daily drawinglessons, and another had read Tasso with her; she had been to thelovely oratory constantly, and to the beautiful church on Sunday, andhad helped to make the wreaths for the great May holidays; she had mademany new friends, and among them the doctor, who, if he had hurt her,had never deceived her, and had really made her more comfortable thanshe had ever been for the last five years, putting her in the way ofsuch self-management as might very possibly avert some of that dreadfulliability to be cross.But with all this, and all her gratitude, Geraldine's longing had beenfor home. She was very happy, and it was doing her a great deal ofgood; but Mamma, and Felix, and Wilmet, and Sibby, and the babies, weretugging at her heart, and would not let it go out from them. She wasalways dreaming that Felix's heels were coming through his stockings,that Mamma was calling and nobody coming, or that Bernard was cuttingoff the heads of the twins with the blunt scissors. And when Dr. Lee'scourse of treatment was over, and Felix had a holiday to come and fetchher home, it is not easy to say which was happiest. For she was so gladto be at home amid the dear faces, troubling and troublous as theyoften were, and so comfortable in the old wheel-ruts of care and toil,that it really seemed as if a new epoch of joy had begun. Felix openlyprofessed how sorely he had missed her, and she clung to his arm withexulting mutual delight; but it was almost more triumphant pleasure tobe embraced by Wilmet with the words: 'Dear, dear Cherry, there you areat last. You can't think how we have all wanted you! I never knew howuseful you are.''I suppose,' said Felix quaintly, 'the world would rather miss itsaxis, and yet that does not move.''Yes, it does,' said Cherry, 'it wobbles. I suppose Wilmet saysrotates, just about as much as I am going to do now I have got backinto my own dear sphere again.'CHAPTER VI.THE CACIQUE.'Devouring flames resistless glow,And blazing rafters downward go,And never halloo, "Heads below!"Nor notice give at all.'Rejected Addresses.It was a warm night in September, and Wilmet had laid herself down inbed in her nursery with a careful, but not an oppressed heart. Aboutmany matters she was happier than before. Her mother had revived insome degree, could walk from her bed-room to the sitting-room, andtook more interest in what was passing; and this the hopeful spiritsof the children interpreted into signs of recovery. Geraldine's healthand spirits had evidently taken a start for the better. Fulbert,too, was off her mind--safe gone to a clergy orphan foundation; andthough Lancelot had not yet been elected, owing, Mr. Audley imagined,to Lady Price's talk about their fine friends, Wilmet could not besorry, he was such a little fellow, and the house would be so dullwithout his unfailing merriment and oddities. And though there hadbeen sore disappointment that Mrs. Thomas Underwood had chosen to goto Brighton instead of coming home, there was the promise of a visitfrom Alda before Christmas to feed upon. Little Robina had come homefor the summer holidays, well, happy, and improved, and crying only ina satisfactory way on returning to school. Moreover, Wilmet's financeshad been pleasantly increased by an unexpected present of five poundsat the end of the half year from Miss Pearson, and the promise of thelike for the next; increasing as her usefulness increased; and shewas also allowed to bring Angela to school with her. The balance ofaccounts at Midsummer had been satisfactory, and Felix had proudlypronounced her to be a brick of a housekeeper. And thus altogetherWilmet did not feel that the weight of care was so heavy and hopelessas when it first descended upon her; and she went to bed as usual,feeling how true her father's words of encouragement and hope had been,how kind friends were, how dear a brother Felix was, and above all,how there is verily a Father of the fatherless. And so she fell fastasleep, but was ere long waked by a voice from the inner room whereCherry slept with the door open.'Wilmet, Wilmet, what is it?'Then she saw that the room was aglow with red light from the window,and heard a loud distant hubbub. Hurrying out of bed, she flew to thewindow of Cherry's room, and drew up the blind. 'O Wilmet, is it fire?''Yes,' low and awe-struck, said Wilmet. 'Not here. No. There's nothingto be frightened at Cherry. It is out--out there. I think it must bethe Fortinbras Arms. Oh, what a sight!''It is dreadful!' said Cherry, shrinking trembling to the foot of herlittle bed, whence she could see the window. 'How plain one can seeeverything in the room! Oh! the terrible red glow in the windows! Iwonder if all the people are safe. Wilmet, do call Felix.''I will,' said Wilmet, proceeding in search of her clothes; but herhands shook so that she could hardly put them on. They longed for Felixas a protection, and yet Cherry could hardly bear to let her sister goout of sight.'I only hope Mamma does not hear,' said Wilmet.'How lucky her room looks out the other way! but, oh! Wilmet, don'tfires spread?''Felix and Mr. Audley will see about us in time, if there is any fearof that,' said Wilmet, trembling a good deal as she wrapped a shawlround Cherry, who sat in a heap on her bed, gazing fascinated at thered sky and roofs. Felix slept at the back of the house; her knock didnot waken him, but her entrance startled both him and Lance.'Felix, the Fortinbras Arms is on fire.--Hush, Lance; take care; thelittle ones and Mamma! O Felix, do come to our room.'They followed her there in a few seconds, but they had only glancedfrom the window before they simultaneously rushed away, to theincreased dismay of their sisters, to whom their manly instinct ofrushing into the fray had not occurred.'I'll go down. I'll try to catch them,' said Wilmet; and she too wasgone before Cherry could call to her. She found that Felix and Mr.Audley were in the act of undoing the front door, and this gave herjust time to fly down with the entreaty that Felix would not leavethem. It was a great deal more to ask of him than she knew.'To the end of the street I must go, Wilmet,' he said.'Oh! but Cherry is so frightened! and if Mamma wakes,' she said,gasping.'It is all quiet in her room,' said Felix.'Tell Cherry there is no danger at all here now,' said Mr. Audley;'but if it makes her happier you may dress her. Don't disturb yourmother. If needful, we will carry her out in her bed; but I do notthink it will be.''We can only see out in the street,' added Felix, opening the door ashe spoke; and that moment out flew Lance, before anybody had thought ofstopping him, and the necessity of pursuing the little fellow into thethrong, and keeping him out of danger, made both Felix and Mr. Audleydash after him; while Wilmet, abashed at the men hurrying by, couldnot even gaze from the door, but fled upstairs in terror lest the twolittle ones should be awake and crying at the appalling red light andthe din, which seemed to her one continuous roar of 'Fire! fire!'To her great relief, they were still asleep, but Cherry was in achilled agony of trembling prayer for the 'poor people,' and thesisters crouched up together shivering in each other's arms asthey watched the rush of flames streaming up into the sky over thebrew-house opposite to them.Presently Wilmet heard feet again downstairs. 'Cherry dear, I must godown, they may want me. Indeed, I don't think there is real danger aslong as that brew-house is safe.'There was a scuffle of feet that frightened her very much. Sheremembered it last Michaelmas when her father was brought home fromchurch, and as she stood on the stairs--one choking petition in herheart, 'Let it not be Felix!' she saw that the figure, whatever it was,was carried by Mr. Audley and a strange man. And so great a horrorcame over her, that, regardless of her toilette, and the hair that hadfallen over the jacket on her shoulders, she dropped at once among themas they were bearing the senseless form into Mr. Audley's bed-room,with a low but piteous cry, 'Felix! Felix! oh, what has happened?''It is not Felix, my dear,' said Mr. Audley; 'he is safe--he is gonefor the doctor. This poor boy has fallen from a window. You can helpus, Wilmet; call Martha, and get some water made hot. The fire isgetting under.'Wilmet needed no second hint. She was up, reassuring Cherry at onemoment; then breaking into Martha's heavy slumbers, impressing upon herthe necessity of not shrieking; then downstairs again, reviving thedying kitchen fire, and finding that, as usual, there was some waternot yet cold. For, as she now saw, it was not yet one o'clock. Shedurst not go to her mother's room, where ready means of heating foodwere always to be found. As she brought the jug to the door, Felix camein with Mr. Rugg, who, living in a street out of sight, and having earsfor no sound but his own night-bell, had been ready at once to obey thecall. Felix told his sister the little he knew.'It was a terrible sight. Just as we got to that one big window--apassage one, I believe, which looks out into this street--we saw thispoor boy and a black man up on the sill, with all the glare of lightbehind them, screaming out for help.''But where was everybody?''In the High Street, round the corner. Crowds there; and here in ourstreet only ourselves and a few men that hurried up after us. Mr.Audley shouted to them that we would get a ladder, but whether theycould not hold on any more, or they thought we were going quite away--OWilmet! I didn't see; but there was the most horrible thump and crashon the pavement.''What! down from that window?''Yes,' said Felix, leaning against the wall, and looking very pale.'And there was that good black man, he had got the boy in his arms, asif he had wound himself round to keep him from harm.''Oh! And he?''Killed--quite killed. Don't ask me about it, Wilmet. It is much toodreadful to hear of;' and he shuddered all over. 'But this boy's headwas safe at least, and as there seemed no one to attend to anything,Mr. Audley said he would bring him here, and I went for Mr. Rugg.''And where's Lance? Did he go with you?''Lance! Is not he in? I never saw or thought of him, I must go andseek for him,' exclaimed Felix, darting off in haste and alarm at thethought of little nine-year-old Lance alone among the midnight crowd,just as Mr. Audley opened the door to try to find a messenger to Mr.Rugg's surgery. He paused to tell Wilmet that it was a lad aboutFelix's age, moaning some word that sounded like Diego, and with abroken leg and ribs; and then, as Martha was in attendance, she feltherself obliged to return to Cherry, whom indeed she could not leaveagain, for though the fire had sunk, and only thick clouds of smokeshowed the play of the engines, the effects of the terror were notso quickly over in the tender little frame, which was in a quiveringhysterical state, so deadly cold, that Wilmet was frightened, and wentonce more down to warm some flannel, and get some hot drink for her.She intended tea, but meeting Mr. Audley again, he sent up a glass ofwine. Even with this in hot water, Cherry could hardly be warmed again,and Wilmet lay down, clasping her round, and not daring to let her knowof her own continued anxiety about the two brothers. At last, however,when the red light had almost faded quite away, the cautious steps wereheard coming up the stairs, and Felix called into the room in a lowvoice--'All right, Wilmet.''Oh! come in,' the sisters called. 'Where did you find him, Fee? Is hesafe?''O Cherry, you never saw such a lark!' cried Lance in a gusty whisper.'Wouldn't Fulbert have given his ears to have seen it? To see theengines pouring down, and the great hose twining about like jolly oldsea-serpents spouting.''Hush, Lance; how can you? How could you! Does Mr. Audley know he issafe?''Yes,' said Felix, 'he opened the door, and said he might have knownLance was too much of a gamin to come to grief.''What's a gamin?' said Lance.'A street ragamuffin at Paris,' said Wilmet. 'But really, Lance, it wasa terrible thing to do.''And where do you think I found him?' said Felix. 'In between littleJacky Brown and that big old coal-heaver who was so impudent about theblanket-club, hanging like a monkey upon the rails of the terrace, andhallooing as loud as they.'''Twas the coal-heaver that helped me up,' said Lance. 'He's a jollygood fellow, I can tell you. He said, "You be one of Parson Underwood'slittle chaps, baint you? A rare honest gentleman of the right sort warhe--he war!" and he pulled down another boy and put me up instead, andtold me all about the great fire at Stubbs's factory. You can't thinkwhat fun it was. Roar, roar, up went the flame. Swish, wish, went thewater--such a bellowing--such great clouds of smoke!''Was everybody saved?' whispered Cherry's tremulous murmur.There was a silence; then Lance said, 'Weren't they?' and Cherry hadanother shuddering fit.'Who?' Wilmet asked.'Poor Mr. Jones's youngest child and his nursemaid were in an atticroom where nobody could get at them,' said Felix in a hurried andawe-struck voice, causing Cherry to renew that agony of tremblingand sobbing so convulsive and painful that her elder brother andsister could only devote themselves to soothing her, till at lastshe lay still again in Wilmet's arms, with only a few long gaspscoming quivering up through her frame. Then Wilmet implored Felix togo away and make Lance go to bed, and finding this the only means ofreducing the little excited fellow to quiet, he went. And though allwere sure they should not sleep, they overslept themselves far intoSunday morning, except Wilmet, who was wakened by the clamours of theundisturbed Angela and Bernard, and succeeded in dressing them withoutdisturbing the other three.Very tired and stiff, and very anxious she felt, but she was obliged togo down as soon as she was dressed, since she always took charge of hermother before breakfast on Sunday while Sibby went to mass. It was solate that she could only listen in vain at the top of the stairs beforeshe went into the room, where she found Sibby very indignant at havingmissed all the excitement of the night past. 'As if she could not havebeen trusted not to have wakened the mistress. She believed they wouldhave let her alone till they all were burnt in their beds!'It was not till breakfast, which took place unusually late, that Wilmetheard much. Felix and Lance had just come downstairs, rather ashamed ofhaving overslept themselves, and Mr. Audley came in and begged for acup of tea.He told them that the father and uncle of the boy had arrived. Theywere American merchants or speculators of some kind, he thought, namedTravis, and they had gone on business to Dearport the day before,meaning to dine there, and return by the mail train in the night, andleaving the boy with the black servant in the unfortunate hotel.On arriving, at about three o'clock, not long after Felix had broughtLance home, they had telegraphed to Dearport for a doctor and nurse,who were momentarily expected to arrive. The patient was only halfconscious, and though he knew his father, continued to murmur forDiego. Martha was sitting with him whenever she could, for his fatherdid not seem to understand nursing, and it would be a great relief whena properly-trained person arrived.She came, and so did the doctor, but not till close upon church-time,and little but stray reports from the sick-room reached the populationupstairs all that day, as Mr. Audley, whenever he was not at church,was obliged to be in attendance on his strange guests. All that reachedthe anxious and excited young people was the tidings of the patientbeing not unlikely to do well, though he was in great pain and highfever, and continually calling for the poor negro who had saved hislife at the expense of his own.This was the last bulletin when the household parted to go theirseveral ways on Monday morning, not to be all collected again and freeto speak till seven o'clock in the evening, when they met round thetable for tea.'Mamma looks cheery,' said Felix, coming into the little back roomwhere Wilmet was spreading bread and butter.'Yes,' said Wilmet, 'I think she has cared to hear about the fire. Somany people have come in and talked, that it has enlivened her.''And how is the boy?''A little better, Martha heard; but he keeps on talking of Diego, andseems not to care about any one else.''No wonder. His father must be an unmitigated brute,' said Felix.'He came to the inquest, and talked just as if it had been an oldNewfoundland dog; I really think he cared rather less than if it hadbeen.''Tell us about the inquest, Felix,' said Lance. 'I wish they'd havewanted me there.''I don't see why, Lance,' said Felix gravely; 'it was a terrible thingto see poor Mr. Jones hardly able to speak for grief, and the mother ofthat poor young nurse went on sobbing as if her heart was breaking.''Nobody knows the cause of the fire, do they?' asked Cherry. 'LadyPrice said it was the gas.''No; no one knows. Way, the waiter, saw a glare under the door ofthe great assembly-room as he was going up very late to bed, andthe instant he opened the door the flame seemed to rush out at him.I suppose a draught was all it wanted. He saw this poor Diego safedownstairs once, but he must have gone back to save his young master,and got cut off in coming back. Poor fellow! he is a Mexican negro,belonging to an estate that came to Mr. Travis's wife, and he hasalways clung to her and her son just like a faithful dog.''But he could not be a slave in England,' said Cherry eagerly.'No; but as this Travis said, his one instinct was the boy: he did notknow how to get rid of him, he said, and I do believe he thinks it alucky chance.''I wish it had been he!' said Lance.'Sibby has asked leave to go to the burial,' added Wilmet.'I hope you gave it,' said Felix. 'Mr. Macnamara came and asked if hewere not a Roman Catholic, and those two Travises laughed a littleoffensively, and said they guessed he was so, as much as a nigger wasanything; and the Papists were welcome to his black carcase, only theywould not be charged for any flummery. "I won't be made a fool of abouta nigger," one said. And then, I was so glad, Mr. Audley begged to knowwhen the funeral would be, and said he would go anywhere to do honourto faithfulness unto death.''Well done, Mr. Audley!' cried Lance. 'Won't we go too, Fee?''It will be at nine to-morrow,' said Felix; at which Lance made a face,since of course he would be in school at the time.'Maybe I shall have to go,' added Felix; 'for only think, as my goodluck would have it, Redstone went on Saturday night to see his motheror somebody, and only came back this morning; and Mr. Froggatt himselfwas "out at his box," as he calls it, so he told me this morning towrite the account of the fire for the paper, and he would pay me for itextra, as he does Redstone.''Well, and have you done it?''I was pretty much at sea at first, till I recollected the letter Ibegan to Edgar yesterday night, and by following that, I made what Ithought was a decent piece of business of it.''Oh, did you put in the way they threw the things out at window atJessop's without looking what they were?' cried Lance; 'and the jollysmash the jugs and basins made, and when their house was never on fireat all: and how the coal-heaver said "Hold hard, frail trade there!"''Well,' said Felix quaintly, 'I put it in a different form, you see. Isaid the inhabitants of the adjacent houses hurled their furniture fromthe windows with more precipitation than attention to the fragilityof the articles. And, after all, that intolerable ass, Redstone, hascorrected fire every time into "the devouring element," and made "thefaithful black" into "the African of sable integument, but heart ofprecious ore."''Now, Felix!''Bald, sir, bald,' he said, with such a face. '"Yes, Mr. Underwood,"even good old Froggy said, when he saw me looking rather blue, "you andI may know what good taste and simplicity is, but if we sent out thePursuivant with no mouth-filling words in it, we should be cut out withsome low paper in no time among the farmers and mechanics."''Is he so led by Mr. Redstone?' asked Wilmet.'Not exactly; but I believe there's nothing he dreads more thanRedstone's getting offended and saying that I am no use, as he wouldany day if he could. O, Mr. Audley, are you coming to stay?''Will you have a cup of tea?' said Wilmet.'Thank you, yes; I've got to dine with these fellows at the RailwayHotel at eight, but I wanted to speak to you first, Wilmet,' said Mr.Audley, sitting down as if he were weary of his day.'How is the boy?''Better. He has been quite sensible ever since he woke at twelveo'clock to-day, only he was dreadfully upset about poor Diego--aboutwhom his father told him very abruptly--without the least notion hewould feel it so much.''I wish I had the kicking of that father,' observed Felix, driving theknife hard into the loaf.'He is not altogether such a bad fellow,' said Mr. Audley thoughtfully.'Not for an American, perhaps.''He is not an American at all. He was born and bred in my own country,and took me by surprise by calculating that I was one of the Audleysof Wrightstone Court, and wanting to know whether my father were SirRobert or Sir Robert's son. Then he guessed that I might have heardof his father, if I was not too young, and by-and-by it dawned on methat whenever there is any complication about business matters, or anyone is in bad circumstances, my father always vituperates one Travis,who, it seems, was a solicitor greatly trusted by all the countryround, till he died, some twenty years ago, and it appeared that hehad ruined everybody, himself included. These men are his sons. Theywent out to America, and got up in the world. They told me the wholestory of how they had knocked about everywhere, last evening, but Iwas too sleepy to enter into it much, though I daresay it was curiousenough; successful speculations and hair's-breadth escapes seemed tocome very thick one upon another, but all I am clear about is thatthis poor boy, Fernando's mother was a Mexican heiress, they--one ofthem, I mean--managed to marry; her father English, but her mother oldSpanish blood allied to the old Caciques, he says; whether it is aboast I don't know, but the boy looks like it--such a handsome fellow;delicate straight profile, slender limbs, beautifully made, inky-blackhair and brows, pure olive skin--the two doctors were both in raptures.Well, they thought affairs in Mexico insecure, so they sold the poorwoman's estate and carried her off to Texas. No; was it? I really can'tremember where; but, at any rate, Diego stuck to her wherever shewent, and when she died, to her child; nursed him like an old woman,and-- In short, it was that touching negro love that one sometimeshears of. Now they seem to have grown very rich--the AmericanVice-Consul, who came over this morning from Dearport, knew all aboutthem--and they came home partly on business, and partly to leaveFernando to be made into an English gentleman, who, Mr. Travis says, ifhe has money to spend, does whip creation. He's English enough for thatstill. Well, they have got a telegram that makes them both want to sailby the next steamer.''That's a blessing. But the boy?''He cannot be moved for weeks. It is not only the fractures, but thejar of the fall. He may get quite over it, but must lie quite still onhis back. So here he is, a fixture, by your leave, my lady housekeeper.''It is your room, Mr. Audley,' said Wilmet. 'But can his father reallymean to leave him alone so very ill, poor boy?''Well, as his father truly says, he is no good to him, but rather thereverse; and as the Travis mind seems rather impressed by finding anAudley here, I am to be left in charge of him now, and to find a tutorfor him when he gets better. So we are in for that!''But what is to become of you?' asked Wilmet. 'The nurse has got thelittle back study.''I have got a room at Bolland's to sleep in, thank you,' he answered;'and I have been representing the inconvenience to the house of thislong illness, so that the Travises, who are liberal enough--''I thought them horrid misers,' said Felix.'That was only the American conscience as to negroes. In other mattersthey are ready to throw money about with both hands; so I hope I havemade a good bargain for you, Wilmet. You are to have five guineas aweek, and provide for boy and nurse, all but wine and beer, ice andfruit.''Five guineas!' murmured Wilmet, quite overpowered at the munificentsum.'I am afraid you will not find it go as far as you expect, for he willwant a good deal of dainty catering.''And your room should be deducted,' said Wilmet.'Not at all. Mrs. Bolland said she did not take lodgers, but shouldesteem it a favour if I would sleep there while her son is away. It isall safe, I think. He has given me orders on his London banker, andthey say here at the bank that they are all right. It is a strangecharge,' he added thoughtfully; 'we little thought what we were takingon ourselves when we picked up that poor fellow, Felix; and I cannothelp thinking it will turn out well, there was something so noble aboutthe poor lad's face as he lay insensible.'It was about three weeks later, that one Sunday evening, when Mr.Audley came in from church, Felix followed him to his sitting-room, andbegan with unusual formality. 'I think I ought to speak to you, sir.''What's the matter?''About Lance, and him in there. I have had such a queer talk withhim!''As how?''Why he wanted us to stop from church, asked me to let off the poorlittle coon; and when I said we couldn't, because we were in thechoir, wanted to know what we were paid, then why we did it at all;and so it turned out that he thinks churches only meant for women andpsalm-singing niggers and Methodists, and has never been inside one inhis life, never saw the sense of it, wanted to know why I went.''What did you tell him?''I don't know; I was so taken aback. I said something about our dutyto God, and it's being all we had to get us through life; but I know Imade a dreadful mess of it, and the bell rang, and I got away. But heseems a sheer heathen, and there's Lance in and out all day.''Yes, Felix, I am afraid it is true that the poor lad has been broughtup with no religion at all--a blank sheet, as his father called him.''Wasn't his father English?''Yes; but he had lived a roving, godless life. I began, when I foundthe boy must stay here, by asking whether he were of his father's orhis mother's communion, and in return heard a burst of exultation thathe had never let a priest into his house. His father-in-law had warnedhim against it, and he had carried his wife out of their reach longbefore the child's birth; he has not even been baptized, but you see,Felix, I could not act like Abraham to the idolater in the Talmud.'Felix did not speak, but knocked one foot against the other invexation, feeling that it was his house after all, and that Mr. Audleyshould not have turned this young heathen loose into it to corrupt hisbrother, without consulting him.'I told Travis,' continued the Curate, 'that if I undertook the chargeas he wished, it must be as a priest myself, and I must try to putsome religion into him. And, to my surprise, he said he left it tome. Fernando was old enough to judge, and if he were to be an Englishsquire, he must conform to old-country ways; besides, I was anothersort of parson from Yankee Methodists and Shakers or Popish priests--heknew the English clergy well enough, of the right sort.''So he is to learn religion to make him a squire?''I was thankful enough to find no obstruction.''And have you begun?' asked Felix moodily.'Why--no. He has been too ill and too reserved. I have attemptednothing but daily saying a short prayer for him in his hearing, hopinghe would remark on it. But you know the pain is still very absorbing attimes, and it leaves him exhausted; and besides, I fancy he has a gooddeal of tropical languor about him, and does not notice much. Nothingbut Lance has roused him at all.''I would never have let Lance in there by himself, if I had known,'said Felix. 'He is quite bewitched.''It would have been difficult to prevent it. Nor do I think that muchharm can be done. I believe I ought to have told you, Felix; but Idid not like denouncing my poor sick guest among the children, or itsgetting round all the town and to my Lady. After all, Lance is a verylittle fellow; it is not as if Edgar or Clem were at home.''I suppose it cannot be helped,' sighed Felix; 'but my father--' and ashe recollected the desire to take his brothers away from Mr. Ryder, hefelt as if his chosen guardian had been false to his trust, out of pityand enthusiasm.'Your father would have known how to treat him,' sighed Mr. Audley.'At any rate, Felix, we must not forget the duties of hospitality andkindness; and I hope you will not roughly forbid Lance to go near him,without seeing whether the poor fellow is not really inoffensive.''I'll see about it,' was all that Felix could get himself to say; formuch as he loved Mr. Audley, he could not easily brook interferencewith his brothers, and little Lance, so loyal to himself, and so drollwithout a grain of malice, was very near to his heart. 'A young Pagan,'as he thought to himself, 'teaching him all the blackguard tricks andwords he has learnt at all the low schools in north or south!' and allthe most objectionable scenes he had met with in American stories, from'Uncle Tom' onwards, began to rise before his eyes. 'A pretty thing todo in a fit of beneficence! I'll order Lance to keep away, and if hedares disobey, I'll lick him well to show him who is master.'So he felt, as he swung himself upstairs, and halted with someintention of pouring out his vexed spirit to Wilmet, because Mr. Audleyhad no business to make it a secret; but Wilmet was putting her motherto bed, and he went on upstairs. There he found all the doors open, andheard a murmuring sound of voices in Geraldine's room. In a mood to beglad of any excuse for finding fault, he strode across the nursery,where Angela and Bernard slept, and saw that Lance, who ought to havegone at once to bed on coming in, was standing in his sister's window,trying to read in the ray of gas-light that came up from a lamp at thebrewhouse door.'Go to bed, Lance,' he said; 'if you have not learnt your lessons inproper time, you must wake early, or take the consequences. I won'thave it done on Sunday night.'Lance started round angrily, and Cherry cried, 'O Felix, it is no suchthing! Only would you tell us where to find about the king and hispriests that defeated the enemy by singing the "mercy endureth forever" psalm?''In the Bible!' said Felix, as if sure it was a blunder. 'There's nosuch story.''Indeed there is,' cried Lance, 'for Papa (the word low and reverently)took out his blue poly-something Bible and read it out in the sermon.Don't you remember, Fee, a hot day in the summer, when he preached allabout those wild robbers--horrid fellows with long spears--coming up inthe desert to make a regular smash of the Jews?''Lance!' cried Cherry.'Well, he did not say that, of course, but they wanted to; and howthe king sent out the priests without a fighting man, only all inwhite, praising God in the beauty of holiness, and singing, "His mercyendureth for ever." I saw him read that, though he told us all the restwithout book; how all the enemy began to quarrel, and all killed oneanother, and the Jews had nothing to do but to pick up the spoil, andsing another psalm coming back.''I remember now,' said Felix, in a very different tone. 'It wasJehoshaphat, Lancey boy. I'll find it for you in the book ofChronicles. Did you want it for anything?'Lance made an uneasy movement.'It was to show poor Fernando Travis, wasn't it?' said Cherry; and asLance wriggled again, she added, 'He seems to have been taught nothinggood.''Now, Cherry,' broke out Lance, 'I told you to say not a word.''I know a little about it, Lance,' said Felix, sitting down on thewindow-seat and lifting Lance on his knee, as he said, in a tone veryunlike his intended expostulation, 'You must not let him do you harm,Lance.''He wouldn't; but he does not know anything about anything,' said thelittle boy. 'They never taught him to say his prayers, nor sing hymns,nor chant, and he thinks it is only good for niggers. So I told himthat singing psalms once beat an army, and he laughed; and I thoughtCherry was sure to know where it was--but girls will always tell.''Indeed you never told me not,' said Cherry, humbly.'She has done no harm,' said Felix. 'Mr. Audley has just been talkingto me about that poor boy. He really is as untaught as that littlescamp at the potteries that we tried to teach.''He's a stunning good fellow,' broke in Lance; 'he has seen analligator, and ridden mustangs.''Never mind that now, Lance; I dare say he is very amusing, but--''Don't hinder me from going to him,' broke in the younger boyvehemently.'If,' said Felix gravely, 'you can be quite sure my father would notmind it.'Lance was nestling close up to him in the dark, and he was surprised tofind that round face wet with tears. 'Papa would not let him lie dulland moped all day long,' he said. 'O Fee, I can't keep away; I am sosorry for him. When that terrible cramp comes, it is of no use to saythose sort of things to him.''What sort of things?''Oh, you know; verses such as Papa used to have said to him. Theyweren't a bit of good. No, not though I did get the book Papa markedfor Cherry.''You did!' gasped Cherry, who little thought that sacred possession ofhers was even known to Master Lance.'You'd have done it yourself, Cherry,' said the little boy, 'if youhad only seen how bad he was; he got quite white, and had great dropson his forehead, and panted so, and would not let out a bit of a cry,only now and then a groan; and so I ran to get the verse Papa used tosay over and over to you when your foot was bad. And I'm sure it wasthe right one, but--but--it did him no good, for, oh! he didn't knowwho our Saviour is;' and the little fellow clung to his brother in apassion of tears, while Felix felt a pang at the contrast.'Have you been telling him, Lancey?' he asked.'I wanted him to ask Mr. Audley, but he said he was a parson, and hisfather said that there would be no parsons if men were not fools. Now,Fee, I've told you, but don't keep me away.''It would be hard on a poor sick fellow,' said Felix, thoroughlysoftened. 'Only, Lance, you know I can't be with you; will you promiseto go away if ever you think Papa would wish it?''Oh yes; one has to do that, you know, when our own fellows getblackguardly,' said little Lance, freely; whereat Cherry shudderedsomewhat. 'And, Fee,' he added, 'if you would only come and make himunderstand about things.''Mr. Audley must do that,' said Felix; 'I can't.''You teach the boys in the Sunday-school,' said Lance. 'And he'd mindyou, Blunderbore. He says you are the grandest and most splendiferousfellow he ever did set eyes on, and that he feels something like, whenyou've just looked in and spoken to him.''You little ass, he was chaffing you.''No, no, indeed he wasn't. I told him all about it, because he likedyour face so much. And he does care so very much when you look in.Oh! do, do, Fee; he is so jolly, and it is so lonely and horrid forhim, and I do so want Papa for him;' and the child cried silently, butFelix felt the long deep sobs, and as Geraldine, much moved, said,'Dear little Lancey,' he carried him over to her as she sat up in bed,and she kissed and fondled him, and murmured in his ear, 'Dear Lance,I'm sure he'll get good. We will get Mr. Audley to talk to him, youknow, and we will say a prayer every day for him.'Lance, beginning to recover, put his arms round Cherry's neck, gave hera tremendous hug, released himself from his brother's arms, and ran offto bed. Felix remained a few moments, while Cherry exclaimed, 'Oh! thedear good little fellow!''Better than any of us,' said Felix. 'I was quite savage with Mr.Audley when I found out about it. I must go down and tell him. I neverthought all that was in the little chap! I'm glad he came to you,Cherry. Good-night.''And you will try to teach this poor boy, Felix?''I don't say that. I don't in the least know how; but I shall not dareto hinder Lance, now I see how he goes on.'On his way down he heard voices in the sitting-room, where, in fact,Mr. Audley had joined Wilmet, to explain to her how vexed he was tohave so much annoyed Felix, and perhaps also something of his ownannoyance at the manner in which Felix took it. Wilmet, partly fromher 'growing on the sunny side of the wall,' partly from her earlyauthority, was in some ways older than her brother, and could see thatthere was in him a shade of boyish jealousy of his prerogative; andas she sat, in her pretty modest gravity, with her fair hair and herSunday frock, she was softly but earnestly telling Mr. Audley that shewas sure Felix would not mind long, and that he was very sorry forthe poor boy really, only he was so anxious about Lance, and he didlike to be consulted. Both looked up, startled, as Felix opened thedoor, and they saw that his eyes were full of tears. He came up to Mr.Audley, and said, 'I beg your pardon, sir; I'd no business to grumble,and that little fellow has been--''Beforehand with us?' asked Mr. Audley, as Felix broke down. 'The nursehas been just telling me how he sat on his bed saying bits of psalmsand verses to him when he had that bad fit of cramp, "so pretty," shesaid; but I was afraid it must have been rather like a spell.'Felix told his story, feeling it too much not to make it lame, and withthe tearfulness trembling in his voice and eyes all the time.'Our little gamin has the most of the good Samaritan in him,' saidMr. Audley. ''Tis not quite the end I should have begun at, but perhapsit may work the better.''Dear little boy, that he should have remembered that sermon!'exclaimed Wilmet.'I am afraid it is more than I do,' said Felix; 'all last summer themore I tried to listen, the more I saw how he was changing. Do youremember it, Wilmet?''Yes; the text was, "The joy of the Lord is your strength," and hesaid how praising God, and going on thinking about His goodness andthankfulness, was the way to make our adversaries dissolve before us,and never trouble us at all, just like the bands of the Moabites andAmmonites before Jehoshaphat.''I recollect it well, and how I thought it such a likeness of himself,'said Mr. Audley; 'he was walking over his troubles, scarcely seeingthem, as if they could not dim the shine of his armour while he went onlooking up and being thankful. I fancy little Lance has a good deal ofthat kind of bright fearless way.''He has,' said Felix in a grave thoughtful tone that made the Curatelook at him and sigh to think how early care and grief had come to makethat joyous buoyancy scarce possible to the elder boy, little more thanseventeen though he was.'He is very idle, though,' added Wilmet; 'such caricatures as thereare all over his books! Edgar's were bad enough, but Lance putspig-tails and cocked hats to all Edgar's.'So Lance's visits to the sick stranger remained unobstructed. He hadno notion of teaching him; but the foreign boy in his languor andhelplessness curiously fascinated him, perhaps from the very contrastof the passive, indolent, tropical nature with his own mercurialtemperament. The Spaniard, or perhaps the old Mexican, seemed topredominate in Fernando, as far as could be guessed in one so weak andhelpless. He seemed very quiet and inanimate, seldom wanting or seekingdiversion, but content to lie still, with half-closed eyes; his mannerwas reserved, and with something of courteous dignity, especially whenLady Price came to visit him; and the Yankeeisms that sometimes droppedfrom his tongue did not agree with the polish of the tone, and stillless with the imperious manner in which he sometimes addressed thenurse. He seemed, though not clever, to be tolerably well cultivated;he had been at the schools of whatever cities his father had residedin, and his knowledge of languages was of course extensive.However, he never talked freely to Mr. Audley. He had bitterly resentedthat gentleman's interference, one day when he was peremptorilycommanding the nurse to place him in a position that had beenforbidden, and the endeavour to control him had made him fearfullyangry. There was a stormy outbreak of violent language, only checkedby a severe rebuke, for which he did not forgive the Curate; he wascoldly civil, and accepted the attentions he could not dispense with ina grave formal manner that would have been sulky in an English lad, buthad something of the dreary grandeur of the Spanish Don from that darklordly visage, and made Mr. Audley half provoked, half pitying, speakof him always as his Cacique. He only expanded a little even to Lance,though the little boy waited on him assiduously, chattering aboutschool doings, illustrating them on a slate, singing to him, actingBlondin, exhibiting whatever he could lay his hands on, including thetwins, whom he bore down one after the other, to the great wrath ofSibby, not to say of little Stella herself, while Theodore took theexhibition with perfect serenity.As to Felix, he was, as Lance said, the subject of the sick lad'sfervent admiration. Perhaps the open, fair, cheerful, though gravecountenance, fresh complexion, and strong, steadfast, upright bearinghad something to do with the strange adoration that in his silent wayFernando paid to the youth, who looked in from time to time, bringinga sort of air of refreshment with his good-natured shy smile, evenwhen he least knew what to say. Or else it was little Lance's ferventaffection for Felix which had conduced to the erection of the elderbrother into the idol of Fernando's fancy; and his briefest visit wasthe event of the long autumnal days spent in the uncurtained iron bedin the corner of the low room. The worship, silent though it was, wasmanifest enough to become embarrassing and ridiculous to the subjectof it, whose sense of duty and compassion was always at war with hisreluctance to expose himself to it. Not another word passed on anyreligious subject. Mr. Audley was not forgiven enough to venture on theattempt; the Rector was shy and frightened about it, and could make nobeginning; and Mr. Mowbray Smith, who found great fault with them fortheir neglect, had been fairly stared down by the great black eyes,which, when the heavy lids were uplifted, proved to be of an immensesize and force; and Felix was so sure that it could not be his businesswhile three clergymen were going in and out that he had never done morethan describe the weather, or retail any fresh bit of London news thathad come down to the office.At last, however, one November day, he found Fernando sitting up inbed, and Lance, perched on the table, talking so earnestly as not toperceive his entrance, until Fernando broke upon his words: 'There!it's no use!''Yes, it is,' cried Lance, jumping down. 'O Fee, I am glad you arecome; I want you to tell him the rights of it.''The rights of what, Lance?''Tell him that it is all the devil's doing, and the men he has got onhis side; and that it was the very thing our Saviour came for to set usfree, only everybody won't,' said Lance clinging to his brother's hand,and looking up in his face.'That's about right, Lance,' said Felix; 'but I don't quite know whatyou are talking about.''Just this,' said Fernando. 'Lance goes on about God being merciful andgood and powerful--Almighty, as he says; but whatever women may tell alittle chap like that, nobody can think so that has seen the things Ihave, down in the West, with my own eyes.''Felix!' cried Lance, 'say it. You know and believe just as I do, aseverybody good does, men and all.''Yes, indeed!' said Felix with all his heart.'Then tell me how it can be,' said Fernando.Felix stood startled and perplexed, feeling the awful magnitude andimportance of the question, but also feeling his own incompetence todeal with it; and likewise that Wilmet was keeping the tea waiting forhim. He much wished to say, 'Keep it for Mr. Audley,' but he feared tochoke the dawning of faith, and he likewise feared the appearance ofhesitation.'Nobody can really explain it,' he said, 'but that's no wonder. Onecannot explain a thunderstorm, but one knows that it is.''That's electricity,' said Fernando.'And what's electricity?''A fluid that--''Yes; that's another word. But you can't get any further. God madeelectricity, or whatever it is, and when you talk about explaining it,you only get to something that is. You know it is, and you can'tget any further,' he repeated.'Well, that's true; though science goes beyond you in America.''But no searching finds out all about God!' said Felix reverently.'All we know is that He is so infinitely great and wise, that of coursewe cannot understand why all He does is right, any more than a privatesoldier understands his general's orders.''And you--you,' said Fernando, 'are content to say you don'tunderstand.''Why not?' said Felix.There was a silence. Fernando seemed to be thinking; Lance gazed fromone to the other, as if disappointed that his brother was not moreexplicit.'And how do you know it is true?' added Fernando. 'I mean, what Lancehas been telling me! What makes you sure of it, if you are?''If I am?' cried Felix, startled into indignation. 'To be sure I am!''But how?''I know it!' said Felix.'How?''The Bible!' gasped Lance impatiently.'Ay; so you have said for ever,' broke in Fernando; 'but whatauthenticates that?''The whole course of history,' said Felix. 'There is a great chain ofevidence, I know, but I never got it up. I can't tell it you, Fernando;I never wanted it, never even tried to think about the proofs. It isall too sure.''But wouldn't a Mahometan say that?' said Fernando.'If he did, look at the Life of our Lord and of Mahomet together, andsee which must be the true Prophet--the Way, the Life, the Truth.''That one could do,' said Fernando thoughtfully. 'I say,' as Felix madea movement as if he thought the subject concluded, 'I want to know onething more. Lance says it is believing all this that makes you--any oneI mean--good.''I don't know what else should,' said Felix, smiling a little; thequestion seemed to him so absurd.'Is it really what makes you go and slave away at that old boss's ofyours?''Why, that's necessity and my duty,' said Felix.'And is it what makes this little coon come and spend all hisplay-hours on a poor fellow with a broken leg? I've been at manyschools, and never saw the fellow who would do that.''Oh! you are such fun!' cried Lance.'All that is right comes from God first and last,' said Felix gravely.'And you--you that are no child--you believe all that Lance tells meyou do, and think it makes you what you are!''I believe it; yes, of course. And believing it should make me muchbetter than I am! I hope it will in time.''Ah!' sighed Fernando. 'I never heard anything like it since my fathersaid he'd take the cow-hide to poor old Diego, if he caught himteaching me nigger-cant.'They left him.'Poor fellow!' sighed Felix; 'what have you been telling him, Lance?''Oh, I don't know; only why things were good and bad,' was Lance'slucid answer; and he was then intent on detailing the stories he hadheard from Fernando. He had been in the worst days of Southern slaveryere its extinction, on the skirts of the deadly warfare with the RedIndians; and the poor lad had really known of horrors that curdled theblood of Wilmet and Geraldine, and made the latter lie awake or dreamdreadful dreams all night.But the next day, Mr. Audley was startled to hear the two friends inthe midst of an altercation. When Lance had come in for his mid-dayrecreation, Fernando had produced five shillings, desiring him to goand purchase a Bible for him; but Lance, who had conceived the ideathat the Scriptures ought not to be touched by an unchristened hand,flatly refused, offering, however, to read from his own. Now Lance'sreading was at that peculiar school-boy stage which seems calculated tocombine the utmost possible noise with the least possible distinctness;and though he had good gifts of ear and voice, and his reciting andsinging were both above the average, the moment a book was before him,he roared his sentences between his teeth in horrible monotony. And ashe began with the first chapter of St. Matthew, and was not perfectlyable to cope with all the names, Fernando could bear it no longer, andinsisted on having the book itself. Lance shook his head and refused;and matters were in this stage when Mr. Audley, not liking the echoesof the voices, opened the door. 'What is it?' he asked anxiously.'Nothing,' replied Fernando, proudly trying to swallow his vexation.'Lance!' said Mr. Audley rather severely; but just then, seeing whatbook the child was holding tight under his arm, he decided to followhim out of the room and interrogate.'What was it, Lance?''He ought not to touch a Bible--he sha'n't have mine,' said Lanceresentfully.'Was he doing anything wrong with it?''Oh no! But he ought not to have it before he is christened, and Iwould have read to him.'Mr. Audley knew what Lance's reading was, and smiled. 'Was that all,Lance? I like your guardianship of the Bible, my boy; but it was notgiven only to those who are Christians already, or how could any onelearn?''He sha'n't touch mine, though,' said Lance, with an odd sturdiness;stumping upstairs with his treasure, a little brown sixpenny S. P. C.K. book, but in which his father had written his name on his lastbirth-day but one.Mr. Audley only waited to take down a New Testament, and presenthimself at Fernando's bedside, observing gladly that there was muchmore wistfulness than offence about his expression.'It was a scruple on the young man's part,' said Mr. Audley, smiling,though full of anxiety; 'he meant no unkindness.''I know he did not,' said Fernando quietly, but gazing at the purplebook in the clergyman's hands.'Did you want this?' said Mr. Audley; 'or can I find anything in it foryou?''Thank you;' and there was a pause. The offended manner towards Mr.Audley had been subsiding of late into friendliness under his constantattentions, and Fernando's desire for an answer prevailed at last.'Felix told me to read the Life of Christ,' he said, not irreverently,'and that it would show me He must be True.''I hope and trust that so it may be,' said Mr. Audley, more moved thanhe could bear to show, but with fervour in his voice far beyond hiswords.'Felix,' said Fernando, resting on the name, 'Felix does seem as if hemust be right, Mr. Audley; can it be really as he says--and Lance--thattheir belief makes them like what they are?''Most assuredly.''And you don't say so only because you are a minister?' asked the boydistrustfully.'I say so because I know it. I knew that it is the Christian faith thatmakes all goodness, long before I was a minister.''But I have seen plenty of Christians that were not in the least likeFelix Underwood.''So have I; but in proportion as they live up to their faith, they havewhat is best in him.''I should like to be like him,' mused Fernando; 'I never saw such afellow. He, and little Lance too, seem to belong to something brightand strong, that seems inside and outside, and I can't lay hold of whatit is.''One day you will, my dear boy,' said Mr. Audley. 'Let me try to helpyou.'Fernando scarcely answered, save by half a smile, and a long sigh ofrelief: but when Mr. Audley put his hand over the long brown fingers,they closed upon it.CHAPTER VII.THE CHESS-PLAYER'S BATTLE.'Dost thou believe, he said, that GraceItself can reach this grief?With a feeble voice and a woeful eye--"Lord, I believe," was the sinner's reply,"Help Thou mine unbelief."'Southey.By the beginning of the Christmas holidays, Fernando Travis was ableto lie on a couch in Mr. Audley's sitting-room. His recovery was eventardier than had been expected, partly from the shock, and partly fromthe want of vigour of the tropical constitution: and he still seemed tobe a great way from walking, though there was no reason to fear thatthe power would not return. His father wrote, preparing for a journeyto Oregon, and seemed perfectly satisfied, and he was becoming verymuch at home with his host.He was much interested in that which he was learning from Mr. Audley,and imbibing from the young Underwoods. The wandering life he hadhitherto led, without any tenderness save from the poor old negro,without time to make friends, and often exposed to the perception ofsome of the darkest sides of human life, in the terrible lawlessnessof the Mexican frontier, had hitherto made him dull, dreary, andindifferent, with little perception that there could be anythingbetter; but first the kindness and then the faith he saw at Bexley, hadawakened new perceptions and sensations. His whole soul was openingto perceive what the love of God and man might be; and the sense ofa great void, and longing to have it satisfied, seemed to fill himwith a constant craving for the revelation of that inner world, whoseexistence had just dawned upon him.After a little hesitation, Mr. Audley decided on reading with Geraldinein his presence after he had come into the sitting-room, explainingto her how he thought it might be helpful. She did not much like it,but acquiesced: she used to hop in with her sweet smile, shy greeting,and hand extended to the invalid, who used to lie looking at herthrough his long eyelashes, and listening to her low voice reading oranswering, as if she were no earthly creature; but the two were far toomuch in awe of one another to go any further; and he got on much betterwith Wilmet, when she looked in on him now and then with cheery voiceand good-natured care.Then Fulbert and Robina came home; and the former was half suspicious,half jealous, of Lance's preoccupation with what he chose to denominate'a black Yankee nigger.' He avoided the room himself, and kept Lancefrom it as much as was in his power; and one day Lance appeared witha black eye, of which he concealed the cause so entirely, that Felix,always afraid of his gamin tendencies, entreated Fulbert, as afriend, to ease his mind by telling him it was not given in a streetrow.'I did it,' said Fulbert; 'he was so cocky about his Yankee that Icould not stand it.''Why shouldn't he be kind to a poor sick fellow?''He has no business to be always bothering about Fernandohere--Fernando there--Fernando for ever. I shall have him coming up toschool a regular spoon, and just not know what to do with him.''Well, Fulbert, I think if you had a broken leg you'd wish some oneto speak to you. At any rate, I can't have Lance bullied for his goodnature; I was very near doing it myself once, but I was shamed out ofit.''Were you--were you, indeed?' cried Fulbert, delighted at thisconfession of human nature; and Felix could not help laughing. And thatlaugh did much to bring him down from the don to the brother. At anyrate, Fulbert ceased his persecution in aught but word.Robina, always Lance's companion, followed him devotedly, and only hungabout the stairs forlorn when he went to Fernando without her; or ifadmitted, she was quite content to sit serenely happy in her belovedLance's presence, expecting neither notice nor amusement, only watchingtheir occupation of playing at draughts. Sometimes, however, Lancewould fall to playing with her, and they would roll on the floor, atumbling mass of legs, arms, and laughter, to the intense diversion ofFernando, to whom little girls were beings of an unknown order.So came on Christmas, with the anniversaries so sweet and so sad, andthe eve of holly-dressing, when a bundle of bright sprays was leftby some kind friend at No. 8, and Lance and Bobbie were vehement tointroduce Fernando to English holly and English decking.Geraldine suggested that they had better wait for either Mr. Audleyor Wilmet to come in, but for this they had no patience, and ran downwith their arms full of the branches, and their tongues going with thedescription of the night's carols, singing them with their sweet youngvoices as they moved about the room. Fernando knew now what Christmasmeant, but the joy and exhilaration of the two children seemed to himstrange for such a bygone event. He asked them if they would have anytreat.'Oh no! except, perhaps, Mr. Audley said he should drink tea one day,'said Robina. And then she broke out again, 'Hark! the herald angels,'like a little silver bell.Suddenly there was a cry of dismay. She had been standing on a chairover the mantelpiece, sticking holly into the ornaments, behind andunder which, in true man's fashion, a good many papers and letters hadaccumulated. One of these papers--by some unlucky movement--fell, andby a sudden waft of air floated irrevocably into the hottest place inthe fire.'O dear! oh dear!' wailed Robina.'That's a pretty go,' cried Lancelot.'That comes of your open fires,' observed Fernando.'What was it?' asked Lance.'I don't know. I think it was a list of names! Oh! how vexed he'll be,and Wilmet; for she told me never to get on a chair over the fender,and I forgot.' Bobbie's round face was puckering for a cry.'No, no, don't cry, Bob; I told you to get up, and I'll say so,' saidLance, smothering her in his arms after the wont of consoling brothers.'I dare say he'll not miss it,' said Fernando good-naturedly; 'he veryseldom meddles with those things.'Bobbie's great round grey eyes came out over Lance's shoulder, andflashed amazement and wrath at him. 'I'm not going to tell stories,'she said stoutly.'No,' said Lance, equally scandalized; 'I thought you had learntbetter, Fernando.'Robina, be it observed, was ignorant of Fernando's untaught state.'I only said you could hold your tongue,' was of course Fernando'srejoinder.'That's just as bad,' was the little girl's response.'But, Lance, you held your tongue about your black eye.''That's my affair, and nobody else's,' said Lance, flushing up andlooking cross at the allusion.'And Fulbert told!' added Robina.'Will they punish you?' asked Fernando.'I think Wilmet will, because it was disobedience! I don't think she'lllet me have any butter at tea,' Bobbie nearly sobbed. 'Mr. Audley won'tpunish! But he'll look--' and she quite cried now.'And do you like that better than not telling?' said Fernando, stillcurious.She looked up, amazed again. 'I must! I don't like it! But I couldn'tever have a happy Christmas if I didn't tell! I wish they would comethat I might have it over.'The street door opened at the moment, and Mr. Audley and Wilmet came intogether from Lady Price's convocation of the parish staff. Fernandoheard the sobbing confession in the passage, and Lance's assurancethat he had been art and part in the disobedience, and Wilmet gravelyblaming the child, and Mr. Audley telling her not to think so muchabout the loss as the transgression; and then the door was shut, and heheard no more, till Mr. Audley came in, examined the chimney-piece, andperformed the elegy of the list in a long low whistle.'Is much harm done?' Fernando asked.'Not much; only I must go and get another list made out, and I amafraid I shall not be able to come in again before church.''I hope they have not punished her.''Wilmet recommended not taking the prize prayer-book to church, andshe acquiesced with tears in her eyes. A good child's repentance is abeautiful thing--"O happy in repentance' schoolSo early taught and tried."'These last words were said to himself as he picked up his variousgoods, and added, 'I must get some tea at the Rectory. I am sorry toleave you, but I hope one of them will come down.'They did not, except that they peeped in for a moment to wish himgood-night, and regretted that they had not known him to be alone.As Felix was going out to begin the Christmas Feast in the darkness ofmorning, he looked in as he usually did, since Mr. Audley, sleeping outof the house, never came in till after early church. The nurse, whostill slept in the room, was gone to dress; there was only a flickeringnight-light, and the room looked very desolate and forlorn, still moreso the voice that called out to him, 'Felix! oh, Felix! is that you?''Yes. A happy Christmas to you,' said Felix.'Happy--!' there was a sort of groan.'Why, what's the matter? have you had a bad night? Aren't you so well?''I don't know. Come here; I must speak to you.'Felix was, as usual, in a great haste, but the tone startled him.'Felix, I can't stand this any longer. I must let you know what afrightful, intolerable wretch I've been. I tried to teach Lance to bet.''Fernando!' He was so choked with indignation, he could not say more.'He wouldn't do it. Not after he understood it. It seems he tried itwith another little boy at school, and one of the bigger ones boxed hisears and rowed him.''Ay; Bruce promised me to look after him.''So he refused. He told me he was on his honour to you not to stay if Idid anything your father would have disapproved. He did leave me once,when I would not leave off.''But how could you?''I was so bored--so intolerably dull--and it is the only thing on earththat one cares to do.''But Lance had nothing to stake.''I could lend him! Ah! you don't know what betting is; why, we alldo it--women, boys and all!' His voice became excited, and Felix inconsternation broke in--'When did you do this?''Oh! weeks ago. Before I was out of bed. When I found my dice in mypurse; but I have not tried it since, with him!''With whom, then?''Why--don't fall on him--with Fulbert. He knew what it meant. Now,Felix, don't come on him for it. Come on me as much as you please. I'vebeen a traitor to you. I see it now.''Anything but that!' sighed Felix, too much appalled for immediateforgiving, dejected as was the voice that spoke to him.'Yes, yes, I know! I see. The worst thing I could do,' said Fernando,turning his face in on the pillow, in so broken-hearted a manner thatFelix's kindness and generosity were roused.'Stay, don't be so downcast,' he said. 'There's no harm done withLance, and you being so sorry will undo it with Fulbert! I do thank youfor telling me, really, only it upset me at first.''Upset! Yes, you'll be more so when you hear the rest,' said Fernando,raising his head again. 'Do you know who set that inn on fire?''Nobody does.''Well, I did.''Nonsense! You've had a bad night! You don't know what you aretalking about,' said Felix, anxiously laying hold of one of the hothands--perceiving that his own Christmas Day must begin with mercy, notsacrifice, and beginning to hope the first self-accusation was alsodelirious.'Tell me. Didn't the fire begin in the ball-room? Somebody told me so.''Yes, the waiter saw it there.''Then I did it; I threw the end of a cigar among the flummery in thegrate,' cried Fernando, falling back from the attitude into which hehad raised himself, with a gesture of despair.'Nobody can blame you.''Stay. It was after father and uncle had gone! I was smoking at thewindow of our room, and the landlord came in and ordered me not,because some ladies in the next room objected. He told me I might comedown to the coffee-room; but I had never heard of such meddling, and Ijawed him well; but he made me give in somehow. Only when I saw thatbig ball-room all along the side of the building, I just took a turn init with my cigar to spite him. Poor Diego came up and begged me not,but you know the way one does with a nigger. Oh!'Felix did not know; but the voice broke down in such misery and horror,that his soul seemed to sink within him. 'Have you had this on yourmind all this time?' he asked kindly.'No, no. It didn't come to me. I think I've been a block or a stone.The dear faithful fellow, that loved me as no one ever did. I've beenfeeling the kiss he gave me at the window all to-night. And then I'vebeen falling--falling--falling in his black arms--down--down to hellitself. Not that he is there; but I murdered him, you know--and someone else besides, wasn't there?''This is like delirium, really, Fernando,' said Felix, putting his armsround him to lay him down, as he raised himself on his elbow. 'I mustcall some one if you seem so ill.''I wish it was illness,' said Fernando with a shudder. 'Oh! don'tgo--don't let me go--if you can bear to touch me--when you know all!''There can't be any worse to know. You had better not talk.''I must! I must tell you all I really am; though you will never letyour brothers come near me, or the little angels--your sisters. I'dnot have dared look at them myself if I had known it, but things neverseemed so to me before.'Felix shivered at the thought of what he was to hear, but he gavehimself up to listen kindly, and to his relief he gathered from theincoherent words that there was no great stain of crime, as he hadfeared; but that the boy had come to open his eyes to the evils of thelife in which he had shared according to his age, and saw them in theirfoulness, and with an agonised sense of shame and pollution. Felixcould not help asking whether this had long dwelt on his thoughts.'No,' he said, 'that's the wonder! I thought myself a nice,gentlemanly, honourable fellow. Oh!' with a groan. 'Fancy that! I neverthought of recollecting these things, or what they have made me. Only,somehow, when those children seemed so shocked at my advising themto hold their tongues about their bit of mischief--I thought firstwhat fools you all were to be so scrupulous; and then I recollectedthe lots of things I have concealed, till I began to think, Is thishonour--would it seem so to Lance--or Felix? And then came down on methe thought of what you believe, of God seeing it all, and laying it upagainst one for judgment; and I know--I know it is true!' and therecame another heavy groan, and the great eyes shone in the twilight interror.'If you know that is true,' said Felix, steadfastly and tenderly, 'youknow something else too. You know Whom He sent into the world for ourpardon for these things.'There was a tightening of the grasp as if in acquiescence and comfort;but the nurse came back to tidy the room, and still Fernando clung toFelix, and would not let him go. She opened the shutters, and thenboth she and Felix were dismayed to see how ill and spent her patientlooked; for she had slept soundly through his night of silent anguishand remorse--misery that, as Felix saw by his face, was pressing on himstill with intolerable weight.By the time the woman had finished Mr. Audley came in, and seeing atonce that Felix's absence was accounted for by Fernando's appearance,he stepped up at once to the bed, full of solicitude. Felix hardly knewwhether to reply or escape; but Fernando's heart was too full for hiswords not to come at once.'No, I am not worse, but I see it all now.--Tell him, Felix; I cannotsay it again.''Fernando thinks--' Felix found he could hardly speak the wordseither--'Fernando is afraid that it was an accident of his own--''Don't say an accident. It was passion and spite,' broke in Fernando.'That caused the fire at the Fortinbras Arms,' Felix was obliged tofinish.'Not on purpose!' exclaimed Mr. Audley.'Almost as much as if it had been,' said Fernando. 'I smoked to spitethe landlord for interfering, and threw away the end too angry toheed where. There!' he added grimly; 'Felix won't tell me how many Imurdered besides my poor old black. How many?''Do not speak in that way, my poor boy,' said Mr. Audley. 'At least,this is better than the weight you have had on your mind so long.''How many?' repeated Fernando.'Two more lives were lost,' said Mr. Audley gently, 'Mr. Jones'sbaby and its nurse. But you must not use harder words than are just,Fernando. It was a terrible result, but consequences do not make theevil.'He made a kind of murmur; then turning round, uneasily said, 'That isnot all; I have seen myself, Mr. Audley.'Mr. Audley looked at Felix, who spoke with some difficulty andperplexity. 'He has been very unhappy all night. He thinks things wrongthat he never thought about before.'Mr. Audley felt exceedingly hopeful at those words; but he was alarmedat the physical effect on his patient, and felt that the presentexcitement was mischievous. 'I understand in part,' he said. 'But itseems to me that he is too restless and uncomfortable to think orunderstand now. It may be that he may yet see the joy of to-day; but nomore talk now. Have you had your breakfast?'He shook his head, but Felix had to go away, and breakfast and dressingrestored Fernando to a more tranquil state. He slept, too, wearied out,when he was placed on his couch; while Felix was at Christmas service,singing, as he had never sung before,--'Peace on earth, and mercy mild,God and sinners reconciled.'Oh! was the poor young stranger seeing the way to that reconciliation?and when Lancelot's sweet clear young notes rose up in all theirpurity, and the rosy honest face looked upwards with an expressionelevated by the music, Felix could not help thinking that the boy hadverily sung those words of truth and hope into the poor dark lonelyheart. Kindness, steadfastness, truth, in that merry-hearted childhad been doing their work; and when Lance marched away with the otherlesser choristers, the elder brother felt as if the younger had beenthe more worthy to 'draw near in faith.'Fernando was more like himself when Felix came in, but he was a gooddeal shaken, and listened to the conventional Christmas greeting likemockery, shrinking from the sisters, when they looked in on him, withwhat they thought a fresh access of shyness, but which was a feeling ofterrible shame beside the innocence he ascribed to them.'I wish I could help that poor boy,' sighed Wilmet. 'He does look sovery miserable!'And Geraldine's eyes swam in tears as she thought of the lonelinessof his Christmas, and without that Christmas joy that even hermother's dulled spirit could feel--the joy that bore them through therecollections of this time last year.Lance's desire to cheer took the more material form of acting asFernando's special waiter at the consumption of the turkey, which Mr.Audley had insisted on having from home, and eating in company with therest, to whom it was a 'new experience,' being only a faint remembranceeven to Felix and Wilmet; but Fernando had no appetite, and even thesight of his little friend gave him a pang.'Do you want any one to stay with you?' asked Lance. 'If Cherry woulddo--for Felix said he would take Fulbert and me out for a jolly longwalk, to see the icicles at Bold's Hatch.''No, I want no one. You are better without me.''I'll stay if you do want it,' said Lance, very reluctantly. 'Idon't like your not having one bit of Christmas. Shall I sing you oneChristmas hymn before I go?' And Lance broke into the 'Herald Angels'again.'Mild He lays His glory by,Born that man no more may die;Born to raise the sons of earth,Born to give them second birth.'Fernando's face was bathed in tears; he held out his arms, and tolittle Lance's great amazement, somewhat to his vexation, he held himfast and kissed him.'What did you do that for?' he asked in a gruff astonished voice.'Never mind!' said Fernando. 'Only I think I see what this day can be!Now go.'Presently Mr. Audley came softly in. The lad's face was turned in tohis cushion, his handkerchief over it; and as the young priest stoodwatching him, what could be done but pray for the poor struggling soul?At last he turned round, and looked up.'I saw it again,' he said with a sigh.'Saw what?''What you all mean. It touched me, and seemed true and real when Lancewas singing. What was it--"Born to save the sons of earth"? Oh! butsuch as I am, and at my age, too!'And with a few words from Mr. Audley, there came such a disburtheningof self-accusation as before to Felix. It seemed as if the terribleeffects of his wilfulness at the inn--horrified as he was at them--wereless oppressive to his conscience than his treachery to his host in hisendeavour to gamble with the little boys. He had found a pair of dicein his purse when looking for the price of a Bible, and the sight hadawakened the vehement hereditary Mexican passion for betting, the baneof his mother's race. His father, as a clever man of the world, hatedand prohibited the practice; but Fernando had what could easily becomea frenzy for that excitement of the lazy south, and even while he hadseen it in its consequences, the intense craving for the amusement hadmastered him more than once, when loathing the dulness and wearinessof his confinement, and shrinking from the doctrines he feared toaccept. He knew it was dishonourable--yet he had given way; and hefelt like one utterly stained, unpardonable, hopeless: but there wasless exaggeration in his state of mind than in the early morning; andwhen Mr. Audley dwelt on the Hope of sinners, his eyes glistened andbrightened; and at the further words that held out to him the assurancethat all these sins might be washed away, and he himself enabled tobegin a new life, his looks shone responsively; but he shook his headsoon--'It went away from him,' he said; poor boy! 'it was too great andgood to be true.'Then Mr. Audley put prayer before him as a means of clinging evenblindly to the Cross that he was barely beginning to grasp, and theboy promised. He would do anything they would, could he but hope to befreed from the horrible weight of sense of hopeless pollution that hadcome upon him.For some days he did not seem able to read anything but the Gospels andthe Baptismal Service; and at length, after a long silence, he said,'Mr. Audley, if your sermon is finished, can you listen to me? May I bebaptized?'Then indeed the Curate's heart bounded, but he had to keep himselfrestrained. The father's consent he had secured beforehand, but hethought Fernando ought to write to him; and it was also needful toconsult the Rector as to the length of actual preparation and probation.Then, when the question came, 'Can I indeed be like Felix and Lancelot'the reply had to be cautious. 'You will be as entirely pardoned, asentirely belonging to the holiness within and without, as they; buthow far you will have the consciousness, I cannot tell; and it is veryprobable that your temptations may be harder. Guilt may be forgiven,while habits retain their power; and they have been guarded, taughtself-restraint, and had an example before them in their father, such asvery few have been blessed with.'Fernando sighed long and sadly, and said, 'Then you do not think itwill make much difference.''The difference between life and death! But you must expect to have tobelieve rather than feel. But go on, and it will all be clear.'The Rector was at first anxious to wait for definite sanction fromthe father; but as Mr. Audley was sure of the permission he hadreceived, and no letter could be had for several months, he agreed toexamine the lad, and write to the Bishop--a new Bishop, who had beenappointed within the last year, and who was coming in the spring for aConfirmation.Mr. Bevan was really delighted with the catechumen, and wrote warmly ofhim. The reply was, that if the Baptism could take place the day beforethe Confirmation, which was to be in a month's time, the Bishop himselfwould like to be present, and the youth could be confirmed the nextday. There was much that was convenient in this, for it gave time forFernando to make progress in moving about. He had made a start withinthe last week or two, was trying to use crutches, and had been out onfine days in a chair; and once or twice Lady Price had taken him fora drive, though she had never thought of doing so by Geraldine. Thedoctor said that change of air would probably quite restore his health;and he had only to wait to be a little less dependent before he was togo to a tutor, an old friend of the Audley family.Everything promised well; but one wet afternoon, in the interim betweenthe end of Lance's and that of Fulbert's holidays, Mr. Audley, whilecoming down from a visit to Mrs. Underwood, fancied he heard an ominousrattle, and opening the door suddenly, found Fernando and Fulberteagerly throwing the dice and with several shillings before them.Both started violently as he entered, and Fulbert put his arm and handround as if to hide the whole affair; while Fernando tried to lookcomposed.All that the Curate said in his surprise was one sharp sentence.'Fernando Travis, if you are to renounce the devil, you will have tobegin by throwing those dice into the fire.'Fernando's eyes looked furious, and he swept the dice and the moneyinto his pocket--all but three shillings. Fulbert stole out of the roomquietly. No doubt these were his winnings, which he did not dare totouch.Mr. Audley took up a book and waited, fully expecting that sorrow wouldfollow; but Fernando did not speak; and when at length he did on someindifferent matter, it was in his ordinary tone. Well, there must bepatience. No doubt repentance would come at night! No; the eveningpassed on, and Fernando was ready for all their usual occupations.Perhaps it would come with Felix, or in the dawn after a troublednight. Alas! no. And moreover, Felix, to whom it was necessary tospeak, was exceedingly angry and vexed, and utterly incredulous ofthere being any good in the character that could be so fickle, if notdeceitful and hypocritical. His own resolute temper had no power ofcomprehending the unmanliness of erring against the better will; hewas absolutely incapable of understanding the horrible lassitude andcraving for excitement that must have tempted Fernando, and he washard and even ashamed of himself for having ever believed in the lad'ssincerity.This anger too made him speak with such a threatening tone to Fulbert,as to rouse the doggedness of the boy's nature. All that could be gotout of Fulbert was that 'his going there was all Felix's doing,' and hewould not manifest any sign of regret, such as would be any securityagainst his introducing the practice among the clergy orphans, orcontinuing it all his life. He was not a boy given to confidences, andneither Wilmet nor Cherry could get him beyond his glum declarationthat it was Felix's fault, he only wanted to keep out of the fellow'sway. They could only take comfort in believing that he was reallyashamed, and that he suffered enough within to be a warning against thevice itself.As to Fernando, he made no sign, he went on as if nothing had happened;and nothing was observable about him, but that he showed himselfintensely weary of his present mode of life, put on at times themanners that were either those of the Spanish Don or of the IndianCacique, and seemed to shrink from the prospect of the English tutor.Yet he continued his preparation for baptism, and Mr. Bevan wassatisfied with him; but Mr. Audley was perplexed and unhappy over thereserve that had sprung up between them, and could not decide whetherto make another attempt or leave the lad to himself.One afternoon, only ten days from the time fixed for the Bishop'svisit, Mr. Audley returned from a clerical meeting to find anunexpected visitor in the room--namely, Alfred Travis, Fernando'suncle, a more Americanized and rougher person than his brother. He roseas he entered. 'Good morning, Mr. Audley; you have taken good care ofyour charge. He is fit to start with me to-morrow. See a surgeon intown--then to Liverpool--''Indeed!' Mr. Audley caught a deprecating look from Fernando. 'Do youcome from his father?''Well--yes and no. His father is still in the Oregon; but he and I havealways been one--and opening the boy's letters, and finding him readyto move, I thought, as I had business in England, I'd come and fetchhim, and just settle any claim the fellow at yonder hotel may havecheek enough to set up, since Fernan was green enough to let it out.''May I ask if you have any authority from his father?''Authority! Bless you! William will be glad to see his boy; we don't goby authority between brothers.''Because,' continued Mr. Audley, 'I heard from your brother that hewished Fernando to remain with me to receive an English education.''All sentiment and stuff! He knew better before we had sailed! AnEnglish squire in this wretched old country, forsooth! when the newrepublic is before him! No, no, Mr. Audley, I'll be open with you. Isaw what you were up to when I got your letter, and Fernan--Got hislesson very well, he had. And when I came down, a friend in London gaveme another hint. It won't do, I can assure you. That style of thing isall very well for you spruce parsons of good family, as you call it inthe old country; but we are not going to have a rising young fellowlike this, with a prospect of what would buy out all your squires andbaronets in the old country, beslobbered and befooled with a lot ofPuseyite cant. You've had your turn of him; it is time he should comeand be a man again.'Mr. Audley was dizzy with consternation. Fernando was no child. He wasfull sixteen, and he was so far recovered that his health formed noreason for detaining him. If he chose to go with his uncle, he must.If not--what then? He looked at Fernando, who sat uneasily.'You hear what your uncle says?' he asked.'I told him,' said Fernando, 'I must wait for a fortnight.' He spokewith eyes cast down, but not irresolutely.His uncle broke out--He knew what that meant; it was only that he mightbe flattered by the Bishop and all the ladies, and made a greater foolof than ever. No, no, he must be out again by May, and he should justhave time to take Fernan to one of the gay boarding-houses at Saratoga,and leave him there to enjoy himself.'I have letters from my father,' said Fernando, looking up to Mr.Audley, 'before he went to Oregon. He said nothing.''Do you wish to stay?' said Mr. Audley, feeling that all depended onthat, and trying to hide the whirl of anxiety and disappointment hefelt.The answer was not what he expected. Fernando sat upright in his chair,looked up to him and then at his uncle, and said low but resolutely, 'Iwill stay.''Then you shall stay,' said Mr. Audley.'You have worked upon him, I see, Sir, with your old-world prejudicedsuperstition,' said Alfred Travis, evidently under the delusion that hewas keeping his temper. 'A proper fool my brother was to leave him toyou. But you do it at your peril. I shall see if there's power even inthis old country to keep a boy from his own relations. You'll see meagain, Fernan. You had better make ready.'The words were not unaccompanied with expletives such as had never beenpersonally uttered to Charles Audley before, and that brought the hotcolour to his cheek. When he looked round, Fernando's face was coveredwith his hands. 'Oh! Mr. Audley,' he cried, as his uncle hastily shutthe door, 'is he going to send for the police?''I do not believe he can do any such thing,' said Mr. Audley, seeingthat Fernando was in great nervous agitation. 'I have authority fromyour father, he has none; and you are old enough to make your owndecision. You really mean and wish to stay?' he added.'I told him so from the first,' said Fernando.'Then he has no power to force you away.'Fernando was silent. Then he said, 'If I could have gone after myBaptism.''Would you have wished that?' said Mr. Audley, somewhat disappointed.The tears were now on the long black lashes.'Oh, don't think me ungrateful, or-- But this English life does comeover me as intolerably dull and slow. No life nor go in it. SometimesI feel sick of it; and going back to books and all, after what Ihave been used to. If my uncle could wait for my Baptism, or,' morehesitating, 'if I could be baptized at once. Men do lead Christianlives out there. I would try to keep from evil, Mr. Audley. I see yourface! Is this another temptation of the devil?''I think it is an attempt of his,' said Mr. Audley, sadly. 'Even hereyou have not been able to abstain entirely from giving way to your oldpassion, when you had little temptation, and felt your honour bound.What will it be when you have comparatively no restraint?''I am resolved not to go unbaptized,' said Fernando. 'I said so fromthe first, but he will not wait! Yet if my father sends for me, I mustgo.''Then it will be your duty, and you will have more right to look forhelp. Besides, a summons from your father could not come for three orfour months, and in that time you would have had time to gain somethingin Christian practice and training.''Oh, there is the bell! Must you go, Mr. Audley? He will come back!''I wish I could stay, but Smith is gone to Dearport, and I do not knowwhether the Rector is in. Besides, this must be your own doing, Fernan,not mine. I shall pray for you, that you well know. Pray for yourself,for this is a real crisis of life. God bless you, my dear boy.' He laidhis hand on the head, and Fernando looked up gratefully, then said,'You never did that before. May Lance come to me, if he has not gone?''I will call him,' said Mr. Audley, seeing that he really dreaded beingalone. The little boy was on the stairs with something in his hand. 'Goin to Fernan,' he was told; 'he wants you. What have you got there?''This queer drawing. Cherry found it in an old portfolio, and has beencopying it.'It was Retzsch's outline of the chess-player, and it almost startledMr. Audley by its appropriateness. He went out to Evensong, and neverwas more glad to get back to reinforce the feeble garrison.Lance opened the front door to him. 'I'm so glad you are come!' hesaid. 'Mr. Bruce is there.''Not the uncle?''No, only Mr. Bruce.'Mr. Bruce was a lawyer, and a very respectable man, in whom Mr. Audleyfelt confidence. He rose at the clergyman's entrance, and asked tospeak to him in another room, so he was taken into the little backdining-room, and began--'This is a very unpleasant business, Mr.Audley; this gentleman is very much annoyed, and persuaded that he hasa right to carry off his nephew; but as I told him, it all turns uponthe father's expressions. Have you any written authority from him?'Mr. Audley had more than one letter, thanking him, and expressing fullsatisfaction in the proposed arrangements for Fernando; and this Mr.Bruce thought was full justification, together with the youth's owndecided wishes. The words were likewise clear, by which William Travishad given consent to his son's Baptism, but there was no witness ofthem. Mr. Bruce explained that Alfred Travis, who seemed to regardFernando as the common property of the brothers, had come to him inwhat he gently termed 'a great state of excitement,' complaining ofa Puseyite plot. He had evidently taken umbrage at the tone of theletters he had opened for his brother, and had been further prejudicedby some Dearport timber-merchant he had met at Liverpool, who had toldhim how the parson had got hold of his nephew, and related a farrago ofgossip about St. Oswald's. He was furious at the opposition, and couldnot understand that law in the old country was powerless in this case,because he was neither father nor guardian. In fact he seemed to bemaster of his brother; and Mr. Bruce told Mr. Audley that it was quiteto be considered whether though law was on his side now, the fathermight not be brought over to the brother's side, be very angry at thedetention of the boy, and refuse the payment, which, while he was inAmerica, could not be forced from him. Of that Mr. Audley could happilyafford to run the risk; and Mr. Bruce said he had also set before theyoung gentleman that he might have to suffer much displeasure fromhis father for his present refusal, although his right to make it wasincontestable. To this Fernando had likewise made up his mind; and Mr.Bruce, who had never seen him before, thought he looked utterly unfitfor a long journey and sea voyage, so that the uncle had taken nothingby his application to the law.Fernando was flushed and panting, but more resolute, for resentment atthe attempt at force had come to back him up, and rouse the spirit ofresistance. Not half an hour had elapsed before there was another ringat the door. The uncle and lawyer were come together now. It was tomake a last offer to Fernando; Mr. Alfred Travis offered to take him upto London the next day, and there to have advice as to the safety ofthe voyage, in the meantime letting him be baptized, if nothing elsewould satisfy him, but by some London clergyman--not one of the Bexleyset whom the uncle regarded with such aversion.Fernando drew himself up, and stood, leaning on the end of the sofa.'Thank you, uncle,' he said, 'I cannot. I am obeying my father now, andI will not leave those to whom he trusted me.'There followed a volley of abuse of his English obstinacy and Spanishpride and canting conceit, which made Mr. Bruce stand aghast, andFernando look up with burning cheeks and eyes glowing like hot coals;but with the Indian impassibility he did not speak till Alfred Travishad threatened him not only with his father's displeasure, but withbeing cast off by both, and left to his English friends' charity.'My father will not!' said Fernando. 'If he sends for me I will come.'But there his strength suddenly collapsed, and he was forced to sitdown and lean back.'Well, Fernan,' said his uncle, suddenly withdrawing his attempt whenhe found it vain, 'you seem hardly in marching order, so I'm off by thenight train; but if you change your mind in the next week, write tome at Peter Brown's--you know--and I'll run down. I will save you thecoming out by yourself. Good-bye.'Mr. Bruce tarried one moment to aver that he was unprepared for hisclient's violence, and that he thought the nephew had done quite right.The door was shut, and Mr. Audley came back holding out his hand, butFernando did not take it. He was occupied in supporting himself bythe furniture from the sofa to the fire-place, where, holding by themantelpiece with one hand, he took his dice from his pocket with theother, and threw them into the reddest depth. Then he held the hand toMr. Audley, who wrung it, and said, 'It has been a hard fight, my boy.'Fernando laid his weary head on his shoulder, and said, 'If my fatheris not poisoned against me!''Do not fear that, Fernando. You are where he left you. You have givenup something for the sake of your new Lord and Master; you will havehis armour another time.'Fernando let himself be helped to sit down, and sighed. He wasthoroughly worn out, and his victory was not such as to enliven hisspirits. He took up the drawing that lay on the table, and gazed on itin a sort of dreamy fascination.'You have checked him this time,' said Mr. Audley.'Here or there, I will never bet again,' said Fernan solemnly. 'Godhelp me to keep the resolution! It is the one thing that I care for,and I know I should have begun the first day I was away from you.''I think that with those tastes you cannot make too strong a resolutionagainst it,' said Mr. Audley.Their dinner was brought in, but Fernando had no appetite. He soonreturned to his chess-player, and seemed to be playing over the game,but he was too much tired for talk, and soon went to bed; where aftera short sleep feverishness set in, bringing something approaching todelirium. The nurse had gone a fortnight previously; but as he wasstill too helpless to have no one within call, Felix slept on the bedin the corner of the room.When he came down the opening of the door was greeted by 'Don't let himcome! Is Mr. Audley there?''Yes, he is not gone.'Then he knew Felix, but soon began again to talk of the game at chess,evidently mixing up his uncle with the personage with the long feather.'He has been checked once. I've taken one piece of his. He is gone now.Will he come back after my Baptism? No; I shall go to him.'This lasted till past midnight, when, as they were deliberatingwhether to send for Mr. Rugg, he fell soundly asleep, and awoke in themorning depressed, but composed and peaceful; and this state of thingscontinued. The encounter with his uncle, and the deliberate choice, hadapparently given some shock to his nerves; and whenever night recurred,there came two or three hours of misery, and apparently of temptationand terror. It took different forms. Sometimes it was half insleep--the acting over again of one or two horrible scenes that he hadpartly witnessed in the Southern States, when an emancipator had beenhunted down, and the slaves who had listened to him savagely punished.In spite of his Spanish blood, the horror had been ineffaceable;and his imagination connected it with the crowd of terrors that hadrevealed themselves to his awakened conscience. He seemed to think thatif he lost in the awful game of life, he should be handed over to thatterrible slave-master; and there were times when Diego's fate, and hisown lapses, so fastened on his mind, as to make him despair of everbeing allowed to quit that slave-master's dominions; and that againjoined with alarm lest his uncle should return and claim him.Sometimes, likewise, the old wandering life, with the flashes ofrollicking mirth and excitement, rather glimpsed at and looked forwardto than really tasted, would become so alluring a contrast to the flatand tasteless--nay, as it seemed to him, tedious and toilsome--futuresketched out for him; and the restraints and constant watchfulness ofa Christian's life appeared so distressing a bondage, that his soulseemed to revolt against it, and he would talk of following his uncleat once to London while yet it was time, and writing to him the nextmorning. This state was sure to be followed by a passion of remorse,and sheer delirious terror lest he should be given up to the enemy,who seemed now to assume to his fancy the form of his uncle. A greatdeal was no doubt delirious, and this betrayed the struggles which hehad been for weeks fighting out in silence and apparent impassiveness;but it was impossible not to feel that therewith was manifested thewrestling with the Prince of Darkness, ere his subject should escapefrom his territory, and claim the ransom of his manumission. Mr.Audley--after the second night--would not let Felix remain, but tookthe watch entirely on himself, and fought the battle with the foeby prayer and psalm. Sleep used to come before morning; and by dayFernando was himself again, very subdued and quiet, and, in fact,having lost a good deal of ground as to health.Strange to say, the greatest pleasure he had at this time was sittingin the upstairs parlour. The custom had begun in consequence of hisnervous shuddering at being left alone lest his uncle should return,and Felix and Geraldine had then proposed taking him to their mother,who was rather interested than annoyed by his presence, and indeedall her gentle motherly instinct was drawn out by his feebleness andlameness; she talked to him kindly and quite rationally, and he waswonderfully impressed and soothed by her tenderness. It was so utterlyunlike anything he had ever even seen, that he watched her with a sortof awe; while Cherry worked, read aloud, or drew, and felt proud ofbeing able to fetch what was beyond the capacity of her little errandboy, Bernard.The children, too, entertained him; he was a little afraid of Bernard'sroughness, but delighted in watching him, and he and little Stellawere intensely admiring friends. She always knew him, cooed at him,and preferred the gold of his watch-chain to all things in nature orart. Then when Wilmet, Angela, and Lance came home, and family chatterbegan, the weary anxious brain rested; and even in that room, so sadto most eyes, Fernando began to realise what Christian peace andcheerfulness could be.CHAPTER VIII.THE HOME.'Within those walls each fluttering guestIs gently lured to one safe nest;Without, 'tis moaning and unrest.'Keble.A great delight came to Wilmet and Geraldine the day of the Bishop'svisit, no other than Alda's being able to spend a week with them. MissPearson spared Wilmet that whole afternoon, that she might go up tomeet her at the station, whither she was escorted by a maid going downto Centry.There she was, in her pretty black silk, with violet trimmings, lookingthoroughly the grown young lady, but clinging tight to her twin in anoverflow of confused happiness, even while they stood together to gettheir first glance of the Bishop, who came down by the same train, andwas met by Mr. Bevan with the carriage.'I'm glad it is so nice and warm; it is better for Fernan, and Cherrycan go!' said Wilmet, ready for joy about everything.'Nice and warm! 'Tis much colder than in London,' said Alda, with ashiver. 'Has Cherry kept well this winter?''Quite well. She walks much better. And Marilda?''Oh, Marilda is always well. Rude health, her mother calls it. What doyou think she has sent you, Wilmet? A darling little watch! just likethis of mine!''O Alda, you should not have let her. It is too much. Fernan wanted togive Lance a watch, but Felix would not let him.''Yes, but he is not like Uncle Thomas, and it makes you like me.''That we shall never be quite again,' sighed Wilmet.'Oh! a little setting off, and trimming up! I've brought down lots ofthings. Aunt Mary said I might. What is this youth like, Wilmet--is hea boy or a young man?''I don't know,' said Wilmet; 'he is younger than Felix, if that helpsyou.''Well, Americans are old of their age. I have met some at Mr. Roper's.Oh, and do you know, Mrs. Roper told Aunt Mary that these Travisesare quite millionaires, and that this youth's mother was a prodigiousMexican heiress. Aunt Mary wants to ask him to Kensington PalaceGardens, when he comes up to town! I'm glad I am in time for thechristening. Doesn't he have godfathers and godmothers?''Yes; he would have nobody but Felix and Mr. Audley, and Lady Pricechose to be his godmother; indeed, there was nobody else.''You could not well be, certainly,' laughed Alda. 'Oh! and I've broughta dress down. I thought some of us might be asked to the Rectory in theevening.''My dear Alda, as if such a thing ever happened!''Ah! you see I have been so long away as to forget my Lady's manners.''Mr. Audley is going, and Fernan was asked, but he is not anything likewell enough. So when Mamma and the little ones go to bed, we are tocome down and spend the evening with him.''Fancy, Wilmet, I have quite been preparing Marilda for herConfirmation. She had hardly been taught anything, and never could haveanswered the questions if she had not come to me. She is always askingme what Papa said about this and that; and it is quite awkward, shewill carry out everything so literally, poor dear girl.''She must be very good.''Oh! to be sure she is! But just fancy, she keeps a tithe of herpocket-money to give to the Offertory so scrupulously; she would reallynot buy something she wanted because it would have been just a shillinginto her tenth. I'm so glad she is confirmed. I never knew what todo at church before. I couldn't go home by myself, and now a servantalways waits for us. Oh! how fast the poor hotel is building again! Itwill brighten our street a little! Dear me, I did not know how dingy itwas!'Nothing could look dingy where two such fair bright faces were; butAlda's became awe-struck and anxious as she went up to her mother'sroom. Indeed Mrs. Underwood looked up at her rather confused, andscarcely knowing the fashionable young lady, and it was only when theplumed hat was laid aside, and the two heads laid together, theirfair locks mingling, that she knew she had her elder twins again, andstroked their faces with quiet delight.There was scarcely more than time to kiss the little ones, and contendwith Stella's shyness, before first Lance hurried in and then Felix,excused from his work two hours earlier. He could only just run up anddress before he convoyed Geraldine to church, she having the first turnof the chair, helped her to her seat near the Font, and then came backfor Fernando, who was under his special charge.Fernando sat looking very pale, and with the set expression of themouth that always made Cherry think of Indians at the stake. His littlenew prayer-book was in his hand, and he was grasping it nervously,but he said nothing, as Felix helped him up and Lance held his crutchfor him. It was his first entrance into a place of worship. They hadintended to have accustomed him a little to the sights and sounds, butthe weather and his ailment had prevented them. He was drawn to theporch, and there Felix partly lifted him out and up the step, whileLance took his hat for him, and as they were both wanted for the choirprocession that was to usher the Bishop into church, they had to leavehim in his place under Geraldine's protection.He had not in the least realised the effect of the interior of achurch. St. Oswald's was a very grand old building, with a deepchancel a good deal raised, seen along a vista of heavy columns andarched vaults, lighted from the clerestory, and with a magnificentchancel-arch. The season was Lent, and the colouring of the decorationswas therefore grave, but all the richer, and the light coming stronglyin from the west window immediately over the children's heads, madethe contrast of the bright sunlight and of the soft depths of mysterymore striking, and, to an eye to which everything ecclesiastical wasabsolutely new, the effect was almost overwhelming. That solemnity andsanctity of long centuries, the peaceful hush, the grave beauty andgrandeur, almost made him afraid to breathe, and Cherry sat by his sidewith her expressive face composed into the serious but happy look thataccorded with the whole scene.He durst not move or speak. His was a silent passive nature, exceptwhen under strong stimulus, and Cherry respected his silence a greatdeal too much to break upon it by any information. She was half sorrywhen the noise of steps showed that the congregation were beginningto drop in, chiefly of the other young Confirmation candidates. Thenpresently Alda came, and whispered to her that Wilmet could not leaveMamma; and presently after, Lady Price bustled in with her daughter,looked severely at Alda under the impression that she was Wilmetvery improperly tricked out, and pressed Fernando's hand beforegoing on to her own place. Then came the low swell of the organ,another new sensation to one who had only heard opera music; then theapproaching sound of the voices. Geraldine gave him the book open atthe processional psalm, and the white-clad choir passed by, one of thefirst pair of choristers being Lance, singing with all his might, andthat merry monkey-face full of a child's beautiful happy reverence. Andagain could be recognised Felix, Mr. Audley, Mr. Bevan, all whom thepoor sick stranger had come to love best, all to his present perceptionglorified and beautiful. They had told him it would be all faith and nosight, but he seemed to find himself absolutely within that brighterbetter sphere to which they belonged, to see them walking in it intheir white robes, to hear their songs of praise, and to know whencecame that atmosphere that they carried about with them, and that he hadfelt when it was a riddle to him.And so the early parts of the service passed by him, not so muchattended to or understood as filling him with a kind of dreamyrapturous trance, as the echoes of the new home, to which he, with allhis heavy sense of past stain and present evil propensity, was gainingadmission and adoption. For the first time he was really sensible ofthe happiness of his choice, and felt the compensation for what hegave up.When the Second Lesson was ended, and the clergy and the choir, intheir surplices, moved down to encircle the Font, it was as if theycame to gather him in among them. Felix came and helped him up. Hecould stand now with one support, and this was his young godfather'sright arm, to which he held tightly, but without any nervousconvulsiveness--he was too happy for that now--during the prayers thatentreated for his being safely gathered into the Ark, and the Gospel ofadmission into the Kingdom. He had an impulse to loose his clasp andstand alone at the beginning of the vows, but he could not; he had notwithdrawn his hand before he was forced again to lean his weight uponthe steady arm beside him.Nothing had been able to persuade Lady Price that she was not to makeall the vows as for an infant, but luckily nobody heard her except herhusband and the other sponsors, for it was a full, clear, steadfastvoice that made reply, 'I renounce them all!' and as the dark deepeyes gazed far away into the west window, and Felix felt the shudderthrough the whole frame, he knew the force of that renunciation; andhow it gave up that one excitement that the lad really cared for. Andwhen that final and carefully-guarded vow of obedience was uttered,the pressure on his arm seemed to show that the moral was felt of thatmoment's endeavour to stand alone.The sound of prayer, save in his own chamber, was so entirely new,that no doubt the force of the petitions was infinitely enhanced, andthe entreaty for the death of the old Adam had a definite applicationto those old habits and tastes that at times exerted their force. Theright hand was ready and untrembling when the Rector took it; thestream of water glittered as it fell on the awe-struck brow and jettyhair, and the eyes shone out with a deep resolute lustre as 'FerdinandAudley' was baptized into the Holy Name, and sworn a faithful soldierand servant.He had begged to be baptized by the English version of his name; theSpanish one had grown up by a sort of accident, and had always beenregretted by his father. He had wished much to take the name of Felix,but they were so certain that this would not be approved, that theyhad persuaded him out of it. He was soon set down again by Geraldine'sside; and she put out her hand and squeezed his hard, looking up intohis face with tearful eyes of welcome.When the last sounds of the voluntary had died away, and thecongregation had gone, she ventured again to look up at him and say, 'Iam so glad!''Why did you never tell me it was like this?' he said. 'I should neverhave hung back one moment. Now nothing can touch me, since I belong tothis.''Nothing can really,' said Geraldine softly. 'Above all, when it issealed to us to-morrow.'Then there came a movement from the vestry, and the Rector and Mr.Audley were seen following the Bishop, who came down to where the twolame children still sat together, and putting his hand upon Ferdinand'shead with the hair still wet, gave him his blessing before he spokefurther. It was only a word or two of congratulation, but such as to govery deep; and then, seeing that the boy looked not excited, but wornand wearied, he added, 'You are going home to rest. I shall see youto-morrow after the confirmation;' and then he shook hands with him andwith Geraldine, asking if she were the little girl of whom he had beentold.'She is very young,' said Mr. Bevan, strongly impressed with thelittleness of the figure; 'but she has been a Communicant for more thana year, and she is--a very good child.''I can believe so,' said the Bishop, smiling to her. 'I have heard ofyour father, my dear, and of your brother.'Cherry coloured rosy red, but was much too shy to speak; and the Rectorand Bishop went away, leaving only Mr. Audley.'Are you very much tired, Fernan?''I don't know,' he half smiled.'I think he is; he is too happy to know it,' said Geraldine. 'Pleaselet him go home first.'So Mr. Audley helped him out to the chair, where Felix, Alda, and Lancewere waiting; and he said, 'Thank you,' and held out his hand, whileLance eagerly shook it, saying, 'Now it is right at last; and here'sAlda--isn't she a stunner?''I thought it was Wilmet,' said Fernan; and Alda went into church tokeep Cherry company, thinking how curiously blind the male sex were notto distinguish between her dress and poor dear Wilmet's.Mr. Audley was more than satisfied, he was surprised and comforted. Hehad prepared to meet either disappointment or excitement in his charge;he found neither--only a perfect placid content, as of one who hadfound his home and was at rest. The boy was too much tired, after hismany bad nights and the day's exertion, to say or think much; all hedid say was, 'I shall mind nothing now that I know what it is to be oneof you.'Mr. Audley tried to remember that there must be a reaction, but hecould not bring himself to fear or to warn, or do anything but enjoythe happiest day of his three years' ministry.He had to go to the Rectory dinner-party, and leave his neophyte tothe tendance of the Underwoods. Felix sat with his friend in a greatcalm silence, while the rest were taken up by the counter-attractionupstairs, where Alda was unpacking an unrivalled store of presents fromherself and Marilda, useful and ornamental, such as seemed a perfectembarras de richesses to the homely, scantily-endowed children. Thatlittle gold watch was the prize and wonder of all. It was the firstin the family, except that Felix wore his father's, and Alda knewhow an elder girl was scorned at school if she had none; but Wilmet,though very happy with hers, smiled, and would not agree to havingmet with disrespect for want of it. Then there were drawing-booksfor Cherry, and a knife of endless blades for Lance, and toys forthe little ones; and dresses--a suit for Wilmet like Alda's plainestSunday one, and Alda's last year's silk for Geraldine, and somecharming little cashmere pelisses--Aunt Mary's special present to thetwo babies--things that would lengthen Wilmet's purse for many a dayto come; and a writing-case for Felix; and all the absent remembered,too. Uncle Thomas had given Alda a five-pound note to buy presents,and Marilda had sent every one something besides, mostly of such amatter-of-fact useful type that Alda stood and laughed at them. AndMrs. Underwood was pleased with the exhibition, and smiled and admired,only her attention was tired out at last, and she was taken early toher own room.The elder ones went down to sit round the fire in Mr. Audley's room,where Ferdinand insisted on leaving his sofa to Geraldine, and betakinghimself to the easy-chair, where he leant back, content and happy towatch the others through his eye-lashes. Alda was a little on hercompany manners at the first, but all the others were at perfectease, as they sat in the dim light. Felix on the floor by Cherry, whodelighted in a chance of playing fondling tricks with his hair andfingers; the twins in Mr. Audley's big chair, where they could leanagainst each other; and Lance cross-legged on the hearth-rug roastingchestnuts, of which a fellow chorister had given him a pocketful, andfeeding every one in turn.Geraldine gave a sigh to the wish that poor dear Edgar were there.'He is very happy!' said Alda.'Oh yes, but I wish he had not missed being here to-morrow. I wonderwhen he will come home.''I cannot guess; Aunt Mary wants to go down the Rhine next summer (onlyshe is not quite sure it is not the Rhone), and if so, I suppose hewould join us there.''It is a whole year since we have set eyes on him,' said Felix.'But I believe he writes more to Cherry than anybody, does not he?''Oh yes, and sends me lovely photographs to copy. Such a beauty ofhimself! Have you seen it?''I should think I had! They have set it up in a little gold frame onthe drawing-room table, and everybody stands and says how handsome itis; and Aunt Mary explains all about him till I am tired of hearing it.''And Clem?''Oh, Clem came to luncheon yesterday. He is very much grown, and looksuncommonly demure, and as much disposed to set everybody to rights asever.'But Alda did not enter much more into particulars; she led away theconversation to the sights she had seen in their summer tour; and asshe had a good deal of descriptive power, she made her narratives sointeresting that time slipped quickly past, and the young company wasas much surprised as Mr. Audley was when he came home and found themall there, not yet gone to bed. They were greatly ashamed, and afraidthey had done Ferdinand harm, and all were secretly very anxious aboutthe night; but, though the wakeful habit and night feverishness werenot at once to be broken through, yet the last impression was thestrongest, and the long-drawn aisle, the 'dim religious light,' andthe white procession, were now the recurring images, all joyful, allrestful, truly as if the bird had escaped out of the snare of thefowler. Real sleep came sooner than usual, and Fernan rose quite equalto the fatigue of the coming day, the Confirmation day, when againGeraldine had to sit beside him--this newly admitted to the universalbrotherhood, instead of being beside that dear Edgar of her own, forwhom her whole heart craved, as she thought how their preparation hadbegun together beside her father's chair.Their place was now as near the choir as possible, and they werebrought in as before, very early, so that Fernan gazed with the sameeager, unsated eyes into the chancel and at the altar, admitted as hewas farther into his true home.The church was filled with candidates from the villages round aswell as from the town, and the Litany preceded the rite which was toseal the young champions ere the strife. The Bishop came down to thetwo lame children, and laid his hands on the two bent heads, ere hegave his final brief address, exhorting the young people to guardpreciously, and preserve by many a faithful Eucharist, that mark whichhad sealed them to the Day of Redemption, through all this world's longhot trial and conflict.There was holiday at both schools, and Felix had been spared to takehis place in the choir, but Mr. Froggatt could not do without himafterwards, as the presence of so many of the country clergy in thetown was sure to fill the reading-room and shop; and he was obligedto hurry off as soon as he came out of church. Now, the Bishop hadthe evening before asked Lady Price 'whether that son of poor Mr.Underwood's' were present among the numerous smart folk who throngedher drawing-room, to which my lady had replied, 'No; he was a nice,gentlemanly youth certainly, but, considering all things, and how sadlyhe had lowered himself, she thought it better not. In fact, some mightnot be so well pleased to meet him.'The Bishop took the opportunity of trying to learn from the next personhe fell in with, namely, Mr. Ryder, how Felix had lowered himself;and received an answer that showed a good deal of the schoolmaster'sdisappointment, but certainly did not show any sense of Felix'sdegradation. And what he said was afterwards amplified by Mr. Audley,whom the Bishop took apart, and questioned with much interest uponboth Ferdinand Travis and the Underwood family, of whom he had onlyheard, when, immediately after his appointment, his vote for the orphanschool had been solicited for the two boys, and he had been asked tosubscribe to the Comment on the Philippians. Mr. Audley felt that hehad a sympathizing listener, and was not slow to tell the whole storyof the family--what the father had been, what Felix now was, and howhis influence and that of little Lancelot had told upon their younginmate. The Bishop listened with emotion, and said, 'I must see thatboy! Is the mother in a state in which she would like a call from me?'but there an interruption had come; and when the country clergy came inthe morning, Mr. Audley had thought it fittest not to swell the numbersunnecessarily, and had kept himself out of the way, and tried to keephis fellow-curate.So he had seen no more of the Bishop, until, some little time after heand Fernan had lunched, and were, it must be confessed, making up fortheir unrestful nights by having both dropped asleep, one on his chair,the other on the sofa, there came a ring to the door, and Lance, whohad a strong turn for opening it, found himself face to face with thesame tall grey-haired gentleman at whom he had gazed in the rochet andlawn-sleeves. He stood gazing up open-mouthed.'I think I have seen you in the choir, and heard you too,' said theBishop, kindly taking Lance's paw, which might have been cleaner had heknown what awaited it. 'Mr. Audley lives here, I think.'Lance was for once without a word to say for himself, though hismouth remained open. All he did was unceremoniously to throw wide Mr.Audley's door, and bolt upstairs, leaving his Lordship to usher himselfin, while Mr. Audley started up, and Ferdinand would have done thesame, had he been able, before he was forbidden.There was a kindly talk upon his health and plans, how he was toremain at Bexley till after Easter and his first Communion, and thenMr. Audley would take him up to London to be inspected by a first-ratesurgeon before going down to the tutor's. The tutor proved to be anold school-fellow and great friend of the Bishop; and what Fernanheard of him from both the friend and pupil would have much diminishedhis dread, even if he had not been in full force of the feeling thatwhatever served to bind him more closely to the new world of blessingwithin the Church must be good and comfortable.This visit over, the Bishop asked whether Mrs. Underwood would liketo be visited, and Mr. Audley went up to ascertain. She was a womanwho never was happy or at rest in an untidy room, or in disorderedgarments, and all was in as fair order as it could be with the oldfurniture, that all Wilmet's mending could not preserve from the vergeof rags. Her widow's cap and soft shawl were as neat as possible, andso were the little ones in their brown-holland, Theodore sitting at herfeet, and Stella on Wilmet's lap, where she was being kept out of theway of the more advanced amusement of a feast of wooden tea-things,carried on in a corner between Angela and Bernard, under Lance'ssomewhat embarrassing patronage.Alda sprang up, stared about in consternation at the utter unlikenessto the drawing-room in Kensington Palace Gardens, and exclaimed, 'Oh!if Sibby had only come to take the children out! Take them away, Lance.''Sibby will come presently, or I will take them to her,' whisperedWilmet. 'I should like them just to have his blessing.''So many,' sighed Alda; but meantime Mr. Audley had seen that all wasright at the first coup d'oeil, had bent over Mrs. Underwood, toldher that the Bishop wished to call upon her, and asked her leave tobring him up; and she smiled, looked pleased, and said, 'He is verykind. That is for your Papa, my dears. You must talk to him, you know.'The Bishop came up almost immediately, and the perfect tranquillity andabsence of flutter fully showed poor Mrs. Underwood's old high-bredinstinct. She was really gratified when he sat down by her, aftergreeting the three girls, and held out his hands to make friends withthe lesser ones, whom their sisters led up, Angela submissive andpretty behaved, Bernard trying to hide his face, and Stella in Wilmet'sarms staring to the widest extent of eyes. The sisters had theirwish--the fatherless babes received the pastoral blessing; and theBishop said a few kind words of real sympathy that made Mrs. Underwoodlook up at him affectionately and say, 'Indeed I have much to bethankful for. My children are very good to me.''I am sure they are,' said the Bishop. 'I cannot tell you how much Irespect your eldest son.'The colour rose in the pale face. 'He is a very dear boy,' she said.'I should like to see him before I go. Is he at home?''Lance shall run and call him,' said Alda; but the Bishop had askedwhere he was, and Wilmet had, not unblushingly, for she was red withpleasure, but shamelessly, answered that he was at Mr. Froggatt's,offering to send Lance in search of him.'I had rather he would show me the way,' said the Bishop. 'Will you, myboy?'The way to Mr. Froggatt's was not very long, but it was long enough toovercome Lance's never very large amount of bashfulness; and he hadmade reply that he went to the Grammar School, and was in the secondform, that he liked singing in the choir better than--no, not thananything--anything except--except what? Oh a jolly good snow-balling,or a game at hockey. Did he like the school? Pretty well, on the whole;but he did not suppose he should stay there long, his brother at theClergy Orphan said there was such a lot of cads, and that he was alwaysgrubbing his nose among them; but now, 'do you really think now thatcads are always such bad fellows?'His Lordship was too much diverted to be easily able to speak, but heobserved that it depended on what was meant by a cad.'That's just it!' exclaimed Lance. 'I'm sure some that he calls cadsare as good fellows as any going.''And what does your eldest brother say?''Felix! Oh! he does not mind, as long as one does not get into a realscrape.''And then?''Oh, then he minds so much that one can't do it, you know.''What, does he punish you?''N--no--he never licks any of us now--but he is so horridly sorry--andit bothers him so,' said Lance. 'Here's old Froggatt's,' he concluded,stopping at the glass door. 'My eyes! what a sight of parsons!' (Lancehad pretty well forgotten whom he was talking to.) 'There, that'sFelix--no, no, not that one serving Mr. Burrowes, that's Redstone;Felix is out there, getting out the sermon paper for that fat one, andthat's old Froggy himself, bowing away. Shall I go and call Felix? Isuppose he will not mind this time.''No, thank you, I will go in myself. Good-bye, my little guide, andthank you.'And Lance, when his hand came out of the Bishop's, found somethingin it, which proved to be a tiny Prayer-book, and moreover ahalf-sovereign. He would have looked up and thanked, but the Bishop andthat 'fat one' were absorbed in conversation on the step; and when heturned over the leaves of the little blue morocco book, with its inlaidred cross, he found full in his face, in the first page, the words,'Lancelot Underwood, March 15th, 1855,' and then followed an initial,and a name that utterly defeated Lance's powers, so that perceiving theshop to be far too densely full of parsons for him to have a chancethere, he galloped off at full speed to Cherry, who happily couldinterpret the contracted Latin by the name of the See, and was notquite so much astonished as Lance, though even more gratified.Meantime, the Bishop had made his way to the bowing Mr. Froggatt, andasked to speak with him in his private room, where he mentioned hiskindness to young Underwood, and was answered by a gratified disclaimerof having done anything that was not of great advantage to himself.The good man seemed divided between desire to do justice to Felix andnot to stand in his light, and alarm lest he should have to lose anassistant whom he had always known to be above his mark, and who wasgrowing more valuable every month; and he was greatly relieved anddelighted when the Bishop only rejoiced at his character of Felix, andcomplimented the Pursuivant by being glad that a paper of such goodprinciples should be likely to have such a youth on its staff; it hadbeen well for the lad to meet with so good a friend. Mr. Froggatt couldnot be denied an eulogium on the father, for whose sake he had firstnoticed the son; and when the Bishop had expressed his sorrow at neverhaving known so bright a light as all described the late Curate to havebeen, he courteously regretted the interruption on a busy day, but hebegged just to see the young man. He had little time himself, 'but ifhe could be spared to walk up to the station--'Mr. Froggatt bustled out with great alacrity, and taking the charge ofthe customer on himself, announced, for the benefit of all who might bewithin earshot: 'Mr. Underwood, his Lordship wishes to speak with you.He wishes you to walk up to the station with him. You had better go outby the private door.'Felix was red up to the ears. His eight years' seniority to Lance wereeight times eight more shyness and embarrassment, but he could onlyobey; and at his first greeting his hand was taken--'hoped to have seenyou sooner,' the Bishop said; 'but you had always escaped me in thevestry.''I had to go to help my sister, my Lord,' said Felix.'And your friend,' said the Bishop. 'That is a good work that has beendone in your house.'Felix coloured more, not knowing what to say.'I wish to see you,' continued the Bishop, 'partly to tell you how muchI honour you for the step you have taken. I wish there were more whowould understand the true uprightness and dutifulness of thinking noshame of any honest employment. I am afraid you do sometimes meet withwhat may be trying,' he added, no doubt remembering Lady Price's tone.'I do not care now, not much. I did at first,' said Felix.'No one whose approval is worth having can consider yours really a lossof position. You are in a profession every one respects, and you seemto have great means of influence likely to be open to you.''So my father said, when he consented,' said Felix.'I shall always regret having just missed knowing your father. Somepassages in that book of his struck me greatly. But what I wished tosay was to ask whether there is any way in which I can be useful to youin the education of any of the younger ones, or--''Thank you, my Lord,' said Felix. 'I think you kindly voted for mybrothers last year for the Clergy Orphan school. Only one got in, andif you would vote again for little Lancelot--''My droll little companion, who Mr. Audley tells me did so much forthat poor young American.''Indeed he did,' said Felix. 'I doubt if any of us would have got athim but for Lance, who did not mean anything but good-nature all thetime.''He is just the boy I want for our Cathedral school.' And then hewent on to explain that a great reformation was going on. There wasa foundation-school attached to the Cathedral, with exhibitions atthe University, to which the Cathedral choristers had the firstclaim. There had been, of course, a period of decay, but an excellentPrecentor had been just appointed, who would act as head master; andthe singing-boys would be kept on free of expense after their voicesbecame unavailable, provided that by such time they had passed acertain examination. Such a voice as Lance's was sure to recommendhim; and besides, the Bishop said with a smile, he wanted to raise thecharacter of the school, and he thought there was the stuff here thatwould do so.Felix could only be thankful and rejoiced; but it was a pang to thinkof Lance being as entirely separated from home as was Clement; withno regular holidays, and always most needed at his post at the greatfestivals. There was something in his tone that made the Bishop say,'You do not like to part with him?''No, my Lord; but I am glad it should be so. My father was not happyabout--things here, and charged me to get my brothers away when Icould.''And as to holidays, you are near at hand, and most of the choir areof our own town. I think he may generally be spared for a good term ateach holiday time. The organist is very considerate in giving leave ofabsence, even if he should turn out to have a dangerously good voicefor solos. I will let you know when to send him up for examination,which he will pass easily. Good-bye. You must write to me if there isanything for me to do for you. One month more, and your father wouldhave been one of my clergy, remember.'Felix went back, flushed with gratification, and yet, to a certaindegree, with confusion, and not exactly liking the prospect of beinginterrogated as to what the Bishop had said to him: indeed, he nevertold the whole of it to any one but Cherry. Somehow, though Wilmet washis counsellor and mainstay, Geraldine was the sharer of all thoseconfidences that came spontaneously out of the full but reserved heart.Besides, Wilmet was at present in such a trance of enjoyment of hertwin sister, that she seemed scarcely able to enter into anything else.She went through her duties as usual, but with an effort to shake offher absorption in the thought of having Alda at home; and every momentshe was not in sight of her darling seemed a cruel diminution of herone poor fortnight. Indeed it was tte--ttes that her exclusivetenderness craved above all; and she was often disappointed that Aldashould be willing to go and visit Fernan Travis when they might havehad a quarter of an hour together alone. How much more selfish she musthave grown than Alda in this last half year!Alda's talk was indeed full of interest, and gave a much better notionof her way of life than her letters did. She seemed to have beenfully adopted as a daughter of the house, and to enjoy all the sameprivileges as Marilda; indeed, she had a good deal more credit withall varieties of teachers, since she learnt rapidly and eagerly; andMarilda, while encouraging her successes, without a shade of jealousy,made no attempt to conquer her own clumsiness and tardiness. Even 'AuntMary,' as Alda called Mrs. Thomas Underwood, often had recourse to Aldafor sympathy in her endeavours to be tasteful, and continually held herup as an example to Marilda.'And poor dear good woman,' said Alda, 'she has such a respect forUnderwood breeding and our education, that I believe I could persuadeher into anything by telling her it was what she calls "comifo."Even when she was going to get the boudoir done with apple-greenpicked out with mauve, enough to set one's teeth on edge, and Marildawould do nothing but laugh, she let me persuade her into a lovely palesea-green.''Is not sea-green too delicate for her?' asked Cherry.'Why, it was very wicked of Edgar, to be sure, but he said that itwas to suit the nymph reining in the porpoises. He made a sketch, andMarilda was delighted with it; she really is the most good-naturedcreature in the world.''She must be!' ejaculated Wilmet; 'but surely she ought not to likelaughing at her mother.''Oh, everybody laughs at Aunt Mary, and she hardly ever finds it out,and when she does, she does not mind! Even old Mrs. Kedge, her mother,does nothing but laugh at her for trying to be fine. Old Granny is nota bit by way of being a lady, you know; she lives in a little house inthe city with one maid, and I believe she rubs her own tables. I amsure she goes about in omnibuses, though she has lots of money; andMarilda is so fond of her, and so like her, only not so clever andshrewd.''But why does she live in such a small way?''Because she never was used to anything else, and does not like it. Shehates grand servants, and never will come to Kensington Palace Gardens;but she really is good-natured. She told Clement to drop in on herwhenever he likes, and bring any of his friends; and she always givesthem a superb piece of plum-cake, and once she took them to the Tower,and once to the Zoological Gardens, for she thinks that she cannot doenough to make up to them for being bred up to be little monks, withcords and sandals, and everything popish.''You don't let her think so?''Well, really when she has got a thing into her head nothing willuproot it; and, after all, they do carry things very far there, andClement goes on so that I don't wonder.''Goes on how?''Why, just fancy, the other day when Uncle Thomas fetched him in hisbrougham because I was coming home, there he sat at luncheon and wouldnot eat a scrap of meat.''Ah! it was a Wednesday in Lent,' said Cherry.'Only a Wednesday, you know; and there, with four or five strangepeople, too. One of them asked if he was a Catholic, and of courseClement looked very wise, and greatly pleased, and said, "Yes, hewas;" and that brought down Aunt Mary with her heavy artillery. "Blessme, Clement, you don't say so. Is Mr. Fulmort really gone over?""Yes," said Clem. (I know he did it on purpose.) "He is gone over topreach at St. Peter's." And then one of the gentlemen asked if Clemmeant Mr. Fulmort of St. Matthew's, Whittingtonia, and when he said"Yes, he lived in the clergy house," he began regularly to play himoff, asking the most absurd questions about fasts and feasts andvigils and decorations, and Clem answered them all in his prim littleself-sufficient way, just as if he thought he was on the high-road tobe St. Clement the Martyr, till I was ready to run away.''Couldn't you have given him a hint?' asked Wilmet.'My dear, have you lived twelve years with Clem without knowing thathints are lost on him?''Dear Clem, he is a very good steady-hearted little fellow,' saidCherry. 'It was very nice of him.''Well, I only hope he'll never come to luncheon again in Lent. Thereare times and seasons for everything, and certainly not for display!And to make it worse, Marilda is the most literal-minded girl. Fastingwas quite a new mind to her, for she never realises what she doesnot see; and she got Clem into a corner, where I heard him going on,nothing loth, about days of abstinence, out of Mr. Fulmort's lastcatechizing, I should think; and ended by asking what Cousin Edwarddid, so that I fully expected that I should find her eating nothing,and that I should be called to account.''And what did you tell her then?''Oh, you know I could say quite truly that he did not.''I don't think that was quite fair,' said Wilmet gravely. 'You know itwas only because he really could not.''You don't know how glad I was to have an answer that would hinder thehorrid commotion we should have had if Marilda had taken to fasting.And, after all, you know, Papa would have said minding her mother washer first duty.''Why did not you tell her that?''I have, dozens of times; but you know there are mothers and mothers,and nobody can always mind Aunt Mary, good soul! Marilda has just madeherself, with her own good rough plain sense. I wish she was a man,she would be a capital merchant like her father; but it is hard to bea great heiress, with nothing she really likes to do. She is alwayslonging to come down to Centry, and tramp about the lanes among thecottages.''Oh! I wish they would!''I don't think Aunt Mary will ever let them, she hates the country; andthough she likes to have a place for the name of the thing, she doesnot want to live there, especially where there are so many of us; andthen, Felix's situation!''For shame, Alda!''Well, I did not say anything myself. It is only Aunt Mary--it is veryfoolish of people, but, you see, they will. As to Marilda, I believeshe would like to stand behind the counter with him this minute.''Marilda is the oddest and best girl I ever heard of!''You may say that. And so ignorant she was! She had a greatvelvet-and-gold Church Service, and hardly guessed there was any Bibleor Prayer-Book besides. I am sure Felix cannot have had more work toteach that youth than I have had with Marilda. Such a jumble as she hadpicked up! She really had only little baby prayers to say, till she sawmy book.''What a blessing you must be to her!' said Wilmet, fondly looking ather sister.'Well, I do hope so. You must know she was regularly struck with dearPapa. I am sure he is the first saint in her calendar, and everythingis--"What did Cousin Edward say?" And when once she has made up hermind that a thing is right, she will blunder on through fire and water,but she will do it.''Then,' said Cherry, 'she ought to try and learn, and not to be awkwardbecause of obedience.'Alda burst out laughing. 'People can only do what they can. Marildatrying to be graceful would be worse than Marilda floundering her ownway. But she really is the best and kindest girl living, and she getson much better for having me to keep her out of scrapes.'Wilmet went to bed that night thankful to have Alda's head on thepillow beside her, and most thankful for the tokens that she watchedamong her brothers and sisters, which showed how much her father'sinfluence was extending beyond his short life.CHAPTER IX.THE THIRTEEN.'They closed around the fire,And all in turn essayed to paintThe rival merits of their saint;A theme that ne'er can tireA holy maid, for be it knownThat their saint's honour is their own.'Scott.The thirteen Underwoods did not meet again in the same house for manya long day, and when they did, it was on a grey misty morning in theChristmas week of the year following; and the blinds were down, andthe notes of the knell clashing out overhead, as the door was openedto Edgar, Alda, and Clement, as they arrived together, having beensummoned late on the previous night by a telegram with tidings thattheir mother had been struck by a paralysis. They knew what to expectwhen Felix, with one of the little ones on his arm, came quietly downthe stairs and admitted them. All they had to ask, was 'when,' and'how;' and to hear, that the long living death had ended in peacefulinsensibility at last. Then they followed him upstairs to the roomwhere the others sat, hushed, over their pen or their books, whereWilmet, her eyes gushing with quiet tears, held Alda in her embrace,and Geraldine, after her first eager kiss, gazed wistfully at Edgar asthough there must be comfort in the very sight of him, if she couldonly feel it; while the very little ones opened their puzzled eyes onthe new-comers as strangers.And so they were: Clement had indeed been at home in September, butAlda not for a year and three-quarters, nor Edgar since he first leftit three years before. The absence of the two latter was not by theirown choice; a doctor who had ordered Mrs. Thomas Underwood to spendthe summer months, year after year, at Spa was partly the cause; andmoreover, during the autumn and winter of 1856 Bexley had been aperfect field of epidemics. Measles and whooping-cough had run riot inthe schools, and lingered in the streets and alleys of the potteries,fastening on many who thought themselves secured by former attacks;and there had been a good many deaths, in especial Clement's chieffriend, Harry Lamb. Nobody, excepting the invalid mother, throughoutthe Underwood household, had escaped one or other disorder; and bothfell to the lot of the four little ones, and likewise of Mr. Audley,who was infinitely disgusted at himself, and at the guarded childhoodfor which he thus paid the penalty pretty severely. When matterswere at the worst, and Felix was laid up, and Wilmet found herselfsuccumbing, she had written in desperation to Sister Constance, whosepresence in the house had made the next three weeks a time of verypleasant recollections. Finally she had carried off Geraldine, Angela,and Bernard, to the convalescent rooms at St. Faith's, where theirhappiness had been such that the favourite sport of the little oneshad ever since been the acting of Sisters of Mercy nursing sick dolls.The quarantine had been indefinitely prolonged for the protgs ofKensington Palace Gardens; for the three at school, though kept awaytill all infection was thought to be over, had perversely caught themaladies as soon as they came home for the summer holidays; and indeedthe whole town and neighbouring villages were so full of contagion,that Mrs. Thomas Underwood had not far to seek for a plea for avoidingCentry.All this time, from day to day, the poor mother had been growing morefeeble, and it had been fully purposed that on Edgar's return atChristmas, on the completion of his studies at Louvaine, he and Aldashould make some stay at home; but the brother and sister were bothso useful and ornamental that their adopted home could not spare themuntil after a series of Christmas entertainments; and Clement had beenin like manner detained until the festival services at St. Matthew's nolonger required him. Indeed, when he had been at home in the autumn, hehad been scarcely recognized.For the last week, however, Mrs. Underwood had been much clearer inmind, had enjoyed the presence of her holiday children, and had for ashort time even given hopes that her constitution might yet rally, andher dormant faculties revive. She had even talked to Mr. Audley andGeraldine at different times as though she had some such presentimentherself, and had made some exertions which proved much increasedactivity of brain. Alas! though their coming had thus been renderedvery happy, the brightening had been but the symptom and precursor ofa sudden attack of paralysis, whence there was no symptom of recovery,and which in a few hours ended in death.For the present, the hopes that had been entertained gave poignancyto the sudden disappointment and grief, and the home children couldnot acquiesce in the dispensation with the same quiet reasonablenessas those who had been so long separated from them as not to missthe gentle countenance, or the 'sweet toils, sweet cares, for evergone.' Indeed Wilmet was physically much exhausted by her long hoursof anxiety, and went about pale-cheeked and tear-stained, quietlyattending to all that was needful, but with the tears continuallydropping; while Geraldine was fit for nothing but to lie still, unableto think, but feeling soothed as long as she could lay her hand uponEdgar and feel that he was near.So the whole thirteen were together again; and in the hush of theorphaned house there was a certain wonder and curiosity in their mutualexamination and comparison with one another and with the beings withwhom they had parted three years ago, at the period of their firstseparation. All were at a time of life when such an interval couldnot fail to make a vast alteration in externals. Even Geraldine hadgained in strength, and though still white, and with features toolarge for her face, startlingly searching grey eyes, and brows thatlooked strangely thick, dark, and straight, in contrast with thepencilled arches belonging to all the rest, she was less weird andelfin-like than when she had been three inches shorter, and dressedmore childishly. As Edgar said, she was less Riquet with a tuft thanthe good fairy godmother, and her twin sisters might have been herprincess-wards, so far did they tower above her--straight as fir-trees,oval faced, regular featured, fair skinned, blue eyed, and brighthaired. During those long dreary hours, Edgar often beguiled thetime with sketches of them, and the outlines--whether of chiselledprofiles, shapely heads, or Cupid's-bow lips--were still almost exactlysimilar; yet it had become impossible to mistake one twin for theother, even when Alda had dressed the tresses on Wilmet's passive headin perfect conformity with her own. Looking at their figures, Alda'sair of fashion made her appear the eldest, and Wilmet might have beena girl in the school-room; but comparing their faces, Wilmet's placidrecollected countenance, and the soberness that sat so well on herwhite smooth forehead and steady blue eyes, might have befitted manymore years than eighteen. There were not nearly so many lights andshades in her looks as in those of Alda and Geraldine. The one had bothmore smiles and more frowns, the other more gleams of joy and of pain;each was more animated and sensitive, but neither gave the same senseof confidence and repose.As usually happens when the parents are of the same family, theinventory of the features of one of the progeny served for almost allthe rest. The differences were only in degree, and the prime specimenswere without doubt the two elder twins and Edgar, with like promise oflittle Bernard and Stella.Edgar had grown very tall, and had inherited his father's advantagesof grace and elegance of figure, to which was added a certaindistinguished ease of carriage, and ready graciousness, too simpleto be called either conceit or presumption, but which looked as ifhe were used to be admired and to confer favours. Athletics had beenthe fashion with him and his English companions, and his complexionwas embrowned by sun and wind, his form upright and vigorous; andby force of contrast it was now perceived that Felix seemed to havealmost ceased growing for the last three years, and that his in-dooroccupations had given his broad square shoulders a kind of slouch,and kept his colouring as pink and white as that of his sisters. LikeWilmet, he had something staid and responsible about him, that, evenmore than his fringe of light brown whiskers, gave the appearance offull-grown manhood; so that the first impression of all the new-comerswas how completely he had left the boy behind him, making it an effortof memory to believe him only nineteen and a half. But they all knewhim for their head, and leant themselves against him. And in themeantime, Edgar's appearance was a perfect feast of enjoyment, notonly to little loving Geraldine, but to sage Felix. They recreatedthemselves with gazing at him, and when left alone together woulddiscuss his charms in low confidential murmurs, quite aware that Wilmetwould think them very silly; but Edgar was the great romance of both.Edgar observed that Clement had done all the growth for both himselfand Felix, and was doing his best to be a light of the Church byresembling nothing but an altar-taper. When they all repaired to theback of the cupboard door in Mr. Audley's room to be measured, his headwas found far above Edgar's mark at fourteen, and therewith he was lankand thin, not yet accustomed to the length of his own legs and arms,and seeming as if he was not meant to be seen undraped by his surplice.His features and face were of the family type, but a little smaller,and with much less of the bright rosy tinting; indeed, when not excitedhe was decidedly pale, and his eyes and hair were a little lighter thanthose of the rest. It was a refined, delicate, thoughtful face, prettyrather than handsome, and its only fault was a certain melancholysuperciliousness or benignant pity for every one who did not belong tothe flock of St. Matthew's.Regular features are always what most easily lose individuality, andbecome those of the owner's class; and if Clement was all chorister,Fulbert and Lancelot were all school-boy. The two little fellows werea long way apart in height, though there were only two years betweenthem; for Lance was on a much smaller scale, but equally full of ruddyhealth and superabundant vigour; and while Fulbert was the more roughand independent, his countenance had not the fun and sweetness thatrendered Lance's so winning. Their looks were repeated in Robina, whowas much too square and sturdy for any attempt at beauty, and wascomically like a boy and like her brothers, but with much frank honestyand determination in her big grey darkly-lashed eyes. Angela was one ofthe most altered of all; for her plump cherub cheeks had melted awayunder the glow of measles, and the whooping process had lengthenedand narrowed her small person into a demure little thread-paper ofsix years old, omnivorous of books, a pet and pickle at school, anda romp at home--the sworn ally, offensive and defensive, of stout,rough-pated, unruly Bernard. Stella was the loveliest little bit ofpainted porcelain imaginable, quite capable of being his companion, anda perfect little fairy, for beauty, gracefulness, and quickness of allkinds. Alda was delighted with her pretty caressing ways and admirationof the wonderful new sister. She was of quieter, more docile mood thanthese two, though aspiring to their companionship; for it was startlingto see how far she had left Theodore behind. He was still in arms,and speechless, a little pale inanimate creature, taking very littlenotice, and making no sound except a sort of low musical cooing ofpleasure, and a sad whining moan of unhappiness, which always recurredwhen he was not in the arms of Sibby, Wilmet, or Felix. It was onlywhen Felix held out his arms to take him that the sound of pleasure washeard; and once on that firm knee, with his shining head against thatkind heart, he was satisfied, and Felix had accustomed himself to allsorts of occupations with his little brother in his left arm. Even atnight, there was no rest for Theodore, unless Felix took him into hisroom. So often did the little fretting moan summon him, that soon thecrib took up his regular abode beside his bed.But Felix, though of course spared from the shop, could not bedispensed with from the printing-house, where he was sub-editor; and inhis absence Theodore was always less contented; and his tearless moanwent to his sister's heart, for the poor little fellow had been wontto lie day and night in his mother's bosom, and she had been as uneasywithout him as he now was without her. All her other babes had grownpast her helpless instinctive tenderness, and Theodore's continuedpassiveness had been hitherto an advantage, which had always beencalled his 'goodness and affection.'Alda was the first to comment on the wonderful interval between thetwins, when Wilmet accounted for it by Theodore's having been quitekept back for his mother's sake, and likewise by his having been morereduced by measles and whooping-cough than Stella had been; but tofresh observers it was impossible to think that all was thus explained,and Edgar and Alda discussed it in a low voice when they foundthemselves alone.'The fact is plain,' said Edgar; 'but I suppose nothing can be done,and I see no use in forcing it on poor Wilmet.''I don't understand such blindness.''Not real blindness--certainly not on Felix's part. He knows thatload is on his back for life. Heigh-ho! a stout old Atlas we havein Blunderbore; I wonder how long I shall be in plucking the goldenapples, and taking a share.''I thought it was Atlas that gathered the apples.''Don't spoil a good simile with superfluous exactness, Alda! It is baseenough to compare the gardens of the Hesperides to a merchant's office!I wonder how many years it will take to get out of the drudgery, andhave some power of enjoying life and relieving Felix. One could tearone's hair to see him tied down by this large family till all his bestdays are gone.''Some of the others may get off his hands, and help.''Not they! Clem is too highly spiritualized to care for anything somaterial as his own flesh and blood; and it is not their fault iflittle Lance does not follow in his wake. Then if Ful has any brains,he is not come to the use of them; he is only less obnoxious than Tinain that he is a boy and not a church candle, but boys are certainly amistake.'If ever the mature age of seventeen could be excused for so regardingboyhood, it was under such circumstances. All were too old for anyoutbreaks, such as brought Angela and Bernard to disgrace, anddisturbed the hush of those four sad days; but the actual loss hadbeen so long previous, that the pressure of present grief was not socrushing as to prevent want of employment and confinement in that smallsilent house from being other than most irksome and tedious.Clement would have done very well alone; he went to church, read, toldAngela stories, and discoursed to Cherry on the ways of St. Matthew's;but, unfortunately, there was something about him that always incitedthe other boys to sparring, nor was he always guiltless of being theaggressor, for there was no keeping him in mind that comparisons areodious.Church music might seem a suitable subject, but the London choristercould not abstain from criticising St. Oswald's and contemning theold-fashioned practices of the Cathedral, which of course Lanceconsidered himself bound to defend, till the very names of Gregoriansand Anglicans became terrible to Cherry as the watchwords of awrangling match. Fulbert, meantime, made no secret of his contempt forboth brothers as mere choristers instead of school-boys, and exaltedhimself whenever he detected their ignorance of any choice morceau ofslang; while their superior knowledge on any other point was viewed asshowing the new-fangled girlish nonsense of their education.This Lance did not mind; but he was very sensitive as to the dignityof his Cathedral, and the perfections of his chosen friend, one BillHarewood; and Fulbert was not slow to use the latter engine for'getting a rise' out of him, while Clement as often, though with lessdesign, offended by disparagement of his choir; nor could Edgar refusehimself the diversion of tormenting Clement by ironical questions andremarks on his standard of perfection, which mode of torture enchantedFulbert, whenever he understood it. Thus these four brothers contrivedto inflict a good amount of teasing on one another, all the morewearing and worrying because deprived of its only tolerable seasoning,mirth.Clement had indeed a refuge in Mr. Audley's room, where he could findbooks, and willing ears for Mr. Fulmort's doings; but he availedhimself of it less than might have been expected. Whether frominclination to his brothers' society, desire to do them good, or innatepugnacity, he was generally in the thick of the conflict; and beforelong he confided to Felix that he was seriously uneasy about Edgar'sopinions.'He is only chaffing you,' said Felix.'Chaff, now!' said Clement.'Well, Clem, you know you are enough to provoke a saint, you bore sointolerably about St. Matthew's.'The much disgusted Clement retired into himself, but Felix was notsatisfied at heart.One was lacking on the cold misty New Year's morning, when evenGeraldine could not be withheld from the Communion Feast of the livingand departed. Each felt the disappointment when they found themselvesonly six instead of seven; but it was Clement who, as the boys werewaiting for breakfast afterwards, began--'Have not you been confirmed, Edgar?''How should I?''I am sure there are plenty of foreign Confirmations. I see them in the"British Catholic."''Foreign parts isn't all one,' said Edgar; and the younger boyssniggled.'If one took any trouble,' persisted Clement.'Yes, but one,' dwelling with emphasis on the awkward impersonal,'one may have scruples about committing an act of schism byencouraging an intruding bishop performing episcopal functions inanother man's diocese. Has not your spiritual father taught you thatmuch, Tina?''I--I must find out about that,' said Clement thoughtfully; 'but, atany rate, the Lent Confirmations are coming on in London, and if I wereto speak to the Vicar, I have no doubt he would gladly prepare you.''Nor I,' answered Edgar.'Then shall I?' eagerly asked Clement.'Not at present, thank you.'Clement stood blank and open mouthed, and Fulbert laughed, secure thatthe joke, whatever it might be, was against him.'Of course,' burst out Lance, 'Edgar does not want you to speak forhim, Clem; he has got a tongue of his own, and a clergyman too, Isuppose.'Clement proceeded to a disquisition, topographical and censorial, uponthe parish and district to which Edgar might be relegated, and finallyexclaimed, 'Yes, he is not much amiss. He has some notions. He dineswith us sometimes. You can go to him, Edgar, and I'll get the Vicar tospeak to him.''Thank you, I had rather be excused.''You cannot miss another Confirmation.''I can't say I am fond of pledges, especially when no one can tell howmuch or how little they mean.'Whether this were in earnest, or a mere thrust in return for Clement'spertinacity, was undecided, for Wilmet came in, looking so sad anddepressed that the brothers felt rebuked for the tone in which they hadbeen speaking.Mr. Thomas Underwood soon arrived, having come to Centry the nightbefore; and after a few words had passed between him and Edgar, thelatter announced his intention of returning with him to London thatevening.'Very well,' said Felix, much disappointed at this repetition ofEdgar's willingness to hurry from the house of mourning, 'but we havehad very little of you; Clement must go on the day after Twelfth Day,and we shall have more room. It will be a great blow to Cherry.''Poor little Cherry! I'll come when I can see her in greater peace, butI must buckle to with the beginning of the year, Fee.'There was no further disputing the point, but Edgar was always a greatloss. To every one except Clement he was so gentle and considerate thatit was impossible not to think that the strange things reported of himwere not first evoked and then exaggerated by the zeal of the modelchorister: and indeed he led Geraldine to that inference when he wentto her in the sitting-room, where, as before, she had to remain at home.'My Cherry, I find I must go back with old Tom. Don't be vexed, myWhite-heart, I am not going back to Belgium, you know: I can often rundown, but my work ought to begin with the year.''You cannot even stay over the Epiphany!''Well, I would have made an effort, but I am really wanted; and thenif I am long with that light of the church, Tina, he will get me intoeverybody's black books. Never mind, old girl. I'll be for ever runningdown. Is any one going to stay with you?''Bernard is coming presently; I must try to make him recollectsomething about it.''You don't mean that child Angel is going.''She wishes it, and it seems right.''Right to leave a black spot in her memory! If children could butbelieve people were sublimated away!''Children can believe in the Resurrection of the body as well as we,'said Cherry reverently.'Better, too, by a long chalk,' he muttered; then perceiving herdismayed expression, he added, 'No, no--I'm not talking to Tina, onlyhe has put me in the humour in which there is nothing he could not makeme dispute--even my Cherry being the sweetest morsel in the world.There, good-bye for the present, only don't afflict that poor littleBernard and yourself into too great wretchedness, out of a sense ofduty.''No, I do not really grieve,' said Cherry. 'Tears come forthankfulness. The real sorrow came long ago; we grew up in it, and itis over now.''Right, little one. The mortal coil was very heavy and painful theselast years, and no one can help being relieved that the end has come.It is the conventionalities that are needlessly distressing. Whatearthly purpose can it serve, save the amusement of the maids andchildren of Bexley, that nine of us should present ourselves a pitifulspectacle all the way up to the cemetery in veils and hat-bands?''Don't talk so, Edgar; you do not know how it jars, though I know youmean no disrespect.''Well, it must be a blessed thing to end by drowning or blowing up, tosave one's friends trouble.''Edgar, indeed I cannot bear this! Recollect what a treasure that dearshattered earthen vessel has held. What a wonderful life of patientsilent resignation it was!''Indeed it was,' said Edgar, suddenly softened. 'No lips could tellwhat the resolution must have been that carried her through thoseyears, never murmuring. What must she not have spared my father! Suchdevotion is the true woman's heritage.'Cherry was soothed as she saw the dew on his eye-lashes, but just thenFelix came in to fetch him, and, stooping down, kissed her, and saidin his low and tender but strong voice, 'We leave her with him, dearchild. Recollect--'"The heart may ache, but may not burst;Heaven will not leave thee, nor forsake."'Much as Geraldine had longed for Edgar, his words brought vagueyearning and distress, while Felix's very tone gave support. How couldEdgar say patient silent self-devotion was not to be found except inwoman?So the worn-out body that once had been bright smiling Mary Underwoodwas borne to the church she had not entered since she had knelt therewith her husband; and then she was laid beside him in the hill-sidecemetery, the graves marked by the simple cross, for which there hadbeen long anxious saving, the last contribution having been a quarterof the Bishop's gift to Lancelot. The inscription was on the edges ofthe steps, from which the cross rose--UNDER WODE, UNDER RODE.EDWARD FULBERT UNDERWOOD,Nine Years Curate of this Parish,Epiphany, 1855,AGED 40.'Thy Rod and Thy Staff comfort me.'There was room enough for the name of Mary Wilmet, his wife, to beadded at the base of the Rood, that Cross which they had borne, the oneso valiantly, the other so meekly, during their 'forty years in thewilderness.'Many persons were present out of respect not only to the former Curate,but to his hard-working son and daughter, and not only the daughter'sholly-wreath, but one of camellias sent by Sister Constance, lay uponthe pall. When the mourners had turned away, Mr. Audley saw a slenderlad standing by, waiting till the grave was smoothed to lay on ita wreath of delicate white roses and ferns. There was no mistakingthe clear olive face; and indeed Mr. Audley had kept up a regularcorrespondence with Ferdinand Travis, and knew that the vows made twoyears ago had been so far persevered in, and without molestation fromfather or uncle. He had written an account of Mrs. Underwood's death,but had received no answer.'This is kind, Ferdinand,' he said; 'it will gratify them.''May I see any of them?' the youth asked.'Felix and Lance will be most glad.''I only received your letter yesterday evening. Dr. White forwarded itto me in London, and I persuaded my father to let me come down.''You are with your father?''Yes; he came home about a fortnight ago. I was going to write to you.O Mr. Audley, if you are not in haste, can you tell me whether I cansee my dear Diego's grave?''The Roman Catholic burial-ground is on the other side of the town. Ithink you will have to go to Mr. Macnamara for admittance. Come homewith me first, Fernan.''Home!' he said warmly. 'Yes, it has always seemed so to me! I havedreamt so often of her gentle loving face and tender weak voice. Shewas very kind to me;' and he raised his hat reverently, as he placedthe flowers upon the now completed grave. 'I saw that all were hereexcept the little ones and Geraldine,' he added. 'How is she?''As well as usual. Wilmet is a good deal worn and downcast, but all arecalm and cheerful. The loss cannot be like what that of their fatherwas.''Will they go on as they are doing now?''I trust so. I am going down to the family consultation. The Londoncousin is there.''Then perhaps I had better not come in,' said Ferdinand, looking ratherblank. 'Shall I go down to Mr. Macnamara first?''Had you rather go alone, or shall I send Lance to show you the way?''Dear little Lance, pray let me have him!''It is a longish walk. Is your lameness quite gone?''Oh yes, I can walk a couple of miles very well, and when I give out itis not my leg, but my back. They say it is the old jar to the spine,and that it will wear off when I have done growing, if I get plenty ofair and riding. This will not be too much for me, but I must be in timefor the 3.30 train, I promised my father.''Is he here alone?''Yes, my uncle is in Brazil. My father is here for a month, and is verykind; he seems very fairly satisfied with me; and he wants me to getprepared for the commission in the Life Guards.''The Life Guards!''You see he is bent on my being an English gentleman, but he has somedislike to the University, fancies it too old-world or something; and,honestly, I cannot wish it myself. I can't take much to books, and Dr.White says I have begun too late, and shall never make much of them.''If you went into the Guards, my brother might be a friend to you.''My back is not fit for the infantry,' said Ferdinand, 'but I can rideanything; I always could. I care for nothing so much as horses.''Then why not some other cavalry regiment?''Well, my father knows a man with a son in the Life Guards, who haspersuaded him that it is the thing, and I don't greatly care.''Is he prepared for the expensiveness?''I fancy it is the recommendation,' said Ferdinand, smiling with alittle shame; 'but if you really see reason for some other choiceperhaps you would represent it to him. I think he would attend to youin person.''Have you positively no choice, Fernan?''I never like the bother of consideration,' said Ferdinand; 'andin London I might have more chance of seeing you and other friendssometimes. I do know that it is not all my father supposes, buthe thinks it is all my ignorance, and I have not much right to beparticular.''Only take care that horses do not become your temptation,' said Mr.Audley.'I know,' gravely replied Ferdinand. 'The fact is,' he added, as theyturned down the street, 'that I do not want to go counter to my fatherif I can help it. I have not been able to avoid vexing him, and this isof no great consequence. I can exchange, if it should not suit me.''I believe you are right,' said the Curate; 'but I will inquire andwrite to you before the application is made. Wait, and I will send outLance. But ought you not to call at the Rectory?''I will do so as I return,' said Ferdinand; and as Mr. Audley enteredthe house, he thought that the making the Cacique into an Englishgentleman seemed to have been attained as far as accent, mind, andmanner went, and the air and gesture had always been natural in him.His tone rather than his words were conclusive to the Curate that hisheart had never swerved from the purpose with which he had stood at theFont; but the languor and indolence of the voice indicated that thetropical indifference was far from conquered, and it was an anxiousquestion whether the life destined for him might not be exceptionallyperilous to his peculiar temperament of nonchalance and excitability.Consideration was not possible just then, for when Mr. Audley openedthe door, he found that he had been impatiently waited for, and barelytime was allowed to him to send Lance to Ferdinand Travis, before hewas summoned to immediate conference with Thomas Underwood, who, oncoming in, had assumed the management of affairs, and on calling forthe will, was rather displeased with Felix's protest against doinganything without Mr. Audley, whom he knew to have been named guardianby his father. The cousin seemed unable to credit the statement; andWilmet had just found the long envelope with the black seal, exactlyas it had lain in the desk, which had never been disturbed since thebusiness on their father's death had been finished.There was the old will made long before, leaving whatever there wasto leave unconditionally to the wife, with the sole guardianship ofthe children; and there was the codicil dated the 16th of October,1854, appointing Charles Somerville Audley, clerk, to the guardianshipin case of the death of the mother, while they should all, or any ofthem, be under twenty-one, and directing that in that contingency theproperty should be placed in his hands as trustee, the interest to beemployed for their maintenance, and the capital to be divided equallyamong them, each receiving his or her share on coming of age. Allthis was in Edward Underwood's own handwriting, and his signature wasattested by the Rector and the doctor.Thomas Underwood was more 'put out,' than the management of such aninsignificant sum seemed to warrant. He was no doubt disappointed ofhis cousin's confidence, as well as of some liberal (if domineering)intentions; and he was only half appeased when Edgar pointed tothe date, and showed that the arrangement had been made before therenewal of intercourse. 'It was hardly fair to thrust a charge upon astranger when there was a relation to act. Poor Edward, he ought tohave trusted,' he said. There was genuine kindness of heart in thedesire to confer benefits, though perhaps in rather an overbearingspirit, as well as disappointment and hurt feeling that his cousin hadacquiesced in his neglect without an appeal. However, after askingwhether Mr. Audley meant to act, and hearing of his decided intentionof doing so, he proceeded to state his own plans for them. The presentstate of things could not continue, and he proposed that Wilmet andGeraldine should go as half boarders to some school, to be prepared forgovernesses. Felix--could he write short-hand? 'Oh yes; but--' Thenhe knew of a capital opening for him; a few years, and he would be onthe way to prosperity: the little ones might be boarded with their oldnurse till fit for some clergy orphan schools; if the means would notprovide for all, there need be no difficulty made on that score.Mr. Audley saw Felix's start of dismay and glance at him, but knowingas he did that the lad was always more himself when not interferedwith, and allowed to act for himself, he only said, 'It is very kind inyou, sir, but I think Felix should be consulted.''It is impossible!' began Felix hastily.'Impossible! It is quite impossible, I would have you to understand,that a lot of children like you should keep house together, and on suchan income as that. Quite preposterous.''As for that,' said Felix, still unsubmissively, 'it is only what wehave been doing, except for the name of the thing, for the last threeyears on the same means.''You don't mean to tell me that you have kept things going on suchmeans without a debt?''Of course we have! We never let a bill run,' said Felix, slightlyindignant.'Now mind, I'm not insulting you, Felix, but I know what the women areand what they tell us. Are you sure of that? No debts--honour bright?''None at all!' said Felix, with an endeavour at calmness, but glowinghotly. 'I help my sister make up her books every Saturday night. Wealways pay ready money.''Humph,' said Mr. Underwood, still only half convinced. 'Living must becheap at Bexley.''You had better explain a little, Felix,' said Mr. Audley.Felix did bring himself to say, 'I am sub-editor now, and get 100 ayear, besides being paid for any article I write. Wilmet has 25 a yearand her dinner, and Angela's at school, so there are only five of usconstantly dining at home, and with Mr. Audley's two guineas a week wecan do very well.''What, you lodge here?''Did not you know that?' said Felix, surprised.Mr. Underwood gave a whistle, and the Curate felt his cheeks growingredder and redder, as he perceived that seven-and-twenty was notconsidered as so very much older than eighteen. Edgar understood andsmiled, but Felix only thought he was suspected of making a good thingof his lodger, and was beginning something awkward about, 'It is allkindness,' when Mr. Audley broke in--'Of course nothing is settled yet, but--but I believe I shall changemy quarters. A smaller house would be better for them; but I think thechildren should keep together. Indeed, my dear friend said he chieflyappointed me that Felix might be kept at their head.'Thereupon Mr. Underwood began to expostulate against the sacrifice ofposition and talent that Felix was making for the sake of bearing theburthen of a family that would have pressed heavily on a man double hisage. It was what Felix already knew, much better than when at sixteenhe had made his first venture. He had experienced the effects of changeof station, as well as of exertion, drudgery, and of the home hardshipthat no one except Mr. Audley had tried to sweeten. He saw how Edgarhad acquired the nameless air and style that he was losing, how evenClement viewed him as left behind; and, on the other hand, he knewthat with his own trained and tested ability and application, and hiskinsman's patronage, there was every reasonable chance of his regaininga gentleman's position, away from that half-jealous, half-conceitedforeman, who made every day a trial to him, and looked at him with anevil eye as a supplanter in the post of confidence. But therewith hethought of his father's words, that to him he left this heavy burthen;and he thought what it would be to have no central home, no place ofholiday-meeting, no rallying-point for the boys and girls, and to castoff the little ones to hired service. This alternative never seriouslyoccurred to him, for were they not all bound to him by the cords oflove, and most closely the weakest and most helpless? Yet his firstreply did not convey the weight of his determination. It was only'Geraldine is too delicate.''Well, well, good advice and treatment might make a change. Or, if shebe fit for nothing else, would not that Sisterhood at Dearport take heron reasonable terms? Not that I can away with such nonsense, but yourfather had his fancies.''My father wished us not to break up the home.''That was all very well when your poor mother was alive. You have beena good son to her, but it is impossible that you and your sister, merechildren as you are, should set up housekeeping by yourselves. Mr.Audley must see it cannot be suffered; it is the bounden duty of yourfriends to interfere.'Mr. Audley did not speak. He knew that Felix could reckon on hissupport; and, moreover, that the youth would show himself to greateradvantage when not interfered with. So after pausing to see whether hisguardian would speak, Felix said, 'Of course we are in Mr. Audley'spower, but he knows that we have made some trial, and except in name,we have really stood alone for these three years. Wilmet can quitemanage the house, and it would be misery for ever to us all to have nohome. In short--' and Felix's face burnt, his voice choked, and hiseyes brimmed over with hot indignant tears, as he concluded, 'it shallnever be done with my good will.''And under the circumstances,' said Mr. Audley, 'I think Felix isright.''Very well,' said Thomas Underwood, much displeased. 'I have no powerhere, and if you and that lad think he can take charge of a house and adozen children, you must have it your own way. Only, when they have allgone to rack and ruin, and he is sick of being a little tradesman in acountry town, he will remember what I said.'Felix forced back his resentful feelings, and contrived to say, 'Yes,sir, I know it is a great disadvantage, and that you only wish for ourgood; but I do not think anything would be so bad for the children asto be all cast about the world, with no place to go to, and becomingstrangers to one another; and since there is this way of keeping themtogether, it seems right.'The steadiness of his manner struck Mr. Underwood, and the reply wasnot unkind.'You are a good boy at bottom, Felix, and mean well, and I am onlysorry not to be able to hinder you from throwing yourself away for lifeby trying to do what is morally impossible, in a foolish spirit ofindependence. Do not interrupt. I warn you that I am not to be appealedto for getting you out of the difficulties you are plunging into; butof course your brother and sister will be mine, as before; and as Ipromised myself to do the same by your mother as by your father--mynear cousins both--here is to cover necessary expenses.'It was a cheque for 150, the same as he had given on the formeroccasion; and though Felix had rather not have taken it, he hadlittle choice, and he brought himself to return cold but respectfulthanks; and Mr. Underwood did not manifest any more displeasure, butshowed himself very kind at the meal that was spread in Mr. Audley'ssitting-room, and even invited Wilmet to accompany Alda, when shejoined the family in a week's time at Brighton, so as to have sea airfor the remainder of her holidays.Nothing could be more reluctant than was Wilmet at first, but there wasa chorus of persuasions and promises; and the thought of being a littlelonger in Alda's presence made her waver and almost consent.Ferdinand Travis came in, but had only time for a greeting and a hastymeal, before Mr. Underwood's carriage came round; and, nothing loth,he gave a lift to the Mexican millionaire to the station with himand Edgar. So, for the last time, had all the thirteen been at hometogether.CHAPTER X.THE FAMILY COBWEB ON THE MOVE.'Oh! the auld house, the auld house,What though the rooms were wee;Oh! kind hearts were dwelling there,And bairnies full of glee.'Lady Nairn.Every one except Edgar would, it was hoped, stay at home till after theEpiphany, that most marked anniversary of birth and death.Clement at first declared it impossible, for St. Matthew's could notdispense with him on the great day; and Fulbert grinned, and nudgedLance at his crest-fallen looks, when he received full leave of absencefor the next three weeks.But Lance was bursting with reverse troubles. The same post hadbrought him a note from his organist; and that 'stupid old Dean,' ashe irreverently called him, had maliciously demanded 'How beautifulare the feet,' with the chorus following, and nobody in the choir wasavailable to execute the solo but Lance. He had sung it once or twicebefore; and if he had the music, and would practise at home, he needonly come up by the earliest train on the Epiphany morning; if not, hemust arrive in time for a practice on the 5th; he would be wanted atboth the festival and Sunday services, but might return as early as hepleased on Monday the 9th.Lance did not receive the summons in an exemplary spirit. It is notcertain that he did not bite it. He rolled on the floor, and contortedhimself in convulsions of vexation; he 'bothered' the Dean, he'bothered' the Precentor, he 'bothered' the Organist, he 'bothered'Shapcote's sore throat, he 'bothered' Harewood's wool-gathering wits,he 'bothered' his own voice, and thereby caused Clement to rebuke himfor foolish murmurs instead of joy in his gift.'A fine gift to rejoice in, to make one be whipped off by an old fogey,when one most wants to be at home! I thank my stars I can't sing!' saidFulbert.'I should thank mine if Bill Harewood had any sense,' said Lance,sitting up in a heap on the floor. 'He can go quite high enough when hepleases; only, unluckily, a goose of a jackdaw must needs get into thecathedral just as Bill had got to sing the solo in "As pants the hart;"and there he stood staring with his mouth wide open--and no wonder, forit was sitting on the old stone-king's head! Wasn't Miles in a rage;and didn't he vow he'd never trust a solo to Harewood again if he knewit! Oh, I say, Wilmet--Fee, I know! Do let me bring Bill back with meon Monday morning; and he could go by the six o'clock train. Oh, jolly!''But is he really a nice boy, Lance?' asked Wilmet, doubtfully.'Oh, isn't he just? You'll see! His father is a Vicar-choral, you know,lives in our precincts; his private door just opposite ours, and 'tisthe most delicious house you ever saw! You may make as much row as youplease, and nobody minds!''I know who Mr. Harewood is. Librarian too, is he not?' said Felix. 'Ihave heard people laughing about his good-natured wife.''Aren't they the people who were so kind to you last year, Lance,'asked Cherry, 'when you could not come home because of the measles?''Of course. Do let me bring him, Fee,' entreated Lance; 'he is no endof a chap--captain of our form almost always--and such a brick atcricket! I told him I'd show him the potteries, and your press, and ourorgan, and everything--and it is such a chance when we are all at home!I shall get the fellows to believe now that my sisters beat all theirsto shivers.''Can you withstand that flattering compliment, Wilmet?' said Felix,laughing. 'I can't!''He is very welcome,' said Wilmet; 'only, Lance, he must not stay thenight, for there really is not room for another mouse.'The little girls had heard so much about Bill Harewood, thatthey were much excited; but their sympathy kindly compensatedfor the lack of that of the elder brothers. Fulbert pronouncedthat a cathedral chorister could never be any great shakes; andClement could not forgive one who had been frivolous enough to bedistracted by a jackdaw; but Lance, trusting to his friend's personalattractions to overcome all prejudice, trotted blithely off to theorganist-schoolmaster, to beg the loan of the music, and received apromise of a practice in church in the evening. Meantime, he beggedClement to play the accompaniment for him on the old piano. Neitherboy knew that it had been scarcely opened since their father's handhad last lingered fondly upon it. Music had been found to excite theirmother to tears; Geraldine resembled Fulbert in unmusicalness, andWilmet had depended on school, the brothers on their choir-practice,so that the sound was like a new thing in the house; nor was any oneprepared either for the superiority of Clement's playing, or forthe exceeding beauty and sweetness of Lance's singing. No one whoappreciated the rare quality of his high notes wondered that he wasindispensable; Geraldine could hardly believe that the clear exquisiteproclamation, that came floating as from an angel voice, could reallycome from the little, slight, grubby, dusty urchin, who stood withclasped hands and uplifted face; and Clement himself--though deferringthe communication till Lance was absent, lest it should make himvain--confided to Wilmet that they had no such voice at St Matthew's,and it was a shame to waste him on Anglicans.Wilmet hardly entered into this enormity. She had made a discoverywhich interested her infinitely more. Little Theodore, hitherto soinanimate, had sat up, listened, looked with a dawning of expressionin the eyes that had hitherto been clear and meaningless as blueporcelain, and as the music ceased, his inarticulate hummings continuedthe same tune. Could it be that the key to the dormant senses wasfound? His eyes turned to the piano, and his finger pointed to itas soon as he found himself in the room with it, and the airs heheard were continually reproduced in his murmuring sounds; that 'Howbeautiful!' which had first awakened the gleam--his own birth-dayanthem--being sure to recur at sight of Lance; while a doleful Irishcroon, Sibby's regular lullaby, always served for her, and the 'HardyNorseman' for Felix, who had sometimes whistled it to him. Wilmet spentevery available moment in awaking the smile on the little waxen facethat had never responded before; it seemed to be just the cheering hopeshe needed to revive her spirits, only she was almost ready to renounceher journey with Alda for the sake of cultivating the new-found faculty.No one would permit this; and indeed, so far from waiting to beexhibited to Lance's friend, the two sisters received their billet deroute on the very day he was expected; and there was no appeal, sincea housekeeper was to travel from Centry, who would take charge of themto London, whence they would go down with Mr. Underwood. Poor Wilmetwas much dismayed at leaving Geraldine to what they both regarded asthe unprecedented invasion of a strange boy; indeed, the whole chargemade Cherry's heart quail, though she said little of her fears, knowingthe importance of Wilmet's having and enjoying her holiday; and Mr.Audley promised extra aid in keeping order among the boys.But as they came in that evening from the practice at the church, towhich Clement had insisted on their coming to hear Lance, Mr. Audleybeckoned Felix to his room with the words, 'There's a thing I want totalk over with you.'Felix recollected those ominous words to Mr. Underwood, and stoodwarming his hands in dread of what might be coming. It was all hefeared.'I wanted to say--I wanted to tell you--' began Mr. Audley. 'I wouldnot have chosen this time, but that I think it may save Wilmetsomething to be able to tell her friends that the present arrangementis to cease.''Wilmet!' exclaimed Felix; then bethinking himself. 'Was that whatTom Underwood meant? But you will not trouble yourself about suchrubbish.''Well, you see,' began the Curate, with heightening colour, 'it can'tbe denied that your sister has grown up, and that things are changed.''Mrs. Froggatt did ask me if you were going on here,' said Felix,still unconvinced; 'but can't we leave people to be stoopid withoutinterfering with us?''Felix, you ought to be a better protector to your sisters. You wouldnot like to have my Lady remonstrating--nay, maybe writing to mymother: she is quite capable of it.'Felix's cheeks were in a flame. 'If people would mind their ownbusiness,' he said; 'but if they will have it so--''They are right, Felix,' said the Curate quietly; 'appearances must becarefully heeded, and by you almost more than by any one. Your slownessto understand me makes me almost doubtful about my further design.''Not going away altogether!''Not immediately; but things stand thus--Dr. White, my old tutor, youknow, and Fernan's, is nearly sure of the new Bishopric in Australia,and he wants me.'Felix hardly repressed a groan.'Any way I should not go immediately; but when your father spoke to meabout the guardianship, he made me promise not to let it stand in theway of any other call. I fancied he had mission work in his mind, andit disposes me the more to think I ought not to hold back; but whileyour dear mother lived, I would not have gone.''Yes, you have been very good to us,' was all Felix could say. 'Butwhen?''Not for some time; but I am not going this moment. Three months'notice Mr. Bevan must have, and if he requires it, six; I must spendsome time at home, and very like shall not be off till you are ofage--certainly not if I find there is any difficulty in handing themanagement of things over to you. How long I remain with you mustdepend on circumstances. How much notice must you give before leavingthis house?''I do not know--half a year, I fancy. You think we ought to give it up?I suppose it is too large for us now.''And you could take no lodger but one of the old-lady type.''Horrid!' said Felix. 'Well, we will see; but it will be a great strokeon poor Cherry--she can remember nothing before this house.''It will be very good for her to have no old associations to sitbrooding over.''My poor little Cherry! If I saw how to cheer up her life; but withoutyour lessons it will be more dreary for her than ever!''Give her all you can to do, and do not be over-careful to keep youranxieties from her knowledge. She is very much of a woman, and if youleave her too much to herself, she will grow more introspective.''Wilmet and I have always wanted to shelter her; she never seems fitfor trouble, and she is so young!''Compared with you two venerable people!' said Mr. Audley, smiling.'But her mind is not young, and to treat her as a child is the way tomake her prey upon herself. I wish her talent could be more cultivated;but meantime nothing is better for her than the care of Bernard andStella. I hope you will not be in a hurry to promote them out of herhands.''Very well; but she will miss you sorely.''I hope to see her brightened before I am really gone, and I am notgoing to decamp from this house till some natural break comes. To dothat would be absurd!'There was a silence; and then Felix said with a sigh, 'Yes, a smallerhouse, and one servant. I will speak to Wilmet.''Perhaps you had better, so that she may have an answer in case she isattacked.'Wilmet was aghast at first, but a hint from Alda made her acquiesce,not with blushing consciousness, but with the perception that the wayof the world was against the retention of the lodger; and sorry as shewas to lose Mr. Audley, her housewifely mind was not consoled, butdistracted, by calculations on the difference of expenditure. Again shetried to beg herself off from her visit, in the dread that Felix wouldgo and take some impracticable house in her absence--some place withthin walls, no cupboards, and no coal-hole; and she was only pacifiedby his solemn promise to decide on no house without her. She went awayin an avalanche of kisses and tears, leaving Geraldine with a basketfulof written instructions for every possible contingency, at which theanxious maiden sat gazing anxiously, trying to store her mind with itsonerous directions.'Shall I give you a piece of advice, Cherry?' said the Curate, as hesaw the dark eye-brows drawn together.'Oh, do!' she earnestly said.'Put all that in the fire!''Mr. Audley!''And go by the light of nature! You have just as many senses as Wilmet,and almost as much experience; and as to oppressing yourself with thedetermination to do the very thing she would have done under allcircumstances, it is a delusion. People must act according to their ownnature, not some one else's.''Certainly,' said Geraldine, smiling. 'I could never walk stately inand say, "Now, boys!"--and much they would care for it if I did.''It seems to be a case for "Now, boys!" at this moment,' said Mr.Audley; 'what can all that row be?''Oh, it must be that dreadful strange boy, Lance's friend,' sighedGeraldine, almost turning pale. Then, trying to cheer up, 'But it isonly for the day, and Lance wished it so much.'As she spoke, the shout of 'Cherry, here's Bill!' came nearer, and thewhole of the younger half of the family tumbled promiscuously into theroom, introducing the visitor in the midst of them. To the elders,'no end of a chap' appeared, as Mr. Audley said, to mean all ends ofshock hair, and freckles up to the eyes; but when Fulbert and Lance hadwhirled him out again to see the lions of Bexley, Robina and Angelawere overheard respectfully pronouncing that he was nice and spottylike the dear little frogs in the strawberry-beds at Catsacre, and thathis hair was just the colour Cherry painted that of all the very bestpeople in her 'holy pictures.'The object of their admiration was seen no more till the middle ofdinner, when all three appeared, immoderately dusty; and no wonder,for the organist had employed them to climb, sweep fashion, into thebiggest organ-pipe to investigate the cause of a bronchial affection oflong standing, which turned out to be a dead bat caught in a tenaciouscobweb.Shortly after, the guest was found assisting Angela in a tableau, wherea pen-wiper doll in nun's costume was enacting the exorcism of the saidbat, in a cave built of wooden bricks.Clement was undecided whether to condemn or admire; and Geraldine, towhom Edgar had lent some volumes of Ruskin, meditated on the grotesque.Before there had been time for the fanciful sport to become roughcomedy, Lance had called off his friend to see the potteries; and topoor Cherry's horror, she found that Robina had been swept off in thetorrent of boyhood. Clement, pitying her despair and self-reproach,magnanimously offered to follow, and either bring the little maid back,or keep her out of harm's way; and for some time Cherry reposed in theconviction that 'Tina was as good as a girl any day.'But at about a quarter to six, a little tap came to Mr. Audley's door,and Angela stood there, saying, with a most serious face, 'Please, Mr.Audley, Cherry wants to know whether you don't think something musthave happened.' And going upstairs, he found the poor young deputy in anervous agony of despair at the non-return of any of the party, quitecertain that some catastrophe had befallen them, and divided betweenself-reproach and dread of the consequences.'The very first day Wilmet had gone!' as she said.It was almost time for Harewood's train, which made it all the morestrange. Mr. Audley tried to reassure her by the probability that thewhole party were convoying him to the station, and would appear whenhe was gone; but time confuted this pleasing hypothesis, and Cherry'smisery was renewed. She even almost hinted a wish that Mr. Audley wouldgo out and look for them.'And then,' he said, smiling, 'in an hour's time you would be sendingFelix to look for me. No, no, Cherry, these waiting times are oftenhard, no doubt; but, as I fear you are one of those destined to "abideby the tents" instead of going out to battle, you had better learn todo your watching composedly.''O Mr. Audley! how can I? I know it must be very wrong, but how can Inot care?' And verily the nervous sensitive girl was quivering withsuspense.'"He will not be afraid of any evil tidings, for his heart standethfast and believeth in the Lord,"' answered Mr. Audley. 'I see that doesnot tell you how not to be afraid; but I imagine that a few trustingejaculations in the heart, and then resolute attention to somethingelse, may be found a help.'Cherry would have sighed that attention was the most impossible thingin the world; but before she had time to do so, Mr. Audley had begun toexpound to her his Australian scheme. It excited her extremely; and asa year and a half seemed an immense period of time to her imagination,the dread of losing him was not so immediate as to damp her enthusiasm.They had discussed his plans for nearly an hour before Cherry startedat the sound of the door, and then it was only Felix who entered. Hewas irate, but not at all alarmed; and presently the welcome clatter ofsteps approached, and in dashed the whole crew, mired up to the eyes,but in as towering spirits as ever.Their delay had, it appeared, been caused by a long walk that ensuedupon the visit to the potteries, and a wild venture of Will Harewoodupon impracticable ice, which had made him acquainted with the depthsof a horse-pond. There was none of the dignity of danger, for thedepths were shallows and the water only rose to his waist; but the mudwas above his ankles, and he had floundered out with some difficulty.He wanted to walk back with no more ceremony than a water-dog; butthe Underwoods had made common cause against him, and had dragged himto a cottage, where he had the pleasing alternative of an old woman'sblankets and petticoats while his garments were drying. He was asnearly angry as a Harewood could be, Lance observed, declaring thatthey should never have got him into the cottage without fighting him,if Tina had not been so tall, and if Robin had not nearly cried; whilehe, throwing off all responsibility, ascribed all his lateness tohis friend's 'maggots.' No more trains stopped at Bexley till aftermidnight; but as to his absence causing any uneasiness at home, helaughed at the notion, and was corroborated by Lance in averring thatthey had too much sense; listening with undisguised amazement to theelaborate explanations and apologies about Robina, which Clement wasscrupulously pouring forth to his brother and sister, saying that hewould have brought her home at once, but that he really did not like totrust those boys alone.Whereat Lance held up his hands with a dumb show of amazement thatconvulsed Fulbert, Bill Harewood, and Robina herself, with agonies ofhalf-suppressed merriment. The boy had come in, prepared to be graveand quiet, as knowing how lately affliction had come to the family,and having been warned by Lance, that 'as to going on as we do in theprecincts, why it would make Cherry jump out of her skin.'But by some extraordinary influence--whether it were the oddity ofWilliam Harewood's face, or the novelty of his perfect insouciancein the household whither care had come only too early--some infectionseized on the young Underwoods, and before the end of the evening meal,if the 'goings on' were not equal to those in the precincts, they were,at any rate, not far short of it.Lance presently incited his friend to show 'how he had mesmerizedLucy.' Clement made a horrified protest; and Geraldine looked alarmedat her eldest brother, who began, 'Indeed, Lance, we can have nothingof that sort here.''But, Felix, I do assure you there is no harm.''Upon my word and honour, there's not a spice of anything theArchbishop of Canterbury could stick at,' added Will Harewood.'It is impossible there should not be harm,' interposed Clement; butthe boys, including Fulbert, were in such fits of laughter, that Felixbegan to suspect the seriousness of the performance; and when Lancesprang at him, exclaiming, 'I'll go to Mr. Audley! Fee--Cherry--willyou be satisfied if Mr. Audley says we may?' Felix and Cherry bothconsented; and Lance rushed off to make the appeal, and returned notonly with full sanction, but with Mr. Audley himself, come to seethe operation. This perfectly satisfied Felix, who even consented,on the entreaty of his brothers, to become the first subject; andCherry knew that where the Curate and Felix had no scruples, she needhave none; but, for all that, she was more than half frightened anduncomfortable--above all, when Clement, amid shouts of mirth from thethree schoolboys, indignantly marched away to shut himself up in hiscold bedroom.By-and-by, after some unseen preparation--all the more mystifyingbecause carried on in the kitchen, where Sibby always used to keepTheodore in a cradle till Felix was ready for him--Will Harewood causedFelix to stand exactly opposite to him and to the spectators, with adinner-plate in his hand, and under injunctions to imitate the operatorexactly. Armed with another plate, William rubbed his own fingerfirst on the under side of the plate, and then, after some passes andflourishes, on his own forehead, entirely without effect so far as hehimself was concerned; but his victim, standing meekly good-naturedand unconscious, was seen by the ecstatic audience to be, at eachpass, painting his own face with the soot from a flame over which hisplate had been previously held. The shrieks of amusement redoubled atthe perplexity they occasioned him, till they penetrated the upperrooms; and suddenly a cry of horror made all turn to the door and see alittle white bare-footed figure standing there, transfixed with fright,which increased tenfold when Felix hurried towards it, not yet awareof the condition of his visage, until a universal shout warned him ofit; while Lance, darting in pursuit, picked up Bernard, and by hiswonderful caressing arts, and partly by his special gift of coaxing,partly as the object of the little fellow's most fervent adoration,made the scattered senses take in that it was 'all play,' and evencarried back the little white bundle, heart throbbing and eyes staring,but still secure in his arms, to admire Felix all black, and then to befurther relieved by beholding the restoration of the natural hue at thepump below stairs.Then amid Sibby's scoldings and assurances that the child would catchhis death of cold, Bernard was borne upstairs again by Felix, who foundClement in the nursery comforting the little girls, and preventingthem from following the example of their valiant pioneer. Felix, nowthoroughly entering into the spirit of the joke, entertained for amoment the hope of entrapping Clement; but of course Bernard could notbe silenced from his bold and rather doubtful proclamation, that 'Thefunny boy made Felix black his own face, and I wasn't afraid.''Naughty boy!' commented Stella. 'Poor Fee!'--and she reared up to kisshim, and stroke the cheeks that had suffered such an indignity.'What! It was only a trick?' said Clement slowly, as if half mystified.'Of course,' said Felix; 'could not you trust to that?''I don't know. Cathedrals are very lax, and it had a questionable name.''O Clem! if it had not been in you before, I should wish you had nevergone to St. Matthew's. Come down now, don't let us disturb the littleones any longer.--Good-night, Angel; good-night, little Star; we'll notmake a row to wake you again.'Clement, in a severe mood, followed Felix downstairs; but somewonderful spirit of frolic was on all the young people that night--areaction, perhaps, from the melancholy that had so long necessarilyreigned in that house, for though the fun was less loud, it was quiteas merry: a course of riddles was going on; and Clement, who reallywas used to a great deal of mirth among the staff of St. Matthew's,absolutely unbent, and gloried in showing that even more conundrumswere known there than by the house of Harewood. He was not strongin guessing them; but then Will Harewood made such undaunted andextraordinary shots at everything proposed, that the spirit of reparteewas fairly awakened, and Cherry's bright delicate wit began to play,so that no one knew how to believe in the lateness of the hour, andstill less that this was the same house that grave Wilmet had left thatmorning.'Poor dear little Cherry!' said Felix to Mr. Audley, after helping herupstairs, 'she is quite spent with laughing; indeed my jaws ache, andshe is ready to cry, as if it had been unfeeling.''Don't let her fancy that. We certainly were surprised into itto-night; but I only wish for her sake--for all your sakes--that youcould keep the house merrier.'Felix sighed. He too felt as if he had been betrayed into unbecominglevity; and though he would not dispute, his heart had only become theheavier. However, he did not forget; and when Cherry again breatheda little sigh as to what Wilmet would think of their first day, hestoutly averred that there was no use in drooping, and no harm inliveliness, and that no one had ever been so full of joyousness astheir father.She owned it. 'But--'And that but meant the effects of the three years that she had spentas the companion of her mother's mournful widowhood, and of the caresof life on her elder brother and sister.It was true, as Mr. Audley said, that the associations of the roomswere not good for her spirits in her many lonely hours and confinedlife; and this reconciled Felix more than anything else to the proposedchange. He was keeping his promise to Wilmet of not seeking a housetill her return, when Mr. and Mrs. Froggatt, whose minds had been muchrelieved by hearing that the lodger would consult the proprieties,communicated to him their own scheme of taking up their residence ata village named Marshlands, about two miles from Bexley, where theyalready spent great part of the summer in a pleasant cottage andgarden which they had bought and adorned. Mr. Froggatt would drivein to attend to the business every day, but the charge of the housewas the difficulty, as they did not wish to let the rooms; and theynow proposed that the young Underwoods should inhabit them rent-free,merely keeping a bedroom and little parlour behind the shop for Mr.Froggatt, and providing firing in them. With much more diffidence, athis wife's earnest suggestion, the kindly modest old man asked whetherMiss Underwood would object to his coming in to take a piece of breadand cheese when he was there in the middle of the day.It was an excellent offer, and Felix had no hesitation in gratefullyclosing with it, even without consulting Wilmet. Her reply showed thata great weight was taken off her mind; and she was only longing to beat home again, contriving for the move, which was to take place atLady Day. She was burning to study the new rooms; nevertheless, as bykind Marilda's contrivance, she was taking lessons in German every dayfrom a superior Fraulein who had once been her cousin's governess, andwas further allowed to inspect the working of a good school, her staywas extended, by Miss Pearson's entreaty, a full fortnight beyond whathad been intended. Nor had anything gone wrong in her absence. Eventhe overlooking of the boys' linen, which she had believed impossiblewithout her, was safely carried on by Cherry, and all were sent off insound condition. No catastrophe occurred; and the continual occupationand responsibility drove away all the low spirits that so often hadtried the home-keeping girl. She did enjoy those tte--tteevenings, when Felix opened to her more than he had ever done before;and yet it was an immense relief to have the day fixed for Wilmet'sreturn, and how much more to have her walking into the room with allthe children clinging about her in incoherent ecstacy, which had notsubsided enough for much comprehension when Felix came joyously in.'Hurrah, Wilmet! Mr. Froggatt sent me home a couple of hours beforetime!''How very good! I met him in the street just now. Really, he is thekindest old gentleman in the world!''I believe you dazzled him, Mettie; he says he did not know you tillyou spoke to him, and if he had realised what a beautiful and majesticyoung lady you were, he should hardly have ventured to propose yourtaking up your abode under his humble roof.''That must be the effect of living with Alda,' said Wilmet merrily;'but, oh! I am glad to be at home again!''And I never was so glad of anything in my life,' said Geraldineeagerly.'I am longing to go over the house, and know what to do aboutfurniture,' continued Wilmet.'There! now W. W. is herself again!' said Felix.'Mrs. Froggatt came and called on me,' said Geraldine. 'She talked ofleaving us the larger things that will not go into the cottage.''Which is well,' said Felix; 'for how much of ours will survive theshock of removing is doubtful.''All the things that came from Vale Leston are quite solid,' saidWilmet, bristling up.'That carpet is solid darn,' said Felix. 'We tried one evening, andfound that though the pattern of rose-leaves is a tradition, no oneyounger than Clem could remember having seen either design or colour.''You should not laugh at it, Felix,' said Wilmet, a little hurt; forindeed her mother's needle and her own were too well acquainted withthe carpet for her to like to hear it contemned.Felix and Cherry both felt somewhat called to order, as if theirmistress had come home again; and Cherry was the first to break silenceby inquiring after Wilmet's studies at Brighton.'Oh yes,' said Wilmet, 'I do hope I am improved. That was all Marilda'skindness. She quite understood how I missed everybody and everything;and at last, one day, when I was wishing I could pronounce German likeAlda, and that Alda had time to give me some lessons--''Alda hasn't time?''Oh, you don't know how useful she is! She writes all the notes.Marilda devised getting this Fraulein--such a good-natured woman! andwhen she heard what I wanted, she got leave for me to come every day tostudy the working of the school. I do believe I shall teach much betternow, if only I were not so ignorant. I never had any notion before howlittle I knew!'However, Wilmet's value had really risen so much in consequence ofthese instructions, that Miss Pearson arranged that she should lay theFrench and German foundations, and prepare the scholars, and shouldreceive half a sovereign a half year from each girl whom she thusinstructed, being the moiety of 'extra.' Moreover, the head teachertalked of retiring, and her succession was promised to Wilmet--abrilliant prospect, that the sight of Alda's grandeur did not make hercontemn.Wilmet's anxious mind was well satisfied by her inspection of the newquarters, which, among other conveniences, had that of shorteningby ten minutes her walk to school. The family apartments were allupstairs, the space below being entirely taken up by the business, andthe kitchens were under ground. The chief sitting-room upstairs wasunfortunately towards the street, and had a northern aspect; it was aspacious room, with three large windows filled with boxes of flowers,and contained a big table and two sofas, which, with the carpet andcurtains, would remain well covered up. Folding-doors led into asmaller room, with a south window towards the little garden, where Mrs.Froggatt generally sat, and which had been used for the dining-room.There were two bedrooms besides on the same floor, one of which wouldremain untouched for Mr. Froggatt; and above these, there was a largenursery, and more rooms than had been ever furnished. Rent, rates,taxes, and repairs, all off her mind! Wilmet felt as if prosperitywere setting in; and she was the first to make the audacious statementthat they need not part with Martha, and indeed, that the house couldnot be kept in order, nor dinners cooked fit for Mr. Froggatt, bySibby single-handed. And Cherry made up her mind that they were like afamily of caterpillars moving their cobweb tent; Angela, seeing such anestablishment of young tortoise-shells, in their polished black, undertheir family web, had asked, 'Which was their brother Felix?' and thename was adopted.So a time of much business and excitement set in; and the lengtheningspring evenings were no sinecure to Wilmet, as the flitting dayapproached, being rather hurried on by the old bookseller, who wantedto be at Marshlands in time to admire his hyacinths and sow hisannuals. Mr. Audley would take rooms at the Fortinbras Arms for theremainder of his stay at Bexley; and indeed, there was a good deal tobreak the old habit of constantly depending on him, for his brother'syoung wife was slowly dying in London, and the whole family seemedinstinctively to turn to him for comfort and advice, so that he wasobliged to be continually going backwards and forwards.On the 24th of March, when he came down by an afternoon train, he foundthe house door open, the steps scattered with straw; and after lookingin and seeing his own parlour intact, and with a cheerful fire, hepursued his way upstairs, and there found the sitting-room bare exceptfor a sort of island consisting of the sofa, on which Geraldine layrolled in cloaks and shawls, trying to amuse the twins by a feebleattempt to sing'Weel may the boatie row,'while making paper boats for Stella to drag by strings upon the smoothboards.'Eh, Cherry, are you the Last Man, or the Last Rose of Summer?''The last of the caterpillars,' said Cherry, smiling, but with effort.'Do you see Stella's fleet--just thirteen?''Making omens, foolish child!' but though Stella was eagerly pointingand explaining, 'Tat Tella's boat--tat Tedo's--tat brother's--tatAngel,' and so on, the word foolish was not directed to the littleone, but to the grey eyes heavy with unshed tears, that restedwistfully upon a wreck that had caught upon a nail and lay rent andragged.'Pray don't look which it is,' said she.'Certainly not; I hate auguries.''Do you think there is nothing in them?''I think there is nothing in this room but what ought to be in mine.Do you expect me to stand discussing superstition in this horrible rawemptiness? Here,' picking up Theodore, 'I'll come back for you.''Oh no, thank you, let me get down by myself; he cannot be left alonein a room.''Come, Stella, and take care of him.''That's worse; she leads him into mischief. We are fox, goose, andcabbage. Please give me my crutch; Wilmet put it out of reach becauseshe said I was destroying myself.''You are tired to death.''Oh no; but one can't sit still when so much is going on. Oh, howdelicious!' as after an interval she arrived, and found Mr. Audleywinding up a musical-box, which Theodore was greeting with its owntunes, and Stella with a dance and chant of 'Sing box--sing box;' andthen the two sat listening to the long cycle of tunes which would holdTheodore entranced for any length of time.After a short inquiry and a reply as to the sister-in-law's state,and a few words on the progress of the flitting, there was a silencewhile Mr. Audley read the letters that had come for him in his absence,and Cherry's face became more and more pensive. At last, when Mr.Audley laid down his letters, and leant against the chimney-piece, sheventured to say, 'Is it wrong?''Is what wrong?' said the Curate, who had quite forgotten the subject.'To care about omens.''That depends. To accept them is sometimes necessary; to look out forthem is generally foolish and often wrong.''Sometimes necessary?' said Cherry eagerly.'Sometimes experience seems to show that in good Providence a mercifulpreparation is sent not so much to lead to anticipations, as to bringthe mind into keeping with what is coming, and, as it were, attune it.''So that little things may be constantly types of great future ones?''My dear Cherry, I said not constantly.''Just let me tell you. Sibby says that the very day we all came intothis poor old house, just as the omnibus stopped, there was the knellringing overhead, and a funeral coming up the street. She knew it wasa token, and burst out crying; and dear Mamma, who you know never shedtears, turned as white as a corpse, as if she was struck to the heart.''And your father?''Oh! Sibby said he just stood in the doorway, lifted his hat as thefuneral passed, and then well-nigh carried Mamma, with the baby (thatwas Fulbert) in her arms, over the threshold, and smiled at her,saying, "Well, mother, what better than to have found our home tilldeath!" So you see he did believe in it.''I see he wanted to cheer her spirits, not by saying "stuff andnonsense," but reminding her that there are worse things than death.Have you an omen on your mind, Cherry? Have it out; don't let it sinkin.''Only please don't laugh at me. Indeed, it was not my own doing, butStella's fancy to have a boat for each of us, when she was launchingthem; and I could not help recollecting how we are all starting out andaway from our first home.''Stella's was not a very perilous ocean.''That was a comfort at first; and Stella tried to draw all the thirteenlines together, but they tangled, and one thread broke, and that boatwas left behind; and one poor crooked ill-made thing fell over, and wasleft at home because hindering all the rest, and even Stella knew thatwas me, and--' her voice quivered, 'one was caught on a nail, and torninto a wreck! Now, can I help thinking, though you'll just call themnewspaper-boats, dragged by a baby on a dry dusty floor?''Watched by a weary fanciful damsel,' said Mr. Audley, sitting downby her, 'who does not know a bit more than she did before, that allare launching on a sea, and if it is a rougher one, there's a betterGuiding Star than Stella Eudora to lead them, and they have compassesof their own--ay, and a Pilot. And if there are times when He seems tobe asleep in the ship--why, even the owner of the unseaworthy boat leftat home can show the Light, and pray on till the others are roused toawaken Him.''I wish there had not been that wreck,' she sighed.'What seems a wreck need not be really one,' said Mr. Audley. 'It maybe the very way of returning to the right course. And by and by weshall see our Master standing on the shore in the morning light.'At that moment there was a sound at the door--Felix had accompaniedCherry's chair, to bring her and Theodore to the new home. Therewas too much haste for the wistful last looks she intended: shewas deposited in the chair with Theodore on her knee, Stellatrotting after, with Felix and Mr. Audley, who was coming to see theinauguration. St. Oswald's Buildings were left behind, and she wasdrawn up to the green private door, beside the shop window; Wilmethurried down and took Theodore from her; Felix helped her out, andup the narrow steep staircase, which certainly was not a gain, butwhen landed in the drawing-room, the space seemed to her magnificent.And their own furniture, the two or three cherished portraits broughtfrom Vale Leston, their father's chair, their mother's sofa, the silkpatchwork table-cover that had been the girl's birth-day present toMamma, the bookcase with Papa's precious books, made it seem home-like.'The mantelpiece is just the same!' cried Cherry, delighted, as sherecognised all the old ornaments.The next moment her delight was great at the flower-stands, which Mr.Froggatt had kindly left full of primulas, squills, and crocuses;and when she looked out from the back room into the little garden,where Mr. Froggatt's horticultural tastes had long found their soleoccupation, and saw turf, green laurels, and bunches of snowdrops andcrocuses, she forgot all Stella's launch!CHAPTER XI.THE CHORAL FESTIVAL.'And with ornaments and banners,As becomes gintale good manners,We made the loveliest Tay room upon Shannon shore.'Thackeray.'Of course, after this,' said Lady Price, 'Miss Underwood did notexpect to be visited.'Otherwise the gain was great. The amusement of looking out of windowinto the High Street was alone a perpetual feast to the little ones,and saved Geraldine worlds of anxiety; and the garden where theycould be turned out to play was prized as it only could be by thosewho had never had any outlet before. It was a pleasant little longnarrow nook, between the printing-house on the west, and such anothergarden on the east, a like slip, with a wall masked by ivy and lilacs,and overshadowed by a horse-chestnut meeting it on the south. It wasnot smoky, and was quite quiet, save for the drone and stamp of thesteam-press; there was grass, a gum-cistus and some flower-beds in thecentre, and a gravel-walk all round, bordered by narrow edgings offlowers, and with fruit trees against the printing-house wall, and aBanksia and Wisteria against that of the house. Mr. Froggatt was quitetouched at the reverence with which Angela and Stella regarded eventhe daisies that had eluded his perpetual spud; and when he found outthe delight it was to Cherry to live with flowers for the first timein her life, he seldom failed to send her a bunch of violets or someother spring beauty as soon as he arrived in the morning, and kept thewindows constantly supplied with plants.The old bookseller was at first very much afraid of his new inmates.To Felix he was used, but he looked on the sisters as ladies, and toladies except on business-terms he was much less accustomed than togentlemen. Besides, being a thorough gentleman himself at heart, he hadso much delicacy as to be afraid of hurting their feelings by seemingat home in his own house; and he avoided being there at luncheon for awhole week, until one afternoon Felix ran up to say that he was sureMr. Froggatt had a cold, and would be glad if a cup of tea appearedin his parlour. Gratitude brought him in to face the enemy; and afterhe had been kept at home for a day or two by the cold, his wife'sinjunctions and Felix's entreaties brought him to the dinner.It happened to be one of Wilmet's favourite economical stews; butthese were always popular in the family, though chiefly composed ofscraps, pot-liquor, rice, and vegetables; and both for its excellenceand prudence it commanded Mr. Froggatt's unqualified approbation. Allthat distressed his kind heart was to see no liquor but water, exceptCherry's thimbleful of port; he could not enjoy his glass of porter,and shook his head--perhaps not without reason--when he found thathis young assistant's diet was on no more generous scale, and was notsatisfied by Felix's laughing argument that it was impossible to bemore than perfectly healthy and strong. 'False economy,' said the oldman in private; but Felix was not to be persuaded into what he believedto be an unnecessary drain on the family-finances, and was still morestout against the hint that if Redstone discovered this prudentialabstinence, it might make him 'disagreeable.' Felix had gone his wayregardless of far too many sneers for poverty and so-called meanness tomake any concession on their account, though the veiled jealousy andguarded insolence of that smart 'gent' the foreman had been for thelast three years the greatest thorn in his side. And at least he madethis advance, that the errand-boy cleaned the shoes!Geraldine, though shy at first from the utter seclusion in which shehad lived, put forth a pretty bashful graciousness that perfectlyenchanted Mr. Froggatt, who was besides much touched by her patienthelplessness. He became something between her grandfather and herknight, loading her with flowers, giving her the run of the circulatinglibrary, and whenever it was fine enough, taking her for a mile or twoin his low basket-carriage either before or after his day's businessin the shop. It was not exactly like being with her only other friend,Mr. Audley; but he was a thoroughly kind, polite, and by no meansunlettered old man; and Geraldine enjoyed and was grateful, while thechildren were his darlings, and were encouraged to take all manner ofliberties with him.Among the advantages of the change was the having Felix always at hand;and though she really did not see him oftener in the course of the daythan at St. Oswald's Buildings, still the knowing him to be withinreach gave great contentment to Cherry. The only disadvantage was thathe lost his four daily walks to and fro, and hardly ever had sufficientfresh air and exercise. He was indeed on his feet for the most of theday, but not exerting his muscles; and all taste for the active sportsin which his kind old master begged him to join seemed to have passedaway from him when care fell upon him. He tried not to hold his headabove the young men of his adopted rank, many of whom had been hisschool-fellows; but, except with the members of the choir and choralsociety, he had no common ground, and there were none with whom hecould form a friendship. Thus he never had any real relaxation, exceptmusic, and his Sunday walks, besides his evenings with his sistersand of play with the children. It was not a natural life for a youth,but it seemed to suit with his disposition; for though not given tooutbursts of animal spirits, he was always full of a certain strong andsupporting cheerfulness.Indeed, though they did not like to own it to themselves, the youngpeople had left behind them much of the mournfulness of the widowedhousehold, which had borne down their youthful spirits; and though thethree elders could never be as those who had grown up without careor grief, yet their sunshine could beam forth once more, and helpedthem through the parting with their best friend. For Mr. Audley'ssister-in-law died in the beginning of June, and his father entreatedhim to go abroad with his brother, so that he was hurried away directlyafter midsummer, after having left his books in Felix's charge, andprovided for the reception of the dividends in his absence.His successor was a quiet amiable young Mr. Bisset, not at alldisinclined to cultivate Felix as a link with the tradesfolk; only hehad brought with him a mother, a very nice, prim, gentle-mannered,black-eyed lady, who viewed all damsels of small means as perilous toher son. Had she been aware that Bexley contained anything so whiteand carnation, so blue-eyed and straight-featured, so stately, and sopenniless as Wilmet Underwood, he would never have taken the Curacy.She was a kind woman, who would have taken infinite pains to serve theorphan girls; and she often called on them; but when the Rector's wifehad told her that such a set had been made at Mr. Audley that he couldbear it no longer, it was but a natural instinct to cherish her son'sbashfulness.That autumn Wilmet came home elevated by the news that the head teacherwas going to retire at Christmas, and that she was to be promoted toher place of forty pounds a year. Her successor was coming immediatelyto be trained, being in fact the daughter of Miss Pearson's sister,who had married an officer in the army. She had been dead about threeyears, and the girl had been living in London with her father, now onhalf pay, and had attended a day-school until he married again, andfinding his means inadequate to his expenses, and his wife and daughterby no means comfortable together, he suddenly flitted to Jersey toretrench, and made over his daughter of seventeen to her aunts to beprepared for governess-ship.This was the account Miss Pearson and Miss Maria gave to Wilmet, andWilmet repeated to Geraldine, who watched with some interest for thefirst report of the new-comer.'She is rather a nice-looking little thing,' was the first report, 'butI don't know whether we shall get on together.'The next was, 'Miss Maria has been begging me to try to draw her out.They are quite distressed about her, she is so stiff and cold in herways with them, and they think she cries in her own room.''Poor thing, how forlorn she must be! Cannot you comfort her, Mettie?''She will have nothing to say to me! She is civil and dry, just as sheis to them.''I think she can talk,' said Angela.'How do you know anything about it, little one?' said Wilmet.'I heard her talking away to Lizzie Bruce in the arbour at dinner-time.Her face looked quite different then from what it does in school.''Then I hope she is settling down to be happier,' said Wilmetthoughtfully; but, having watched Angela out of hearing, she added,'Not that I think Lizzie Bruce a good friend; she is rather a weakgirl, and is flattered by Carry Price making a distinction between herand some of the others.''When is Carry Price ever going to leave school?''When she can play Mendelssohn well enough to satisfy Mr. Bevan. Iwonder Lady Price does keep her on here; but in the meantime we canonly make the best of her.'A day or two later, Wilmet and Angela came in from school eager,indignant, and victorious.'You did manage it well!' the younger was saying. 'I was so gladyou saw for yourself.--Just fancy, Cherry, there were Carry Price andLizzie Bruce turning out all the most secret corners of Miss Knevett'swork-box, laughing at them, and asking horrid impertinent questions,and she was almost crying.''And you fetched Wilmet?''She was sitting out in the garden, showing some of the little ones howto do their crochet--it was the play-time after dinner--and I just wentto her and whispered in her ear, so she strolled quietly by the window.''Yes,' added Wilmet, 'and before I came to it, Edith was saying to JaneMartin, on purpose for me to hear, that she thought it would be a goodthing if Miss Underwood would look into the school-room. So Angel wasnot getting into a scrape.''I should not have minded if I had,' said Angel; 'it was such a shame,and she looks such a dear--''There she was,' said Wilmet, 'her fingers shaking, and her eyes fullof tears, trying to do some work, while Carry Price went on in herscoffing voice, laughing over all the little treasures and jewels, andasking who gave them to her, and what they cost. All I could do was toput my hand on her shoulder and say I saw she did not like it; and thenLizzie Bruce looked ashamed, but Miss Price bristled up, and declaredthat Miss Knevett had unlocked the box herself. Then the poor childburst out that she had only said she would show her Maltese cross; shehad never asked them to turn everything out, and meddle with it; andCarry tossed her head, just like my Lady, and said, "Oh, very well,they did not want to see her trumpery, since she was so cross aboutit. I suppose you mean to show the things one by one to the littlegirls! A fine exhibition!" She cried out, "Exhibit! I don't mean toexhibit at all; I only showed it to you as my friend!" Whereupon CarryPrice flounced off with, "As if I were going to make a friend of anunderteacher!" and she went into a tremendous fit of crying, like whatyou used to have, Cherry, except that it was more passionate!''I'm sure I never had anything like that to cry for. What did you dowith her? How lucky she had you!''Why, when she went on sobbing, "I'll not stay here," "I won't beinsulted." "I'll tell my aunts," my great object was to get herupstairs, and to silence her, for I was sure Miss Pearson woulddislike nothing so much as having a regular complaint from her aboutCarry; and, besides that, all the girls, who pity her now, would beturned against her, and think her a mischief-maker. I did get her upat last, and, oh dear! what a scene we had! Poor thing, I suppose shehas been a spoilt child, going to a lady's fashionable institute, asshe calls it, where she was a great girl, and rather looked up to, forthe indulgences she got from her father--very proud, too, of beinga major's daughter. Then came the step-mother; what things she saidabout her, to be sure! No end of misery, and disputes--whose fault,I am sure I don't know; then a crisis of debts. She says it was allMrs. Knevett's extravagance; but Miss Pearson told me before that shethought it had been going on a long time; and at last, when the fatherand his wife and her child go off to Jersey, this poor girl is turnedover to the aunts she never saw since her mother died, twelve yearsago.''I dare say it is the best thing for her.''If she can only think so; but she fancies the being a teacher the mosthorrid thing in the world.''Oh, Wilmet!' interrupted Angela; 'why, you like teaching: and Robinmeans to be a real governess, and so do I, if I am not a Sister!''Me too,' called out Stella.'But you see this unlucky girl can't understand that teaching may bea real way of doing good; she fancies it a degradation. She says sheand her friends at her institute hated and despised the teachers, andplayed all manner of tricks upon them.''How foolish the teachers must have been!''She did say something about their being low and mean. She did me thefavour to say not like me, and that she was quite shocked to find I wasone of this dreadful race. It was quite amazing to her when I told herhow Robina's dear Miss Lyveson keeps school without necessity, onlyto be useful. You may imagine what it is to her to be plunged all ona sudden into this unhappy class. She began by trying to take her oldplace as an officer's daughter, and to consort with the girls; but Ithink if she and Carry Price were left to one another, she would verysoon sink as low as any of the poor hounded teachers she describes.''She must be very silly and conceited.''No, I think she is sensible, and loving too, at the bottom,' saidWilmet, 'only every one is strange here: I think she will understandbetter soon; and in the meantime, she has quite forgiven me for beinga teacher. She clung about me, and called me all sorts of prettynames--her only friend, and so forth.''Perhaps she can forgive you for being a teacher, in consideration ofyour being a twin,' said Cherry.'There, Cherry, you understand her better already than I do! I'll bringher to you, I have not time for such a friendship.''Poor thing! I should like to try to comfort her, if she is strange anddreary; but I think she must be rather a goose. What's her name?''Alice; but in school Miss Pearson is very particular about having hercalled Miss Knevett. We have exchanged Christian names in private, ofcourse.''You horrid old prosy thing of four U's,' said Geraldine. 'You aresitting up there, you great fair creature, you, for the poor child toworship and adore, and not reciprocating a bit!''Of course,' said Wilmet, 'if she can't be happy without being petted,I must pet her, and let her be nonsensical about me; but I think it isall great stuff, and that you will suit her much better than I evershall.''Do you never mean to have a friend, Mettie?''Oh no, I haven't time; besides, I've got Alda.'Geraldine had, however, many dreams about the charms of friendship. Sheread of it in the books that Felix selected for her; and Robina hada vehement affection for a schoolfellow whose hair and whose carteshe treasured, and to whom she would have written daily during theholidays but for the cost of stamps. The equality and freedom of theletters she received always made Cherry long for the like. Since Edgarhad left her, she had never been on those equal terms with any one;Wilmet was more like mother or aunt than sister; and though Felix hada certain air of confidence and ease when with her, and made her hischief playfellow, he could not meet all her tastes or all her needs;and there was a sort of craving within her for intimacy with a creatureof her own species.And though Wilmet's description of Alice Knevett did not soundparticularly wise, Cherry, in her humility, deemed her the more secureof being on her own level, not so sensible and intolerant of littledreams, fancies, and delusions as those two sensible people, the twinsisters. So she watched impatiently for the introduction; and at lastWilmet said, 'Well, she is coming to tea to-morrow evening. Littleridiculous chit, she bridled and doubted, but as you were an invalid,she supposed she might, only it was not what she had been used to, andPapa "might object."''What? To the shop? Well, I really think she had better not come! I'llhave nobody here that thinks it a favour, and looks down on Felix.''My dear, if she contrives to look down on Felix after she has seenhim, she will deserve anything you please. Just now, I believe thefoolishness is in her school, and not in herself.'Nevertheless, Geraldine's eagerness underwent a great revulsion.Instead of looking forward to the visit, she expected it with dread,and dislike to the pert, conceited, flippant Londoner, who despised hernoble brother, and aspired to the notice of Carry Price. Her nervousshrinking from strangers--the effect of her secluded life--increased onher every moment of that dull wet afternoon; her feet grew cold, hercheeks hot, and she could hardly find temper or patience for the manyappeals of Bernard and Stella for her attention.Her foolish little heart was palpitating as if a house-breaker wereentering instead of Wilmet, conducting a dainty cloud of fresh lilacmuslin, out of which appeared a shining black head, and a smilingsparkling face, with so much life and play about the mouth and eyesthat there was no studying their form or colour, and it was only aftera certain effort that it could be realised that Alice Knevett was aglowing brunette, with a saucy little nose, retrouss, though verypretty, a tiny mouth full of small pearls, and eyes of black diamond.In spite of her gracious manner, and evident consciousness of her owncondescension, the winsomeness of the dancing eyes fascinated Cherry atonce. Indeed, the simplicity and transparency of her little dignitiesdisarmed all displeasure, they were so childish; and they vanished in amoment in a game at play with Bernard and Stella. When Wilmet broughtout Geraldine's portfolio, her admiration was enthusiastic if notcritical.A sketch of Wilmet and Alda enchanted her; she had never seen anythingso lovely or so well done.'No, no,' said Cherry, rather shocked, 'you must have seen the RoyalAcademy.''Oh, but I am sure this ought to be in the Royal Academy; I never sawanything there that I liked half so much. How clever you must be!'Cherry could not but laugh at the extravagant compliment. 'My brotherEdgar draws much better than that,' she said, producing a capitalwater-colour of a group of Flemish market-women.'I shall always like yours best. Oh! and what is this?''I did not know it was there,' said Cherry, colouring, and trying totake it away.'Oh, let me look. What! Is it a storm, or a regatta, or fishing boats?What is that odd light? What is written under? "The waves of thistroublesome world." Why, that is in the Bible, is not it?''Thirteen boats, Cherry,' said Wilmet; 'is that a device of your own?''What, not copied? Oh dear! I wish I was so clever!''It is the sea of this life, isn't it?' said Angela, coming up. 'Is itourselves, Cherry, all making for the golden light of Heaven, and thestar of faith guiding them?''She reads it like a book,' exclaimed Alice. 'And those two closetogether--that means love, I suppose!''Love and help, the weak and the strong,' said Geraldine, in herearnest dreamy voice.'Do pray make a picture of my boat on a nice smooth sea of light; Idon't like rocks and breakers, such as you have done there.''There always must be a last long wave,' said Cherry.'Oh, but don't let us think about horrid things. I like the summer sea.Aren't there some verses--'"Youth at the prow, and pleasure at the helm?"''That would not be a pleasant augury,' said Cherry. 'Do you know whatthis is meant for, bad as it is? Longfellow's verses--''The phantom host that beleaguered the walls of Prague? How can youdraw such things?''So I say,' observed Wilmet.'They come and haunt me, and I feel as if I must.''Who is this kneeling on the wall? He looks like a knight watching hisarmour.''So he is,' said Cherry.'But there is nothing about him in the poem. Did you make him foryourself?''Why, he is Ferdinand Travis!' exclaimed Wilmet.'What, is it a real man? I thought it was somebody in a story.''I see!' said Angela quietly. 'He is watching his armour the nightbefore he was baptized.'For the child had never forgotten the adult baptism, though she hadbeen little more than four years old at the time; but she was one ofthose little ones to whom allegory seems a natural element, with whichthey have more affinity than with the material world.However, the mention of Ferdinand Travis led to the history of the fireat the hotel, and of his recovery; Alice declared that 'everythingnice' seemed to happen at Bexley, and was laughed at for her peculiarideas of niceness; but there was something in the feminine prattlethat was wonderfully new and charming to Geraldine, while, on theother hand, the visitor was conscious of a stimulus and charm that shehad never previously experienced; and the eager tongues never flaggedtill Felix came in. He had evidently taken pains with his toilette,in honour of the unusual event; and the measured grave politeness ofhis manners renewed Alice's scared punctilious dignity of demeanour,and entire consciousness that she was a major's daughter and he abookseller.But Felix had brought in some exciting Eastern news; and Alice put onan air capable, as one connected with India and the army, but shesoon found out the deficiency of her geography, and was grateful forthe full clear explanations, while her amour propre was gratifiedby finding that her familiarity with a few Indian terms was valuable.Before the end of the evening all were at ease, and she was singingwith Felix and Wilmet at the old piano.No sooner had the door shut on her when the maid came to fetch her,than a storm fell on Wilmet.'So that's what you call rather nice-looking?''Well, she is under-sized and very brown, but I did think you wouldhave allowed that she was rather pretty.''Rather!' exclaimed Cherry indignantly.'That's what it is to be a handsome woman!' said Felix.'Do you mean to say that you think her anything remarkable?' saidWilmet.'Say no more, my dear W. W.,' laughed Felix. 'I never understoodbefore why negroes don't admire white people.''I am sure I don't know what you are talking about,' said Wilmet,betaking herself to her darning with great good-humour. 'Alice Knevettis prettier than I thought she was when she was all tears and airs; butI can't see any remarkable beauty to rave about.''No, you can't,' said Geraldine merrily. 'You look much too high overher head, but you see I don't; and such a little sparkling diamondbeetle is a real treat to me.'And Geraldine often enjoyed the treat.In a very short time the green door and steep stairs were as familiarto Alice as to the Underwoods themselves; for her aunts were thankfulto have her happy and safe, and she was rapturously fond of Geraldine,reflecting and responding to most of her sentiments. Most of theUnderwoods had the faculty of imprinting themselves upon the charactersof their friends, by taking it for granted that they felt alike; andAlice Knevett had not spent six weeks at Bexley before she had cometo think it incredible that she had thought either teaching or theUnderwoods beneath her. She was taking pains to do her work well,and enjoying it, and was being moulded into a capital subordinateto Wilmet; while with Geraldine she read and talked over her books,obtained illustrations for the poetry she wrote out in her album,and brought in a wholesome air of chatter, which made Cherry muchmore girl-like than she had ever been before. It was an importationof something external, something lively and interesting, which wasvery refreshing to all; and even Felix, in his grave politeness andattention to his sister's friend, manifested that so far from being inhis way, as they had feared, he found her a very agreeable element whenshe joined the home party or the Sunday walk.Indeed, there was a certain tendency to expansion about the life of theyoung people; the pinch of poverty was less griping than previously,and their natural spirits rose. In January Lance was allowed to bringhis friend Harewood to a concert of the choral society; and on thefollowing evening Alice Knevett came to tea, and there was a series ofwonderful charades, chiefly got up by Clement and Robina, and of comicsongs by Lance and Bill Harewood--all with such success, that Alicedeclared that she had never seen anything so delightful in all herexperience of London Christmases!The young people really seemed to have recovered elasticity enough thatyear to think of modest treats and holidays as they had never venturedto do since that memorable sixteenth birth-day of Felix's. Here washis twenty-first not very far off; and when it was announced that thisidentical 3rd of July had been fixed on for a grand choral meetingat the Cathedral, at which the choir of Bexley was to assist, therewas such a spirit of enterprise abroad in the family, that Geraldinesuggested that Wilmet might take Robina to see the Cathedral and hearLance.'Lance will be just what will not be heard,' said Felix. 'They willnot show off their solos; but the Robin ought to have the pleasure, ifpossible; and as I go in two capacities, press and choir, I hope we canmanage it for her.'He came in full early for the evening. 'All right,' he said. 'Twotickets are come for the Pursuivant, and Mr. Froggatt says he would notgo at any price; and besides, each of the choir may take a friend--sothat's three.''Am I to be reporter or friend?' asked Wilmet.'Reporter, I think, for you will have to do audience.''Nay, Cherry ought to be the gentleman connected with the press,' saidWilmet, for in fact Geraldine did sometimes do copying and correctingwork for her brother; 'and, indeed, I do not see why she should not. Wecould go home directly after morning service, and leave you there.''Oh no, impossible,' said Geraldine, 'it would never do; it would onlyspoil everybody's pleasure, and be too much for me.''I think you are wise,' said Felix; and somehow it struck her with aprick that he had rather the proposal had not been made. 'There is sureto be a great crush, and I may be obliged to be with the choir.''I am quite able to take care of her, I can always lift her,' saidWilmet, surprised.'I would not go on any account,' protested Cherry. 'I should be likethe old woman in that Servian proverb, who paid five dollars to go tothe fair, and would have paid ten to be safe at home again.''There might be no getting a bench fit for you to sit upon,' addedFelix, who, as a gentleman of the press, was not devoid of experience.'I could not be easy about you, my dear; it is much safer not.''Perhaps so,' owned Wilmet, disappointed; 'but Angel is too little forsuch a long day, and Cherry is so much stronger, that I thought--''Oh, but could not Alice Knevett go?' put in Cherry.'A very good suggestion,' said Felix. 'She hardly ever has anyamusements. Well thought of, White-heart!'I believe he thought of it from the first, felt Geraldine, angry withherself that this conviction gave a prick like the point of a needle.She threw her energies into the scheme, and was begging Wilmet to goand make the proposal, when there was a sudden peal of the bell, aheadlong trampling rush, a dash open of the door--Theodore began to humthe anthem 'How beautiful,' the other three small ones hailed 'Lance'at the top of their voices, and his arms were round the neck of thefirst sister who came in his way.'What, Lance! how came you here?''Our organ is tuning up its pipes--man comes to-morrow--Prayers in theLady Chapel and not choral, and it's a holiday at school, so I gotoff by the 5.20, and need not go back till the 6.10 to-morrow. We arepractising our throats out to lead you all on the 3rd. You know you arecoming, the whole kit of you.''Do we?' said Wilmet. 'It is only for the last ten minutes that we haveknown that any of us were coming.''All right; that's what I'm come about. Robina must be got home.''She will be come. She comes on the 1st.''That's right; then there's to be a great spread in Bishop's Meadsbetween services. Everybody sends provisions, and asks their friends;but Cherry is to go and rest at the Harewoods'. The governor will gether in through the library into the north transept as quiet as a lamb,no squash at all. It is only along the cloister--a hop, step, and jump;and Miles has promised me the snuggest little seat for her. Then theHarewood sofa--''It is too much, Lance,' began Cherry. 'Mrs. Harewood--''Don't be absurd; she wishes it with all her heart. She won't want aticket if Mr. Harewood smuggles her in, but I can get as many as youwant. How many--Wilmet, Cherry, Robin, Angel, and Miss Knevett. She'llcome, won't she?''We were thinking of going to ask her.''I'll do it; I've brought my own ticket for a friend for her; here itis, with L. O. U. in the corner. I'll run down with it before any oneelse cuts in.''Hold hard,' said Felix; 'we shall not get her if you set about it inthat wild way!''Oh, but I'll promise Wilmet shall take her in tow, and if anythingwill pacify the old girls, that will.''You had better let me come with you,' said Wilmet.'Look sharp then. Is it a practising night? Yes, that's well; Miles isin a state of mind at the short notice, and has crammed me choke-fullof messages; he says it will save his coming down; come along, then, W.W., and soft-sawder the venerable aunts.'No more of this operation was necessary than the assurance thatMiss Underwood was going, and that Mrs. Harewood would be a sort ofchaperon. Alice Knevett was happy and grateful; and if anything werewanting to the universal enthusiasm of anticipation, it was suppliedby Lance. The boy, with his musical talent, thorough trustworthinessand frank joyous manners, was a favourite with the organist, and waswell versed in the programme; and his eagerness, and fulness of detail,were enough to infect every one. Geraldine thought it was great proofof his unspoilableness, that he took quite as much pleasure in bringingthem to these services, where he would be but a unit in the hundreds,as if it had been one of the anthems, of which every one said, 'Haveyou heard little Underwood?' In the charm of the general welcomeand the congratulation on Lance's arrangement, Geraldine had quiteforgotten both her alarms and her tiny pang of surprise at not havingbeen Felix's prime thought. Lance, by dint of a judicious mixture ofhectoring and coaxing, obtained leave for Angela to be of the party,though against Wilmet's judgment; and Bernard and Stella were to spendthe day with Mrs. Froggatt, which they regarded as an expedition quiteas magnificent as that to St. Mary's Minster.Mr. Froggatt was almost as eager about this pleasure for 'his youngpeople,' as he called them, as they could be. He came in early to driveGeraldine to the station, and looked with grandfatherly complacency atthe four sisters, who had ventured on the extravagance of white piquand black ribbons, and in their freshness looked as well-dressed as anylady in the land.He entertained Cherry all the way with his admiration of Wilmet'sbeauty and industry, and when arrived at the station, waited there withher till first the three girls came up with Alice Knevett, white withpink ribbons, and then the choir arrived, marching with the bannerwith the rood of St. Oswald before them, each with a blue satin bowin his button-hole, and the bag with his surplice under his arm, theorganist, the schoolmaster, and the two curates, bringing up the rear.Mr. Bevan, my Lady, and Miss Price, whirled up in the carriage, theomnibus discharged the friends of the choir, and two waggon loads ofmusical talent from the villages came lumbering and cheering in! Thevery train roared and shrieked in with a sound of cheering from itsvertebr, and banners were projecting from the windows, amid noddingheads and waving handkerchiefs of all colours; the porters ran aboutdistracted; and Geraldine began to be alarmed, and to think of the oldwoman of Servia, but behold, Felix had her on one side, Mr. Froggatt onthe other, a solid guard held open the door, and protected her from therush, and before she well knew what they were doing with her, she waslying on the seat of the carriage, with her sisters and Alice all in arow in front of her; the recently crowded platform was empty of all buta stray porter, the stationmaster, and Mr. Froggatt kissing his hand,and promising to come and fetch her on her return.The train seemed hardly to have attained its full speed before itslackened again, and another merry load was disposed of within itsjoints. Another start, another arrival; and before the motion was over,a flash of sunny looks had glanced before the sisters' eyes. There wasLance, perfectly radiant, under his square trencher cap--hair, eyes,cheeks, blue bow, boots, and all, seeming to sparkle with delight as hesnatched open the door. 'Hurrah! there they are. Give her out to me,Wilmet!' (as if she had been a parcel).'Stay, wait for Felix. You can't---'Felix rushed up from his colleagues of the choir, and Geraldine was seton her foot and crutch. 'Come along! I've got Ball's chair for you, andBill Harewood is sitting in it for fear any one should bone it. Where'syour ticket?''Lance, take care! Don't take her faster than she can go!' as hewhisked her over the platform; and Wilmet was impeded by the seekingfor Alice's parasol and Angela's cloak. They were quite out of sightwhen Lance had dragged Cherry through the crowd at the door, andbrought her to the wheeled chair just in time to find Bill Harewoodglaring out of it like the red planet Mars, and asseverating that hewas the lame young lady it was hired for.In went Geraldine, imploring to wait for Wilmet, but all in vain; offwent the chair, owner and escort alike in haste, and she was sweptalong, with Lance and Will with a hand holding either side of thechair, imparting breathless scraps of information, and exchangingremarks: 'There goes the Archdeacon.' 'The Thorpe choir is not come,and Miles is mad about it.' 'That's the Town Hall.' 'There's where Jacklicked a cad for bullying.' 'There's a cannon-ball of Oliver Cromwell'ssticking out of that wall.' 'That's the only shop fit to get gingerbeerat!' 'That old horse in that cab was in the Crimea.' 'We come last inthe procession, and if you see a fellow like a sheep in spectacles,that's Shapcote.' 'Hurrah! what a stunning lot! where is it from?''Bembury? My eyes, if that big fellow doesn't mean to bawl us all down.Down that way--that's the palace. Whose carriage is it stopping there?Now, here's the Close.''Is that the Cathedral? Oh!''You may well say so! No, not that way.' And on rattled poor amazedGeraldine through an archway, under some lime trees, round a corner,round another corner, to another arched doorway, with big doors studdedwith nails, with a little door for use cut out of one of the big ones.'You must get out here,' said Lance, 'we are close by,' and he helpedher out, and paid and thanked the man with the chair. 'Here's ourdomain,' he continued, as he introduced Cherry through the open doorwayinto a small flagged court, with two houses, grey and old-fashioned,forming one side, and on the other an equally old long low buildingwith narrow latticed arched windows. Opposite to the entrance was ahandsome buttressed Gothic-looking edifice, behind which rose the gableof the north transept of the Cathedral, beautiful with a rose window,and farther back, far, far above, the noble tower.Already everything was very wonderful to Geraldine. 'That's ourkennel,' said Lance, pointing to the low buildings to the right.'School's behind; but we boarders are put up in one of the old monks'dormitories, between court and cloister.''Is it really?' exclaimed Geraldine.'So my father says,' said Will. 'Here's our door.' Another stone-archedpassage, almost dark, with doors opening on either side, seemed commonto both houses; and Will was inviting them to enter, but Lance heldback. 'No time,' he said; 'better call your father.''The others,' sighed Geraldine.'Bother the others! That's right: here he is!''Halloo, Father!' cried Will; 'we've got Cherry.''By which unceremonious designation I imagine you to mean to introduceMiss Underwood,' said a figure, appearing from beneath the archway,in trencher cap, surplice, and hood, with white hair, and a sortof precision and blandness that did not at all agree with Cherry'spreconceived notions of the Harewood household. 'I am very glad tosee you. My ladies, as usual, are unready. Will you have a glass ofwine? No?--What do you say, Lancelot?--Very well, we will take you inat once. You will not object to waiting there, and this is the quiettime.--Boys, you ought to be with the choir.''Oceans of time, Dad,' coolly answered Will; 'none of the fellows upthere are under weigh.'Mr. Harewood offered his arm, but perceived that Cherry preferred Lanceand her crutch; advancing to the door opposite that by which they hadentered, he unlocked it, and Geraldine found herself passing through abeauteous old lofty chamber, with a groined Tudor roof, all fans, andpendants, and shields; tall windows stained with armorial bearings,parchment charters and blazoned genealogies against the walls, andscreens upon screens loaded with tomes of all ages, writing-tables andchairs here and there, and glass-topped tables containing illuminationsand seals. 'Here is my paradise,' said the librarian, smiling.'I think it must be,' said Geraldine, with a long breath of wonder andadmiration.'Ah! would you not like to have a good look, Cherry?' said Lance.'That's Richard Coeur de Lion's seal in there.''Don't begin about it--don't set him on,' whispered Willie, with asign of his head towards his father, who was fitting the key into theopposite door, 'or we shall all stay here for the rest of the day.'This low door open, Mr. Harewood and the boys bared their heads as theyentered, and Geraldine felt the strange solemn sensation of findingherself in a building of vast height and majesty, full of a wonderfulstillness, as though the confusion of sounds she had been in sorecently were far, far off.'Where now, Lancelot?' asked Mr. Harewood, in a hushed voice; 'do youwant me any further?''No, thank you, sir; I'll just take her across the choir to Mr. Miles,and then join the rest of us at the vestry.''Good-bye for the present, then,' said Mr. Harewood kindly. 'You are insafe hands. Your brother comes round every one. I could not do this.'Through the side-screen, into the grandly beautiful choir, arching highabove, with stall-work and graceful canopies below, and rich glasscasting down beams of coloured light--all for 'glory and for beauty,'thought Geraldine.'You must not stop; you must look when you are settled. That's myside,' pointing to one of the choristers' desks. 'It will be only wethat sing in here; the congregation is in the nave--a perfect seaof chairs. I'll come for you when it is over. Here is Mr. Miles. Mysister, sir.'A pale gentleman in spectacles, with a surplice and beautiful bluehood, was here addressed. He too greeted Geraldine, very shyly butkindly, and she found herself expected to ascend some alarming-lookingstone steps. The organ was on the choir-screen, and to the organist'slittle private gallery was she to ascend. It was a difficult matter,and she had in her trepidation despairingly recognised the differencebetween Lance's good will and Felix's practised strength; but at lastshe was landed in an admirable little cushioned nook, hidden by twotall painted carved canopies--exactly over the Dean's head, her brothertold her--and where, as she sat sideways, she could see through thequatrefoils into the choir on the right hand, and the nave on the left.'Delightful! Oh, thank you; how kind! If I am only not keeping any oneout.''No,' said Lance, smiling, and whispering lower than ever, 'he has noone belonging to him. He hates women. Never a petticoat was here beforein his reign. Have you a book?''They are robing, Underwood,' said the misogynist in the organ-loft;and Lance hurried away, leaving Geraldine alone, palpitating a gooddeal, but almost enjoying the solitude, in the vast structure, wherethe sanctity of a thousand years of worship seemed to fill the veryair, as she gazed at the white vaultings and bosses carved with emblemsabove, at the vista of clustered columns terminating in the greatjewelled west window, or at the crown-like loveliness that encompassedthe sanctuary. All was still, except a deep low tone of the organ nowand then. Mr. Miles looked in after the first, to hope she did notfeel it uncomfortably, and to assure her that though she was too nearhis organ, she need not fear its putting forth its full powers; itwas to be kept in subordination, and only guide the voices. This wasgreat attention from a woman-hater, and Geraldine ventured to reiterateher thanks; at which he smiled, and said, 'When one has such a boy asyour brother, there is pleasure in doing anything he wishes. You aremusical?''I never was able to learn to play.''But you can read music?''Oh yes,' for she had often copied it.So he brought her whole sheets of music, and put her in the way offollowing and understanding, perceiving, as he went, that she was fullof intelligence and perception.When he went back to his post, a few groups, looking very small, werecreeping in by transept doors--by favour, like herself: then a littlewhite figure flitted across to the desks, opened and marked the books,took up something, and disappeared; and in another moment Lance, in hisbroad white folds, was at her side. 'Here's the music. Oh, you have it!I've seen Fee,' he whispered; 'they are at Mrs. Harewood's, all right!'and he was gone.Here she sat, her attention divided between the sacred impressions ofthe place, its exceeding beauty, and the advance of the multitude intothe nave, as the doors were open, and they surged up the space left inthe central aisle, and occupied the ranks of chairs prepared for them.Then came a long pause; she scanned each row in search of her sisters,and only was confused by the host of heads; felt lost and lonely, andturned her eyes and mind to the silent grandeur to the east, ratherthan the throng to the west.At last there came the sweet floating sound of the chant, growing inpower like the ocean swell as it approached, and the first brightbanner appeared beneath the lofty pointed archway; and the double whitefile came flowing on like a snowy glacier, the chant becoming clearand high as the singers of each parish marched along to their places,each ranked under a bright banner with the symbol of their church'sdedication. St. Oswald's rood helped Geraldine to make out that ofBexley better than their faces, though she did make out her eldestbrother's fair face, and trace him to his seat. The cathedral singerscame at last, and that kenspeckle red head of Will Harewood's directedher to the less conspicuous locks belonging to Lance, whose own clearthrush-like note she could catch as he passed beneath the screen. Thencame the long train of parish clergy, the canons, the Dean, and lastlythe Bishop, the sight of whom recalled so much.The unsurpliced contribution had meantime been ushered in by the sidedoors, and filled seats in the rear of the others, so as to add theirvoices without marring the general effect--the perfection of whichGeraldine enjoyed--of the white-robed multitude that seemed to fill thewhole chancel.The sight seemed to inspire her whole soul with a strange yearning joy,as though she were beholding a faint earthly reflex of the great visionof the Beloved Disciple; and far more was it so at the sound, whichrealised in a measure the words, 'As the voice of mighty waters, and asthe voice of thunder.'These were the very words that had been selected for the Second Lesson,and the First consisted of those verses in which we hear of David'scommencement of the continual chant of psalms at the sanctuary; andboth, unwonted as they were, gave a wonderful thrill to the audience,as though opening to them a new comprehension of their office assingers of the sanctuary.There is no need to dwell on the wonderful and touching exhilarationderived from the harmony of vast numbers with one voice attuned topraise. It is a sensation which is so nearly a foretaste of eternity,that participation alone can give the most distant perception thereof.To the entirely unprepared and highly sensitive Geraldine it was mostoverpowering, all the more because she was entirely out of sight, andwithout power of taking part by either gesture or posture--she waspassive and had no vent for her emotion.Lance, who made his way to her round through the transept the momenthe had disrobed, found her pale, panting, tearful, and trembling, withburning cheeks, so that his exaltation turned to alarm. 'Are you doneup, Cherry? It is too hot up here? I'll try to find Felix or Wilmet,which?''Neither! I am quite well, only--O Lance, I did not know anything couldbe so heavenly. There seemed to be the sweeping of angels' wings allround and over me, and Papa's voice quite clear.''I know,' said Lance; 'it always does come in that Te Deum.'The sister and brother were silent, not yet able for the criticaldiscussion of single points; only, as he put his arm round her to helpher to rise, she said, with a sigh, 'O Lance, it is a great thing tobe one of them! Thank you. I think this is the greatest day of all mylife.'The getting her down, what with Lance's inexperience and want ofheight and strength, was anxious work; and just as it had been safelyaccomplished, the rest of their party were seen roaming the aisle indistress and perplexity. Geraldine was very glad of Felix's substantialarm, but she had rather he had omitted that rebuke for venturesomenessin dealing with her, which would have affronted Fulbert, but neverseemed to trouble Lance, who was only triumphant in his success; andher perfect contentment charmed away the vexation which really arosefrom a slight sense of having neglected her.The others had been perfectly happy in their several ways, and madeeager comments on their way to the house of Harewood, whither Lancepiloted them--this time by the front way, through the garden, whichlay behind the close--entering, in spite of the mannerly demurs of theelder ones, through the open door, into a hall whence a voice of heartygreeting at once ensued. 'Here you are at last; and how's the poordarling your sister? not over-tired?'And Cherry, before she was aware, found herself kissed, and almostsnatched away from Felix, to be deposited on a sofa; and while the likekisses were bestowed on the two little girls, and hospitable offersshowered on all, she was amused by perceiving that good Mrs. Harewoodwas endowed with exactly the same grotesque order of ugliness as herson William; but she was even more engaging, from an indescribablydroll mixture of heedlessness, blundering, and tender motherliness.'There, now, you'll just leave her to me, the poor dear; and Lance willtake you down to the Mead, and find Papa and the girls for you.''Oh, thank you, I could not think of your staying. Now pray--''Now prays' were to no purpose; Mrs. Harewood professed only to want anexcuse for staying at home--she did not want to be done up with runningafter her girls to the four ends of the Mead, when it was a long stepfor her to begin with. Off with them.So when Wilmet was satisfied that Geraldine was comfortable, the fivemoved off--Felix and Alice, Angel in Wilmet's hand, and Lance's andRobina's tongues wagging so fast that the wonder was how either caughta word of what the other was saying.Meanwhile, Mrs. Harewood, tossing her bonnet and gloves aside, inperfect indifference to the exposure of the curious structure ofred and grey hair she thus revealed, lavished meats and drinks uponher guest, waiting on her with such kindness, that in spite of allweariness and craving for quiet after these deep and wonderfulimpressions, it was impossible not to enjoy that warmth of heart.There was exactly the tender motherliness that even Wilmet and SisterConstance could not give.It was charming to hear how fond Mrs. Harewood was of Lance, and howthe having such a companion had made it possible to keep her Willieat the cathedral school, where the mixture of lads was great, but themaster first-rate. He thought highly of the promise of both; 'but, totell the truth,' said Mrs. Harewood, as she sat and fanned herself withher husband's trencher cap, looking more than ever like a frog in astrawberry bed, 'though my Willie is the cleverest boy in the school,little good his cleverness would have done him, and he would have beenharum-scarum Bill more than ever, if it were not for Lance. So say hisfather and brother Jack; so that they will not be for his going to apublic school unless Lance were sure of it too.''Will not they be able to stay on here?'Mrs. Harewood explained that the year that the barristers--choristersshe meant--were sixteen, when their voices were usually unserviceable,they, together with those of like age in the school, were subjected toan examination, and the foremost scholar obtained an exhibition, invirtue of which he could remain free of expense for another two years,and then could try for one of the Minsterham scholarships at one of thecolleges at Cambridge. Those who failed, either had to pay like theordinary schoolboys, or left the school.Dear Mrs. Harewood was a perfect Malaprop, and puzzled Geraldine bycontinually calling the present occasion the rural meeting, and otherlike slips, uncommonly comical in a well-educated woman with the wordsshe knew best.All this, and a great deal more--about the shy woman-hating organist,and the unluckiness of the dissenter--no, precentor--having a sickwife, and the legal difficulties that prevented building a better housefor the boarders than the queer long room where they lodged, betweenthe cloister and the Bailey--the proper name of the little court bywhich Geraldine had come--was poured out; and kind as it was, there wasa certain sense of having been talked to death.A whole flood of Harewoods, Underwoods, and untold numbers besides,swept into the room as the bell began to ring for Evensong. Mostsincere were Cherry's entreaties that she might be left alone. Shecould not go back to her coign of vantage, 'it had been too beautifulfor her to bear more,' she said; and she severally declined offers ofcompanionship from three female Harewoods and two sisters, tellingWilmet at last that all she wanted was to be still and alone.Alone she was, but not still, for there was nothing to hinder themagnificent volume of sound that surged around the Cathedral fromcoming to her; and she could trace the service all along--in chant,pealing mighty Amens, with the hush between, in anthem, and in jubilanthymn. She was more calmly happy than in the oppressive grandeur of themorning, as she lay there, in the cool drawing-room, with the openwindow veiled by loose sprays of untrimmed roses, and sacred printslooking down from the walls.The solitude lasted rather too long, when she had heard the hum andbuzz of the host pouring out of the Cathedral, and still no one came.They were to go home by the 5.10 train, and every time she counted thechimes she became more alarmed lest they should be too late. Minutesdragged on. Five! It was five! Was she forgotten? Should she be onlymissed and remembered at the station, too late? Tired, nervous, unusedto oblivion, she found tears in her eyes, and was too sorrowful andangry with her own impatience even to think of the old woman of Servia.Hark! a trampling? Had they remembered her? But oh, it would be latefor the train!In burst Lance, in his cap and little short quaint black gown.'O Lance, I shall be too late!''You don't go by this train.''Oh dear! oh dear! Mr. Froggatt was to meet me;' and the tears startedfrom her eyes. 'How could Felix forget?''Never mind, there's sure to be a fly or something.''Yes, but Mr. Froggatt waiting!''Never mind,' repeated Lance, ''tis a fine evening to air the old boss.''Don't, Lance; you none of you have any proper regard for Mr.Froggatt;' which, as far as Lance was concerned, was unjust, and it waswell for Cherry that it was not addressed to either of the brothers whobetter deserved it.What Lance did was to execute one of his peculiar summersaults, andthen, making up a dismal face, to say, 'Alas! I commiserate thevenerable citizen disappointed of the pleasure of driving my LadyGeraldine home from the wash as well as hisself.'She was past even appreciating the bathos. 'It is no laughing matter,'she said; 'it is so uncivil, when he is so kind. I can't imagine whatFelix is thinking of?''Croquet,' said Lance briefly; then seeing the flushed, quivering,mortified face, he added, 'Wilmet has not forgotten you one bit,Cherry; but Alice Knevett and Robin did so want to see the fun in themead--there's running in sacks, and all sorts of games--that there's nogetting any one away; and the W's are in charge, and can't leave themto their own devices, so she said perhaps you would be more rested bylying still than rattling home.''Oh, I dare say Wilmet is as sorry as anybody,' said Cherry ratherquerulously, for the needle point was pricking her again.'And as to your dear old Froggy,' continued Lance, 'she says he toldher he did not in the least expect you back by this train, and if youdid not come by it, he'll stay in town for the 8.50.''How very good of him!' said Cherry, beginning to be consoled. 'AndFelix at croquet!''Alice is teaching him. You never did see such a joke as oldBlunderbore screwing up his eyes at the balls, and making at them withhis mallet like a sledge-hammer. He and Alice and Robin and that Bissetcurate are playing against Bill, two of the girls, and Shapcote--Bexleyagainst Minsterham; and little Bobbie's a real out-and-outer. She'llmake her side win by sheer cool generalship.''And poor little Angel?' The needle point was a pang now.'Oh, Angel is happier than ever she was in her life. The Bishop'sdaughter has a turn for little kids, and has got all the small onestogether in the pleached alley, playing at all manner of things.''Run back, Lance, to the fun. I shall do very well,' said poorGeraldine.'I should think so, when I get you so often!' scornfully ejaculatedLancelot, drawing a dilapidated brioche from under the sofa, andsquatting on it, with his dancing eyes close to her sad ones.An effusion of spirits prompted her to lay her hands on his shoulders,kiss him on each cheek, and cry, 'O Lance, you are the very sweetestboy!''Sweetest treble, you mean,' said Lance quaintly; 'if you had onlyheard me! You should see how the old ladies in the stalls peep andwhisper, and how Bill Harewood opens his mouth rather wider than itwill go, and they think it is he.''Not for fun, Lance?''Well, I believe all their jaws are hung on looser than other people's.But I say, ain't you dying of thirst?''Perhaps Mrs. Harewood will give us some tea when she comes in.''If you trust to that--''O Lance!' she cried, alarmed at seeing him coolly ring the bell.'Bless you, she's forgotten all about you and tea and everything! Theyare drinking it by the gallon in the tents; and by and by she'll rollin, ready to cry that you've had none, and mad with herself and me forgiving you none; and the fire will be out, and the kettle will boilabout ten minutes after you are off by the train. We'll have some thisminute.''But, Lance--''But, Cherry, ain't I a walking Sahara with roaring at the tip-top ofmy voice to lead the clod-hoppers? How they did bellow! I owe it as aduty to the Chapter to wet my whistle.''One comfort is, nobody knows your coolness. Nobody comes for all yourringing.''Reason good! Every living soul in the house is in the Bishop's meadow,barring the old cat; I seen 'em with their cap-strings flying. Butthat's nothing. I know where Mother Harewood keeps her tea and sugar;'and he pounced on a tea-caddy of Indian aspect.'Lance, if you did that to Mettie--''Exactly so. I don't;' and he ran out of the room, while Cherry satup on her sofa, her petulance quite banished between amusement anddesperation at such proceedings in a strange house. He came backpresently, with two cups, saucers, and plates, apparently picked up athap-hazard, as no two were alike. 'My dear Lance, where have you been?''In the kitchen. Such a jolly arched old hole. Bill and I have done noend of Welsh rabbits there. Once when we were melting some lead, Billlet it drop into the pudding, and the Pater got it at dinner, and saidit was the heaviest morsel he ever had to digest.''But wasn't it poison?''I suppose not, for you see he isn't dead. Another time, when we weremelting glue, we upset a whole lot of fat, and the chimney caught fire;and wasn't that a go? Bill got a pistol out of Jack's room, and firedit up the chimney to bring the soot down; and down it came with avengeance! He was regularly singed, and I do think the place would havebeen burned if it had not been too old! All the Shapcotes ran out intothe court, hallooing Fire! and the engine came, but there was nothingfor it to do. Oh, the face Wilmet would make to see that kitchen.Kettle's biling--I must run.'He came back with an enormous metal tea-pot in one hand, and a boilingkettle in the other, a cloud of vapour about his head.'You appear in a cloud, like a Greek divinity,' said Cherry, beginningto enter into the humour of the thing.'Bringing nectar and ambrosia,' said Lance, depositing the kettle amidthe furbelows of paper in the grate, and proceeding to brew the tea.'Excuse the small trifles of milk and cream; and as to bread, I can'tfind it, but here are the cakes you had for luncheon, shunted off intothe passage window. Sugar, Cherry? Fingers were made before tongs. NowI call this jolly.''I only hope this isn't a great liberty.''If you fired off a cannon under Mrs. Harewood's nose, she would notcall it a liberty.''So it appears. But Mr. Harewood does not look--like that.''Oh, he's well broken in. He is the pink of orderliness in his ownstudy and the library, but as long as no one meddles there, he mindsnothing. It just keeps him alive; but I believe the Shapcotes thinkthis house a mild lunatic asylum.''Who are the Shapcotes?''He's registrar. They live in the other half of this place--the oldinfirmary, Mr. Harewood calls it. Such a contrast! He is a tremendousold Turk in his house, and she is a little mincing woman; and they'vemade Gus--he's one of us, you know--a horrid sneak, and think it's allmy bad company and Bill's. By-the-by, Cherry, Gus Shapcote asked me ifmy senior wasn't spoony about--''I hope you told him to mind his own business!' cried Geraldine, with agreat start of indignation.'I told him he was a sheep,' said Lance. 'But, I say, Cherry, I want toknow what you think of it.''Think? I'm not so ready to think nonsense!''Well, when the old giant was getting some tea for her, I saw twoladies look at one another and wink.''Abominably ill-mannered,' she cried, growing ruddier than the cherry.'But had you any notion of it?''Impossible!' she said breathlessly. 'He is only kind and civil to her,as he is to everybody. Think how young he is!''I'm sure I never thought old Blunderbore much younger than Methuselah.Twenty-one! Isn't it about the age one does such things?''Not when one has twelve brothers and sisters on one's back,' sighedGeraldine. 'Poor Felix! No, there can't be anything in it. Don't let usthink of foolish nonsense this wonderful day. What a glorious hymn thatwas!'Lance laid his head lovingly on the sofa-cushion, and discussedthe enjoyment of the day with his skilled appreciation of music.Geraldine's receptive power was not inferior to his own, though she hadnone of that of expression, nor of the science in which he was trained.He was like another being from the merry rattle he was at other times;and she had more glimpses than she ever had before of the high natureand deep enthusiasm that were growing in him.'Hark! there's somebody coming,' she cried, starting.'Let him come. Oh, it is the Pater.--Here is some capital tea, Mr.Harewood. Have some? I'll get a cup.''You are taking care of your sister. That is right. A good colonistyou would make.--Come in, Lee,' said Mr. Harewood, who, to Cherry'sincreased consternation, was followed by another clergyman. 'We arebetter off than I dared to expect, thanks to this young gentleman. MissGeraldine Underwood--Mr. Lee.--You knew her father, I think.''Not poor Underwood of Bexley? Indeed! I knew him. I always wished Icould have seen more of him,' said Mr. Lee, coming up and heartilyshaking hands with Cherry, and asking whether she was staying there, &c.Meantime Lance had fetched a blue china soup-plate, a white cup andpink spotted saucer; another plate labelled 'Nursery,' and a coffee-cupand saucer, one brown and the other blue; and as tidily as if he hadbeen lady of the house or parlour-maid, presented his provisions, Mr.Harewood accepting with a certain quiet amusement. His remarkabletrim neatness of appearance, and old-school precision of manner, madehis quiet humorous acquiescence in the wild ways of his household allthe more droll. After a little clerical talk, that reminded Cherryof the old times when she used to lie on her couch, supposed not tounderstand, but dreamily taking in much more than any one knew--itappeared that Mr. Lee wanted to see something in the Library, and Mr.Harewood asked her whether she would like to come and see Coeur deLion's seal.She was fully rested, and greatly pleased. Lance's arm was quitesufficient now, and she studied the Cathedral and its precincts in asuperexcellent manner. Mr. Harewood, who had spent almost his wholelife under its shadow, and knew the history of almost every stone orquarry of glass, was the best of lionizers, and gave her much attentionwhen he perceived how intelligent and appreciative she was. He showedher the plan of the old conventual buildings, and she began to unravelthe labyrinth through which she had been hurried. The Close and Deanerywere modernized, but he valued the quaint old corner where he livedfor its genuine age. The old house now divided between him and Mr.Shapcote had been the infirmary; and the long narrow building opposite,between the Bailey and the cloister, had been the lodgings either oflay-brothers or servants. There being few boarders at the Cathedralschool, they had always been lodged in the long narrow room, withthe second master in a little closet shut off from them. Cherry wasfavoured with a glance at Lance's little corner, with the old-fashionedblack oak bedstead, solid but unsteady table and stool, the equallyold press, and the book-case he had made himself with boards beggedfrom his friend the carpenter. A photograph and drawing or two, and abat, completed the plenishing. She thought it very uncomfortable, butLance called it his castle; and Mr. Harewood, pointing to the washingapparatus, related that in his day the cock in the Bailey was the onlyprovision for such purposes. The boys were safely locked in at eightevery night when the curfew rang, and the Bailey door was shut, therebeing no other access to their rooms, except by the Cathedral, throughthe Library, and the private door that led into the passage common tothe Harewoods and Shapcotes.The loveliness of the Cloister, the noble vault of the Chapter-house,the various beauties and wonders of the Cathedral, and lastly thecuriosities of the Library--where Mr. Harewood enthroned her in his ownchair, unlocked the cases, brought her the treasures, and turned overthe illuminated manuscripts for her as if she had been a princess--madeGeraldine forget time, weariness, and anxiety, until, as the summer sunwas at last taking leave, a voice called at the window, 'Here she is!I thought Papa would have her here!' and the freckled face of a MissHarewood was seen peering in.There the truants were, eager, hurried, afraid for the train, full ofcompunction for the long abandonment: Alice, most apologetic; Wilmet,most quiet; Felix, most attentive; Robina, still ecstatic; and Angela,tired out--there they all were. It was all one hasty scramble to thecrowded station, and then one merry discussion and comparison of notesall the way home; Geraldine maintaining that she had enjoyed herselfthe best of all; and Alice incredulous of the pleasure of sitting ina musty old library with an old gentleman of at least sixty; whileFelix was so much delighted to find that she had been so happy, that healmost believed that the delay had been solely out of consideration forher.Mr. Froggatt was safe at the station in his basket, full of delightat the enjoyment of his young people, and of anecdotes of Bernard andStella; and Geraldine found herself safely deposited at home, but withone last private apology from Wilmet as she was putting her to bed.'I did not know how to help it,' she said; 'Alice was so wild withdelight, that I could not get her away; and Felix was enjoying hisholiday so thoroughly, I knew that you would be sorry it should beshortened.''Indeed I am very glad you stayed. It would be too bad to encumber you.''I wanted to come and see after you, but I had promised Miss Pearsonnot to lose sight of Alice. And then Lance offered to take care of you.''O Wilmet, I never half knew what a dear boy Lance is! What boy wouldhave come, when all that was going on, to stay with a lame crossthing like me? And how nice for him to have such kind friends as theHarewoods!''They seem very fond of him,' said Wilmet; 'but I wish he had taken upwith the Shapcotes. I never saw such a house. It is enough to ruin allsense of order! But they were very kind to us; and if you were welloff, it was all right. I never saw Felix look so like his bright oldself as to-day; and it is his birth-day, after all.'So Wilmet was innocent of all suspicions--wise experienced Wilmet!That was enough to make Cherry forget that little thorn of jealousy,especially as things subsided into their usual course, and she had nomore food for conjecture.CHAPTER XII.GIANT DESPAIR'S CASTLE.'Who haplesse and eke hopelesse all in vaine,Did to him pace sad battle to darrayne;Disarmd, disgraste, and inwardly dismayde,And eke so faint in every ioynt and vayne,Through that fraile fountaine which him feeble made.'Spenser.Felix's majority made no immediate difference. His thirteenth part ofhis father's small property remained with the rest, at any rate untilhis guardian should return from his travels in the East; but in thecourse of the winter his kind old godfather, Admiral Chester, died, andhaving no nearer relation, left him the result of his small savings outof his pay, which would, the lawyer wrote, amount to about a thousandpounds; but there was a good deal of business to be transacted, and itwould be long before the sum was made over to him.Wilmet and Geraldine thought it a perfect fortune, leading to theUniversity, and release from trade; and they looked rather crestfallenwhen they heard that it only meant 30 per annum in the funds, or50 in some risky investment. Mr. Froggatt's wish was that he shouldpurchase such a share in the business as would really give him standingthere; but Wilmet heard this with regret; she did not like his thusbinding himself absolutely down to trade.'You are thinking for Alda,' said Felix, smiling. 'You are consideringhow Froggatt and Underwood will sound in her ears.''In mine, too, Felix; I do not like it.''I would willingly endure it to become Redstone's master,' said Felix,quietly.'Is he still so vexatious?' asked Geraldine; for not above once in sixmonths did Felix speak of any trials from his companions in business.'Not actively so; but things might be better done, and much ill bloodsaved. I cannot share W. W.'s peculiar pride in preferring to be anassistant instead of a partner.''Then this is what you mean to do with it?''Wait till it comes,' he said, oracularly. 'Seriously, though, I don'twant to tie it all up. The boys may want a start in life.'Neither sister thought of observing that the legacy was to one, notto all. Everybody regarded what belonged to Felix as common property;and the 'boys' were far enough into their teens to begin to make theirfuture an anxious consideration. Clement was just seventeen, and thoughhe had outgrown his voice, was lingering on as a sort of adopted childat St. Matthew's, helping in the parish school, and reading under oneof the clergy in preparation for standing for a scholarship. He triedfor one in the autumn, but failed, so much to his surprise and disgust,that he thought hostility to St. Matthew's must be at the bottom of hisrejection; and came home with somewhat of his martyr-like complacencyat Christmas, meaning to read so hard as to force his way in spiteof prejudice. He was very tall, fair, and slight; and his featureswere the more infantine from a certain melancholy baby-like gravity,which music alone dispersed. He really played beautifully, and beingentrusted with the organ during the schoolmaster's Christmas holidays,made practising his chief recreation. That Lance would often follow himinto church for a study, and always made one of the group round thepiano when Alice Knevett came to sing with them, was a great grievanceto Fulbert, who never loved music, and hated it as a rival for Lance'sattention.These two were generally the closest companions, and were alike inhaving more boyishness, restlessness, and enterprise than theirbrothers. This winter their ambition was to be at all the meets withinfive miles, follow up the hunt, and be able to report the fox's deathat the end of the day. Indeed, their appetite for whatever bore thename of sport was as ravenous as it was indiscriminate; and theirrapturous communications could not be checked by Clement's manifestcontempt, or the discouraging indifference of the rest--all but Robina,who loved whatever Lance loved, and was ready to go to a meet, ifWilmet had not interfered with a high hand.Before long Felix wished that his authority over the male part of thefamily were as well established as that in her department.One hunting day the two brothers came in splashed up to the eyes,recounting how they had found a boy of about their own age in a ditch,bruised and stunned, but not seriously hurt; how with consolation andschoolboy surgery they had cheered him, and found he was Harry Collis,whom they had known as a school-fellow at Bexley; how they had helpedhim home to Marshlands Hall, and had been amazed at the dreariness andwant of all home comfort at the place, so that they did not like toleave him till his father came home; and how Captain Collis had notonly thanked them warmly, but had asked them over to come and shootrabbits the next day.There was nothing to blame them for, but Felix had much rather it hadnever happened. Captain Collis was one of a race of squires who hadnever been very reputable, and had not risen greatly above the farmer.He had been in the army, and had the bearing of a gentleman; but eversince his wife's death, he had lived an unsatisfactory sort of lifeat the Hall, always forward in sport, but not well thought of, andbelieved to be a good deal in debt. His only child, this Harry Collis,had been sent somewhat fitfully to the St. Oswald's Grammar School,and had been rather a favourite companion of Lance's; but separationhad put an end to the intimacy, and this renewal was not at all to thetaste of their eldest brother.'It can't be helped this time,' he said, when he heard of theinvitation; 'I suppose you must go to-morrow, but I don't fancy theconcern.'Fulbert's bristles began to rise, but Lance chatted gaily on. 'But,Fee, you never saw such a place! Stables for nine hunters. Only think!And a horse entered for the Derby! We are to see him to-morrow. It isthe jolliest place.''Nine hunters!' moralized Clement; 'they cost as much as three timesnine orphans.''And they are worth a dozen times as much as the nasty little beggars!'said Fulbert.On which Angela put in the trite remark that the orphans had souls.'Precious rum ones,' muttered Fulbert; and in the clamour thus raisedthe subject dropped; but when next morning, in the openness of hisheart, Lance invited Clement to go with them to share the untold joysof rabbit-shooting, he met with a decisive reply. 'Certainly not! Ishould think your Dean would be surprised at you.''Oh, the Dean is a kind old chap,' answered Lance, off-hand; 'wheneverhe has us to sing at a party, he tips us all round, thanks us, andtells us to enjoy ourselves in the supper-room, like a gentleman, as heis.''Do you know what this Collis's character is?''Hang his character! I want his rabbits.'And Lance was off with Fulbert; while Clement remained, to makeGeraldine unhappy with his opinion of the temptations of MarshlandsHall, returning to the charge when Felix came in before dinner.'Yes,' said Felix briefly, 'Mr. Froggatt has been telling me. It mustbe stopped.''Have you heard of the mischief that--''Don't be such a girl, Tina. I am going to do the thing, and there isno use in keeping on about it.'Felix had not called Clement Tina since he had been head of the family,and irritability in him was a token of great perplexity; for indeed hishardest task always was the dealing with Fulbert; and he was besidesvery sorry to balk the poor boys of one of their few chances of manlyamusement.He would have waited to utter his prohibition till the excitementshould have worked off, but he knew that Clement would never holdhis peace through the narrative of their adventures; so, as they hadnot come in when his work was over, he took Theodore on his arm, andretreated to the little parlour behind the shop, where he lay in wait,reading, and mechanically whistling tunes to Theodore, till he heardthe bell, and went to open the door.The gas showed them rosy, merry, glorious, and bespattered, onewaving a couple of rabbits, and the other of pheasants, and trying totickle Theodore's cheeks with the long tails of the latter, of coursefrightening him into a fretful wail.'Take Theodore upstairs, if you please, Lance,' said Felix, 'and thencome down; I want you.''The Captain was going to dine at Bowstead's,' said Fulbert, 'so hedrove us in his dog-cart. If the frost holds, we are to go out andskate on Monday.'Felix employed himself in putting away his papers, without answering.'I had very good luck,' continued Fulbert, 'four out of six; wonderfulfor so new a hand, the Captain said.''Such a lovely animal you never saw,' said Lance, swinging himselfdownstairs. 'You must walk out and see it, Fee, for you'll have it inthe Pursuivant some Saturday.''Lance, I am very sorry,' said Felix, standing upright, with his backto the exhausted grate. 'Just attend to me, both of you.''Oh!' said Lance, hastily, 'I know there's a lot of old women's gossipabout Collis; but nobody minds such stuff. Harry is as good a lad asever stepped; and there was no harm to be seen about the place;--wasthere, Ful?''The old Frog has been croaking,' hoarsely muttered Fulbert.Boys of sixteen and fourteen were incapable of coercion by a youthof one-and-twenty, and the only appeal must be to conscience andreason; so Felix went on speaking, though he had seen from the firstthat Fulbert's antagonism rendered him stolid, deaf, and blind; andLancelot's flushed cheeks, angry eyes, impatient attempts to interrupt,and scornful gestures told of scarcely-repressed passion.'You may have seen no harm, I find no fault' (Fulbert scowled); 'butif I had known what I do now I should not have let you go to-day. Myfather would rather have cut off his right hand than have allowed youto begin an acquaintance which has been ruinous to almost all the youngmen who have been in that set.''But we are not young men,' cried Lance; 'it is only for the holidays;and we only want a little fun with poor Harry, he is so lonely--andjust to go out rabbiting and skating. It is very hard we can't belet alone the first time anything worth doing has turned up in thisabominable slow place.''It is very hard, Lance. No one is more concerned than I; but if thisintimacy once begins, there is no guessing where it will lead; and I donot speak without grounds. Listen--''If it comes from old Frog, you may as well shut up,' said Lance.'There's been no peace at Marshlands since he took that cottage--aregular old nuisance and mischief-maker, spiting the Captain becauseone of the dogs killed his old cock, and bothering Charlie to no endabout him.''I have heard from others as well,' said Felix; and he brieflymentioned some facts as to the scandals of the dissipated household,some of the imputations under which Captain Collis lay, and named twoor three of the young men whose unsatisfactory conduct was ascribed tohis influence.He saw that both lads were startled, and wound up with saying,'Therefore it is not without reason that I desire that you do not gothere again.'With which words, he opened the door, turned off the gas, and walkedupstairs, hearing on the way a growl of Fulbert's--'That's what comesof being cad to a stupid brute of an old tradesman;' and likewise abouncing, rolling, and tumbling, and a very unchorister-like expletivefrom Lance; but he hurried up, like the conclave from the vault atLindisfarn, only with a sinking heart, and looks that made his sisterssay how tired he must be. The boys were seen no more, but sent word byBernard that they were wet through, they should not dress, but shouldget some supper in the kitchen, and go to bed.On Sunday Lance had recovered himself and his temper, but in theevening he made another attempt upon Felix in private. His heart wasgreatly set upon Marshlands, and he argued that there was no evil atall in what they had been doing, and entreated Felix to be content withthe promise both were willing to make, to take no share in anythingdoubtful--not even to play at billiards, or cards--if that wouldsatisfy him, said Lance, 'but we will promise anything you pleaseagainst playing, or betting, or--''I know, Lance, you once made such a promise, and kept it. I trust youentirely. But before, it would have been cruel to keep you from thatsick boy; now this would be mere running into temptation for your ownamusement.''Harry is not much better off than Fernan was,' said Lancelot,wistfully.'Poor fellow! very likely not; but it would be more certain harm toyourself than good to him. Any way, no respectable person would chooseto be intimate there, or to let their boys resort there; and it is myduty not to consent.''Ful is in such an awful way,' said Lance, disconsolately. 'Fee, youdon't know how hard it is, you always were such a muff.''That is true,' said Felix, not at all offended; 'and I had my fatherand Edgar; but indeed, Lance, nothing ever was so hard to me to do asthis. I cannot say how sorry I am.''You do really order me not?' said Lance, looking straight up at him.'I do. I forbid you to go into Captain Collis's grounds, or to do morethan exchange a greeting, if you meet him.''I will not. There's my word and honour for it, since--since you are sointolerably led by the nose by old Frog;' and Lance flung away, withthe remains of his passion worked up afresh, and was as glum as hisnature allowed the rest of the evening; but Felix, though much annoyed,saw that the boy had set up voluntarily two barriers between himselfand his tempted will--in the command and the promise.But the command that was a guard to the one, was a goad to the other;for Fulbert had never accepted his eldest brother's authority, andcould not brook interference. Still his school character was good, andthere was a certain worth about him, which made him sometimes withdrawhis resistance, though never submit; and Felix had some hope that itwould be so in the present case, when, while speeding to church in thedark winter Monday morning, he overheard Lance say to Clement, 'I say,Clem, 'tis a jolly stinging frost. If you'll take your skates and giveus a lesson, we'll be off for the lake at Centry.'One of the Whittingtonian curates had taken the boys to the ice in theparks, and taught them so effectively, that Clement was one of the bestskaters in Bexley; but he was too much inclined to the nayward not toreply, 'I have to practise that anthem for Wednesday.''Oh, bother the practice!'(Which Felix mentally echoed.)'I can play that anthem, if that's all,' said Lance; 'and I believe youknow it perfectly well. Now, Clem, don't be savage; I think, if youwill come, we might put that other thing out of Ful's head.''Well, if you think it is to be of use--''That's right! Thank you,' cried Lance. 'And you won't jaw us all theway? He can't stand that, you know.'Clement winced; but in compensation, apparently, for this forbiddenlecture, he observed, 'I am glad you at least take it properly, Lance,though it would be worse in you than in him, considering your--''Bother it!' unceremoniously broke in Lance; and the words of wisdomwere silenced.Lance did his best to organise his party, but it was a failure; Fulbertsaid he had made an engagement, and would not break it; he was notbound to toady old Froggy, nor in bondage to any old fogeys of a deanand chapter; and he walked off the faster for Clement's protest,leaving Lance to roll on the floor and climb the balusters backwardsto exhale his desire to follow. He was too much upset even to followClement to the organ, or to settle to the drawing which Cherry wasteaching him, and was a great torment to himself and his sisters tilldinner-time, when Clement had done his organ and his Greek, and wasready for a rush for the ice; and Robina went joyously with them.'Between two young ladies one can't well run into harm's way,' saidLance.So things went on for a fortnight. Fulbert never shuffled, he wentopenly to Marshlands Hall; and though not boasting of his expeditions,did not treat them as a secret. Wilmet and Geraldine each triedpersuasion, but were silenced rudely; and Felix, unable to enforce hisauthority, held his tongue, but was very unhappy, both for the presentand for the future. He did not believe much harm was doing now, but thetemptation would increase with every vacation as the boys came nearerto manhood; and he seemed to have lost all influence and moral powerover Fulbert.Good old Mrs. Froggatt gave a small children's party, to which, withmany apologies, she invited the lesser Underwoods, under charge ofWilmet. They were to sleep at the cottage, and Wilmet having offered tohelp in dressing the Christmas-tree, they set out early in the day towalk, escorted by the three brothers. That the trio did not return totea did not alarm Felix and Geraldine, who suspected that the dislikethe two elder expressed to the whole house of Froggatt had meltedbefore the pleasure of working at the tree.The evening was taken up in the discussion of a letter of Edgar's, morethan usually discontented with his employment; and another of Alda's,who had been laid under orders to write to her eldest brother, anddesire him to remonstrate with Edgar on his inattention, laziness, andpleasure-seeking. The anxiety had long been growing up; Felix had cometo write his difficult letter by the light of Geraldine's sympathy,and they were weighing what should be said, when the door-bell rang,some sounds puzzled them, and just as Felix was getting up to see whatwas the matter, Fulbert put his head in at the door, and said, low butearnestly, 'Step here, Felix, please.'He thought there must have been some terrible accident; but when fromthe top of the stairs he beheld Clement's aspect under the gas inthe passage, and heard the thick tones in which he was holding forthaccording to instinct, his consternation was almost greater than at anyinjury. Fulbert looked pale and astounded. 'I can't get him upstairs,'he said.However, sense enough remained to Clement to give effect to his eldestbrother's stern words, 'Be quiet, and come up;' and they dragged himstumbling upstairs without more words.'Where's Lance?' then asked Felix.'Stayed at the Froggatts'. I wish he hadn't. He will walk homeby-and-by.''Now, Ful, run and tell Cherry that nobody is hurt. Do not let her getfrightened.'Felix spoke resolutely, but he felt so full of dismay and horror,that he hardly knew what he was doing till Fulbert had returned, andrepressing all poor Clement's broken moralities, they had deposited himsafely in bed, and shut the door on him. Then Fulbert gazed up at Felixwith eyes full of regret and consternation, and he gathered breath toenter his own room, and say, 'What is the meaning of this?''His head must be ridiculously weak; or there was some beastly trick.Nobody else was the least queer!''Marshlands Hall?''Well, he had gone on at me so, that when Lance let himself bepersuaded into staying to hang up the lamps, it struck me what a larkit would be to take Tina across the Hall lands, and then tell him hehad been on the enemy's ground. So I told him of the old chantry thatis turned into a barn, and of course he must go and see it, and takesketches of the windows for his clergy. While he was doing it, up comesyoung Jackman. You know young Jackman at the Potteries--a regularclever fellow that knows everything?''Yes, I know him.''Well, they got into early pointed, and late pointed, and billets anddog-tooths, and all the rest, and Clem went on like a house on fire;and by that time we had got to the big pond, where Collis and halfa dozen more were, and he had got his skates, and I believe he didsurprise them; they called it first rate.''Did he know where he was?''Not at the beginning of the skating. I only wanted to get him downfrom his altitudes, and never thought it would come to this. Youbelieve that, Felix?''Yes, I do. Go on.''It was fine moonlight, and we stayed on ever so long, while Jackmanand Clem and two more danced a quadrille on the ice; and when it wasover everybody was horribly cold, and Captain Collis said we must allcome in and have something hot; and Jackman said he was going to drivehome to dinner at eight, and would take us, but every one got talking,and it was half-past eight before we started. It was all in such ascramble, that I had no notion there was anything amiss till Clem beganto talk on the way home.''What were they drinking?''Various things--brandy-and-water chiefly. I don't like it, and hadsome ale; but I was playing with Harry's puppies, and not much noticingClem.''Do you think it was a trick?''I can't tell. He is so innocent, he would have no notion how stiff tomake it. If any one meant mischief, it was Jackman; and I did thinkonce or twice he had found out Tina, and was playing him off. On theway home, when I was trying to hinder poor Clem from falling off, hewent on chaffing so, that I longed to jump off, and lay the whip abouthis ears.''Poor Clem!' said Felix, more grieved and shocked than angry, and notinsensible to Fulbert's being even more appalled, and quite frightenedout of his sulkiness.'It is a bad business,' he sighed. 'It was all Lance's fault forletting himself be lugged into that baby party.'Even this was a great admission, and Felix would not blight it by aword.'It is well the girls are not at home,' was all he said.'I only told Cherry that Clem wasn't well. I can't face her; I shall goto bed. I would not have had this happen for the world.''I shall say nothing to her,' said Felix, dejectedly, turning to leavethe room, under a horrible sense of disgrace and stain on the wholefamily; but at the door he was caught hold of by Fulbert, who looked upat him with a face quite unlike anything he had ever seen in the lad.'Felix, I never was so sorry in my life. I wish you would give me agood rowing.'Felix half smiled. 'I could not,' he said. 'You did not know what youwere doing. Good-night.'Fulbert gazed after him as he went downstairs, and went back, with agroan, to his own room.Felix had never before felt so hopeful about Fulbert; but still he wastoo much overset to talk to Cherry, and hurried her off to bed, soonfollowing her example, for he had not the heart to see Lance that night.Of course, the first hours of the morning had to be spent in attendingon the victim, whose misery, mental and bodily, was extreme, and wasaggravated by his engagement to the organ. Lance could supply his placethere, and was sent off to do so, but looking as subdued and guilty asif he had been making Fulbert's confession instead of hearing it, andstumbling uncomfortably over the explanation that Clement was not well,and that Felix could not leave him.For there was a fragility about Clement's long lank frame that made anyshock to it very severe, and he was ill enough to alarm his happilyinexperienced brothers, and greatly increase Fulbert's penitence; butby the time Mr. Froggatt drove the sisters home, and Wilmet wonderedthat she could not go out for a night without some one being ill, hehad arrived at a state which she could be left to attribute to Mrs.Froggatt's innocent mince-pies.He burrowed under his blankets, and feigned sleep and discomfort beyondspeech, whenever she came into the room, begging only that the lightmight be kept out, and that nobody would speak to him. He was tooutterly miserable for anger with Fulbert, but only showed a sort ofbroken-hearted forgiveness, which made Fulbert say in desperation toLance, 'I wish you would just fall upon me. I shall not be myself againtill I've been blown up!''I suppose you are doing it for yourself, and that is worse,' saidLance.'And you know it was all your doing, for going to that disgusting oldPhilistine's tea and cake.''What, you and Clem wanted me to lead you about, like two dogs in astring?' said Lance.'No; Tina would have kept the baby-bunting out of harm's way.''More likely he would have bored me into going. Poor Tina! I shouldalmost like to hear him jaw again! After all, you and he neverpromised, and I did.''I wish I had,' said Fulbert; 'I am awfully afraid they are gettinghold of it in the town.''So am I. Mowbray Smith looked me all over, and asked me after Clement,when I met him just now in the street, as if he had some malice in hishead.''What did you tell him?''I said he was in a state of collapse, and that serious fears wereentertained for his life and reason; and then he warned me against thenineteenth-century manners, and I thanked him and made a bow, and now Isuppose he is gone to tell my Lady.'When Felix was free in the evening, he found Clement dressed, andsitting over the fire in his room--so well indeed, that he might havebeen downstairs, but that he shrank from every one; and that fire hadbeen the fruit of such persevering battles of Wilmet and Sibby with thesmoke and soot, that it would have been a waste of good labour to havedeserted it.'Well, Clem, you are better?''Yes, thank you.''Head-ache gone?''Nearly,' with a heavy sigh.Felix drew an ancient straw-bottomed chair in front of the firebackwards, placed himself astride on it, laid his arms on the topand his forehead on them, and in this imposing Mentorial attitudebegan, 'After all, Clem, I don't see that you need be so desperatelybroken-hearted. It was mere innocence and ignorance. Water-drinkers athome are really not on a level with other people. I always have to bevery guarded when I have to dine with the other reporters.''No,' said Clement, sadly; 'I do not regard the disgrace as the sin somuch as the punishment.'It was more sensible than Felix had expected. He was conscious of notunderstanding Clement, who always seemed to him like a girl, but iftreated like one, was sure to show himself in an unexpected light.'You did not know where you were going?''Not at first. I found out long before I came off the ice; and then,like an absurd fool as I was, I thought myself showing how to dealcourteously and hold one's own with such people.''You are getting to the bottom of it,' said Felix.'I have been thinking it over all day,' said Clement, mournfully. 'Isee that such a fall could only be the consequence of long-continuederror. Have I not been very conceited and uncharitable of late, Felix?''Not more than usual,' said Felix, intending to speak kindly.'I see. I have been treating my advantages as if they were merits,condemning others, and lording it over them. Long ago I was warned thatmy danger was spiritual pride, but self-complacency blinded me.' And hehid his face and groaned.Felix was surprised. He could not thus have discussed himself, evenwith his father; but he perceived that if Clement had no one elseto preach to he would preach to himself, and that this anatomicalexamination was done in genuine sorrow.'No humility!' continued Clement. 'That is what has brought me to this.If I had distrusted and watched myself, I should have perceived whenI grew inflated by their flattery, and never--egregious fool that Iwas--have thought I was showing that one of our St. Matthew's choircould meet worldly men on their own ground.'Felix was glad that his posture enabled him to conceal a smile; butperhaps Clement guessed at it, for he exclaimed, 'A fit consequence, tohave made myself contemptible to everybody!''Come, Clem, that is too strong. Your censorious way was bad foryourself, and obnoxious to us all, and it was very silly to go to thatplace after what you had heard.''After telling Lance it was unworthy of a servant of the sanctuary,'moaned Clement.'Very silly indeed,' continued the elder brother, 'very wrong; but asto what happened there, it is not reasonable to look at it as more thanan accident. It will be forgotten in a week by all but Fulbert andyourself, and you will most likely be the wiser for it all your lives.I never got on so well with Ful before, or saw him really sorry.'Clement only answered by a disconsolate noise; and Felix was becominga little impatient, thinking the penitence overstrained, when he brokesilence with, 'You must let me go up to St. Matthew's!''Really, Clement, it is hardly right to let you be always living uponMr. Fulmort now your occupation is ended, and it would be braver not torun away.''I do not mean that!' cried Clement. 'I will not stay there. I wouldnot burthen them; but see the Vicar I must! I will go third class,and walk from the station.''The fare of an omnibus will not quite break our backs,' said Felix,smiling. 'If this is needful to settle your mind, you had better go.''You do not know what this is to me,' said Clement, earnestly; 'Iwish you did.' Then perceiving the recurrence to his old propensity,he sighed pitifully and hung his head, adding, 'It is of no use tillSaturday, the Vicar is gone to his sisters.''Very well, you can get a return ticket on Saturday--that is, if theorganist is come back.''Lance must play; I am not worthy.''You have no right to break an engagement for fancies about your ownworthiness,' said Felix. 'Rouse yourself up, and don't exaggerate thething, to alarm all the girls, and make them suspicious.''They ought to know. I felt myself a wicked hypocrite when Wilmetwould come and read me the Psalms, and yet I could not tell her. Tellthem, Felix; I cannot bear it without.''No, I shall not. You have no right to grieve and disgust them justbecause you "cannot bear it without." Cannot you bear up, instead ofdrooping and bemoaning in this way? It is not manly.''Manliness is the great temptation of this world.''You idiot!' Felix, in his provocation, broke out; then getting himselfin hand again, 'Don't you know the difference between true and falsemanliness?''I know men of the world make the distinction,' said Clement; 'I am notmeaning any censure, Felix. Circumstances have given you a differentstandard.'Felix interrupted rather hotly: 'Only my father's. I have heard himsay, that if one is not a man before one is a parson, one brings theministry into contempt. The things the boys call you Tina for are notwhat make a good clergyman.''I don't feel as if I could presume to seek the priesthood after that.''Stuff and nonsense!' cried Felix. 'If no one was ordained who had evermade a fool of himself and repented, we should be badly off for clergy.You were conceited and provoking, and have let yourself be led into anasty scrape--that's the long and short of the matter; but it is onlyhugging your own self-importance to sit honing and moaning up here.Come down, and behave like a reasonable being.''Let me stay here to-night, Felix, I do need it,' said Clement, withtears in his eyes; 'if I am alone now, I think I can bring myself tobear up outwardly as you wish.'The affected tone had vanished, and Felix rose, and kindly put hishand on his shoulder, and said, 'Do, Clem. You know it is not only myworldliness--mere man of business as I am--that bids us to hide griefwithin, and "anoint the head and wash the face."'Just then an exulting shout rang through the house, many feet scuttledupstairs, knocks hailed upon the door, and many voices shouted, 'Mr.Audley! Felix, Clem, Mr. Audley!''Won't you come, Clem?''Not to-night; I could not.'Clement shut the door, and Felix hastened down among the dancingexulting little ones. 'I thought you were at Rome!' he said, as thehands met in an eager grasp.'I was there on Christmas Day; but Dr. White's appointment is settled,and he wants me to go out with him in June. My brother is gone on toLondon, and I must join him there on Saturday.''I am glad it is to-day instead of yesterday,' said Wilmet. 'We wereall out but Felix and Cherry, and poor Clement was so ill.''Clement ill? Is he better?''He will be all right to-morrow,' said Felix.Mr. Audley detected a desire to elude inquiry, as well as a meaninglook between the two younger boys, and he thought care sat heavier onthe brow of the young master of the house than when they had partedeighteen months before.His travels were related, his photographs admired, his lodging arrangedin Mr. Froggatt's room, and after the general good-night, he drew hischair in to the fire, and prepared for a talk with his ex-ward.'You look anxious, Felix. Have things gone on pretty well?''Pretty fairly, thank you, till just now, when there is rather an uglyscrape,'--and he proceeded to disburthen his mind of last night'smisadventure; when it must be confessed that the narrative of Clement'soverweening security having had a fall provoked a smile from hisguardian, and an observation that it might do him a great deal of good.'Yes,' said Felix, 'if his friends do not let him make much of hispenitence, and think it very fine to have so important a thing torepent of.''I don't think they will do that. You must not take Clement as exactlythe fruit of their teaching.''There's no humbug about him, at least,' said Felix. 'He is really cutup exceedingly. Indeed all I have been doing was to get him to moderatehis dolefulness. I believe he thinks me a sort of heathen.''Well,' said Mr. Audley, laughing, 'you don't seem to have taken theline of the model head of the family.''The poor boys were both so wretched, that one could not say a wordto make it worse,' said Felix. 'This satisfies me that Fulbert is allright in that way. He would not have been so shocked if he had everseen anything like it before; but though he is very sorry now, I amafraid it will not cut the connection with those Collises.''You do not find him easier to manage?''No; that is the worst. He is not half a bad boy--nay, what is called awell-principled boy--only it is his principle not to mind me. I do notknow whether I am donnish with him, or if I bullied him too much whenhe was little; but he is always counter to me. Then he is one of thoseboys who want an out-of-door life, and on whom the being shut up in atown falls hard. The giving up sporting is real privation to him and toLance, and much the hardest on him, for he does not care for music ordrawing, or anything of that sort.''How old is he?''Just sixteen.''Suppose I were to take him out to Australia?''Fulbert!''Yes; I always intended to take one if I went, but I waited tillmy return to see about it, and I thought Clement was of a moreinconvenient age; but you must judge.''Poor Tina!' said Felix, smiling, 'he would hardly do in a colony. Heis heart and soul a clergyman, and whether he will ever be more of aman I don't know; but I don't think he could rough it as a missionary.''Is he going to get a scholarship?''He has tried at Corpus, and failed. He is full young, and I suppose heought to go to a tutor. I am afraid he learnt more music than classicsup at that place.''Can the tutoring be managed?''I suppose a hundred out of that thousand will do it.''Is that thousand to go like the famous birth-day five?''Five hundred is to be put into the business; but the rest I meant tokeep in reserve for such things as this.''If all are to be helped at this rate, your reserve will soon come toan end.''Perhaps so; but I have always looked on Clement as my own substitute.Indeed, I held that hope out to my father, when it distressed him thatI should give it up. So Clem is pretty well settled, thank you. BesidesI am not afraid of his not going on well here; but I do believe Fulbertwill do the better for being more independent, only it seems to me toomuch to let you undertake for us.''They are all my charge,' said Mr. Audley; 'and as I am leaving youthe whole burthen of the rest, and my poor little godson is not likelyto want such care, you need have no scruple. One of the Somervilles isgoing out to a Government office at Albertstown, and perhaps may put mein the way of doing something for him.'Felix mused a moment, then said, 'The only doubt in my mind would bewhether, if it suited you equally, it might not be an opening forEdgar.''Edgar! Surely he is off your hands?''I am greatly afraid his present work will not last. He always hatedit, and I believe he always had some fancy that he could persuade TomUnderwood into making a gentleman of him at once, sending him to theUniversity or the like, and they petted and admired him enough toconfirm the notion. Mrs. Underwood makes him escort her to all herparties; and you know what a brilliant fellow he is--sure to be wantedfor all manner of diversions, concerts, private theatricals, and whatnot; and you can fancy how the counting-house looks to him after. TomUnderwood declares he requires nothing of him but what he would of hisown son; and I believe it is true; but work is work with him, and hewill not be trifled with. Here is a letter about it, one of many, Iwas trying to answer last night; only this affair of poor Clem's upseteverything.''Six brothers are no sinecure, Felix.''They are wonderfully little trouble,' said Felix, standing on theirdefence. 'They are all good sound-hearted boys; and as to Lance,there's no saying the comfort that little fellow always is. He has thatpeculiar pleasantness about him--like my father and Edgar--that onefeels the moment he is in the house; and he is so steady, with all hisspirits. The other two both say all this could not have happened withhim.''High testimony.''Yes, as both are inclined to look down on him. But think of that boy'sconsideration. He has never once asked me for pocket-money since hewent to the Cathedral. He gets something when the Dean and Canons havethe boys to sing, and makes that cover all little expenses.''What do you mean to do with him?''If he gets the scholarship, a year and a half hence, he will stay ontwo years free of expense. Unluckily, he says that young Harewood iscleverer than he, and always just before him: but I have some hope inthe hare-brains of Master Bill. If he do not get it--well, we must see,but it will go hard if Lance cannot be kept on to be educated properly.'Mr. Audley took the letters, and presently broke into an indignantexclamation; to which Felix replied--'The work is not good enough for him, that is the fact.''If you are weak about any one, Felix, it is Edgar. I have no patiencewith him. His work not good enough, forsooth, considering what yoursis!''Mine has much more interest and variety; and he is capable of muchmore than I am.''Then let him show it, instead of living in the lap of luxury, andmurmuring at a few hours at the desk.''I ascribe that to his temperament, which certainly has a good deal ofthe artist; that desk-work is peculiarly irksome.''Very likely; but it is his plain duty to conquer his dislike. No,Felix; I wish I could take him away with me, for I am afraid he will bea source of trouble.''Never! Edgar is too considerate.''But he is exactly what Australia is over-stocked with already--adiscontented clerk. If he be spoilt by luxury here, do you think hewould bear with a rude colony? No. Fulbert is a gruff, obstinate boy,but not idle and self-indulgent; and I am not afraid to undertake him,but I should be of Edgar.'Felix had flushed up a good deal, for his love for Edgar was lesspaternal and more sensitively keen than that for any of the others; buthe was more reasonable, and had more control of temper now, than whenMr. Audley had last crossed him; and he made answer, 'I believe you areright, and that Edgar could not be happy in a colony. Any way, you aremost kind to Fulbert. But I am afraid I must go now, or Theodore willwake.''Do you still have him at night?''He is not happy with any one else. You have not seen him yet? I amsure he is improving! There's his voice! Good-night.' And Felix hurriedaway, leaving Mr. Audley feeling that though here and there the youngpillar of the house might be mistaken, the daily unselfishness of hislife was a beautiful thing, and likewise impressed by his grave air ofmanly resolution and deliberation.By the morning, Clement had recovered his tone, so as not to obtrudehis penitence or to be much more subdued in manner than usual. Mr.Audley made him bring his books to the dining-room after breakfast, andthe examination quite exonerated the authorities at Oxford from anyprejudice except against inaccuracy, and showed that a thorough courseof study was needful before he could even matriculate; and Clement inhis present lowliness was not incredulous of any deficiency at St.Matthew's, but was only meek and mournful.'What shall I do?' he asked. 'Perhaps some school would take me toteach and study at the same time. Or I might get an organist's place,and read so that I might be ordained as a literate at last. It wouldcome when I was fit, I suppose.'Mr. Audley only said he would inquire, and talk to Felix; and Clementpleased him by answering that he could not bear to be an expense toFelix. The good principle in the boys was quite to be traced, whenpresently after it was necessary to put Fulbert to a severe trial. Ongoing to pay his respects at the Rectory, Mr. Audley found Mr. MowbraySmith there, and after some preliminaries, he was asked whether he knewhow the young Underwoods had been going on of late; of course, though,it would be concealed from him: but it was right, &c. Then Mr. Bevanfeebly suggested that he did not believe there was any truth in it, andwas sharply silenced; and Miss Caroline observed that she was alwayssure that Clement Underwood was a great humbug; whereupon, between themother, daughter and curate, the popular version of the MarshlandsHall affair was narrated--or rather versions, for all were beautifullyentangled and contradictory.Some one had been in the street, and had seen poor Clement's exit fromyoung Jackman's dog-cart, and reported indiscriminately that it was'young Underwood.' Lance had not been able to put a sufficiently boldface on his morning's report of Clement's indisposition and Felix'sabsence; and this, together with the boys' hunting propensities, andFulbert's visits to Marshlands, had all been concocted into a veryserious accusation of the whole of the brothers, including Felix, ofhaving entered into a dangerous friendship with Captain Collis, andunderhand enjoying the dissipations of the Hall, which had been thebane of many a young man of Bexley.There were different measures of indignation. Miss Price expected agrand series of denunciations--to Mr. Froggatt--to Miss Pearson, 'whoseniece was always there--most imprudent;'--nay, perhaps to the Dean, andto the Vicar of St. Matthew's. The least excitement she expected, wasFelix Underwood's expulsion from the choir.Lady Price merely believed it all, and thought the friends ought tointerfere, and save the poor young things while there was time for anyof them. She would never mention it so as to injure them, but nothingelse could be expected.Mr. Mowbray Smith supposed there must be some exaggeration, but hehad been surprised at Lancelot's manner, and he did not think Felix'sabsence accounted for; he did seem steady--but-- And there wassomething unnatural in the way of life at St. Matthew's, that wouldmake him never trust a lad from thence.Yes; and even Mr. Bevan did not like St. Matthew's (because it was notslack or easy), and he too could believe anything of Clement. No doubtpoor Felix found those great brothers getting too much for him.Mr. Audley was standing by the window. He saw Fulbert with Lance andlittle Bernard going down the street, and by one of the sudden dashesthat had often puzzled the Rectory, he flew out at the door, and thenext moment had his hand on Fulbert's shoulder.'Fulbert, they have made a terrible scandal of this affair atMarshlands Hall. They fancy Felix had something to do with it.''Felix! I should like to punch their heads.''You can do better. You can contradict it.''But, Sir--'However, Fulbert, while still following to plead with Mr. Audley, foundhimself where he never recollected to have been in his life before,among the cushions, arm-chairs, and tables covered with knick-knacks,of the Rectory drawing-room. Mr. Bevan in an easy-chair; Mr. Smithstanding before the fire; Lady Price at work, looking supercilious; andher daughter writing notes at a davenport.Mr. Bevan half rose and held out his hand, the others contentedthemselves with a nod, while the big, stout lad stood rather like agreat dog under the same circumstances, very angry with everybody, andchiefly with Mr. Audley--to whom, nevertheless, he trusted for gettinghim safe out again.'Fulbert,' said Mr. Audley, 'Mr. Bevan would be better satisfied if hecould hear what intimacy there has been between your brothers and theCollises.''None at all,' said Fulbert, bluntly.'My boy,' said the gentle Rector, deprecatingly, 'nobody ever suspectedyour eldest brother.''I should think not!' exclaimed Fulbert, with angry eyes. 'All he everdid was to warn us against going. More fools not to mind him!''Then,' said my Lady, 'it has been the insubordination and wilfulnessof you younger boys that has nearly involved him in so grave animputation.''Of nobody's but mine,' returned Fulbert. 'The others would havenothing to do with it.''That cannot be the literal fact,' said Mr. Smith, in a low voice, toLady Price. 'There were certainly two of them.'Fulbert heard, and turning to the Rector, as if he thought every oneelse beneath his notice, said, 'The long and short of it is this:Lance and I picked young Collis out of a ditch, and took him home.Then Captain Collis asked us rabbit-shooting. Lance never went again,because Felix did not choose it. I did; and, just by way of a joke, Itook Clement there without his knowing what place it was. We fell inwith them skating, and went into the house, the day before yesterday.That is,' said Fulbert, concluding as he had begun, 'the long and shortof it. Whatever happened was my fault, and no one else's.''A very honest confession!' said kind Mr. Bevan, pleased to havesomething to praise.'And I hope it will act as a warning,' said Lady Price.'But,' said Mr. Smith, partly incited by Carry's looks, 'it was truethat you--two of you were brought home by young Jackman.''Yes,' said Fulbert, growing crimson, 'he drove Clement and me home!''And,' said Mr. Audley, 'it was Clement's great distress that keptFelix at home the next morning.''Yes,' said Fulbert, 'there was nobody else but me, and Clem couldhardly bear the sight of me, because I had led him into it. We thoughtno one in the house would know it--and I don't believe they do.''Ah!' said Lady Price, 'it is false kindness to attempt concealment.''From lawful authority it is,' said Mr. Audley; 'but in this case itwas only from children and servants. However, Fulbert, I think you havefully satisfied Mr. Bevan as to the amount of intercourse between yourbrothers and Marshlands.''Entirely,' said Mr. Bevan; 'in fact, you may assure your brother thatI never believed anything to his discredit.''I shall say nothing about it,' said Fulbert, not choosing to see thehand held out to him. 'I should be ashamed!--May I go now, Sir?' to Mr.Audley; and with an odd sort of circular bow, he made his escape; andMr. Audley, having remained long enough to ascertain that the worstthat could be said of him was that he was a cub, and that it was aterrible thing to see so many great hulking lads growing up under nocontrol, took his leave, and presently came on the three boys again,consulting at the ironmonger's window over the knife on which Bernardwas to spend a half-crown that Mrs. Froggatt had given him.'Can Lance and Bernard settle that? I want you a moment, Fulbert. Notto confront the Rectory again,' he added, smiling. 'It was a horridbore for you, but there was no helping it.''I suppose not,' said Fulbert, gloomily, as if he did not forgive theunpleasant moments.'It was not about that I wanted to speak to you, though,' said Mr.Audley. 'I wanted to know whether you have any plans or wishes for thefuture.''I?' said Fulbert, looking up blank.'Yes, you. You are growing up, Fulbert.''I suppose I must take what I can get,' said Fulbert, in the samesulky, passive voice.'That may be a wise determination; but have you really no choice?''Well, when I was a little chap, and knew no better, I used to think Iwould be a soldier or a farmer--but that's all nonsense; and I supposeI must have some abominable little clerkship,' said Fulbert, with acertain steadiness for all the growl of his tone.'Well, Fulbert, have you a mind to try whether the other side of theworld would suit you better?'Fulbert looked up. 'You don't mean that you would take me out?''Yes, I do, if you are inclined to come and try for work atAlbertstown.'Fulbert, instead of answering, quickened his pace to a walking run,dashed on, nearly upsetting half a dozen people, and was only checkedby a collision with a perambulator. Then he stood still till Mr. Audleycame up to him, and then again muttered under his breath, 'Go out toAlbertstown!'They walked on a little way, and then the boy said, 'Say it again,please.'Mr. Audley did say it again, in more detail; and Fulbert this timeexclaimed, 'It is the very thing! Thank you, Mr. Audley;' and his faceclearing into a frank, open look, he added, 'I'll try to do my bestthere. I wonder I never thought of it before. I would have worked myway out as a cabin-boy if I had. Where is Lance? Does Felix know?'There was no sentiment about Fulbert. He jumped at the offer asinstinctively as a young swallow would prepare to migrate, seemed tobrighten all over, and shake off his dull, defiant mood, and gaveno sign of feeling about brother or sister--except that he said hebelieved Felix would get on better without him; and that he told Lancethat they would have splendid fun together when he was big enough tocome out and ride a buck-jumper.CHAPTER XIII.PEGASUS IN HARNESS.'Fear not on that rugged high-wayLife may want its lawful zest,Sunny glens are on the mountain,Where the weary heart may rest.'Charles Gavan Duffy.There was much relief and comfort in that visit of Mr. Audley's. Forone thing, Geraldine was able to pour out all her troubles, as she hadbeen used to do ever since her father had left her in his charge--herrepentance for the stirrings of her naturally fretful, plaintivetemper, for her fits of impatience and her hard judgments, and, whatsurprised him chiefly, for jealousy.'Yes,' she repeated, at his word of surprise, 'I am jealous!''Indeed!''I never knew it till the choral festival. I used to be very fond ofher, but--I'm sure it is jealousy; I don't like to see her more eagerlyattended to than myself. Not that there is anything to complain of. Henever neglected me in his life.'Mr. Audley smiled. 'People would tell you it is the natural lot ofsisters.'Then she saw that he knew all about it; for, in fact, Felix had, ratherto the general surprise, observed that the Miss Pearsons would liketo meet Mr. Audley, and the trio had spent a musical evening with theUnderwood party.'Oh,' she cried, 'is it all my own horridness? Or is it really--''My own horridness or my own discernment?' said he, taking the wordsout of her mouth. 'My dear, such an affair as this would be generallythe family jest.''Oh!''It is just as well it should not be so here,' continued Mr. Audley,'for nonsense is not always a cure, and the talk would be mischievous;besides, I think both are unconscious.''He is, I believe,' said Cherry.'At any rate, he is more than ordinarily full of sense andself-control, and may safely be trusted to do nothing imprudent. Sheis pretty and attractive, and of course he likes to be with her; butI should think it very unlikely it would go farther. Has any one elseobserved it?''Not Wilmet, only Lance.''And has not made fun of it? That speaks well for Master Lance'sdiscretion. Yet you all feel the weight of life too heavily. I hadrather have found you amused by these little prepossessions, thanweighing them seriously, and wearing yourself to fritters.''I will try not to mind, but I can't help being afraid for him! Itmust be very wrong to be almost turned against her because he likesher; and yet, what is all very well as my friend does not seem enoughfor Felix.''Nor will it be. My dear Cherry, such things come on and go off twentytimes in a man's life. You will treat the symptoms more lightly beforeyou have done with your seven brothers. Meantime, don't fret yourconscience over fancies, unless you have spoken or acted unkindly orfretfully.''O Mr. Audley, what shall I do when you are quite gone? All this time Ihave felt as if I were without my pilot.'Mr. Audley, too, had been thinking this over, and wished to put hermore formally under the spiritual charge of Mr. Willoughby of St.Faith's, feeling that the morbid and sensitive nature needed externalsupport, and that it was not right to deprive it of what the Churchsanctions.Her only doubt was Felix's approval. His nature did not readily acceptprogress beyond that to which he had been bred up; and in borderlands like these, an unfavourable medium made much difference to theclearness of the sight. Clement's contempt for what had satisfied hisfather annoyed him; and his mind was self-reliant, his soul accustomedto find its requirements met by the system around him, and hischaracter averse to intermeddling; so that it was against the grainwith him that spiritual guidance should be sought outside the family,or, at any rate, outside the parish. He thought such direction weakenedthe nature; and Mr. Audley, after warning him against taking thedisease for the effect of the remedy, had to laugh at him as a Britishhouseholder. After all, he yielded, because he thought Mr. Audley hada certain right over Geraldine, and that it was proper to defer to hisjudgment; while his guardian trusted to a sight of St. Matthew's forthe overthrowal of the prejudices that Clement had managed to excite.Before leaving England, Mr. Audley was resolved that little Theodoreshould be shown to some London physician. The child was five yearsold, but looked no more than three. He could totter in an uncertainrun, and understood a few simple sentences, but came no nearer tolanguage than the appropriation of a musical sound to every one whomhe knew. There was nothing unpleasant about him, except his constantpurring and humming; he was perfectly docile, loved music, and couldbe amused by simple recurring games. His affections seemed to havegone out chiefly to Felix and to Sibby; and as to his twin-sister, heseemed lost without her, and she seemed to view him as the complementof herself--like a sort of left hand, giving him things to hold in hisfeeble grasp, saying her lessons to him, and talking as if to a doll.There was something sad in the very resemblance; for their eyes were ofthe same shade of deep blue, their long soft hair of the same flaxentint, their faces equally fair; but while hers was all colour, light,and life, his was pale and vacant, and scarcely ever stirred intoexpression.Mr. Audley thought it right to ascertain whether treatment could be ofany use; and finding that his father's London house was only occupiedby his brother the Captain, he arranged that Felix should come up totown with the child and Sibby, when the law business could be arranged,and there would be an opportunity of his seeing something of the world.He had never had a holiday before, and Mr. Froggatt rivalled hisguardian in his desire that it should not be too short. The first callwas by appointment on the doctor. He was not used to have patients likeTheodore brought by youths of Felix's age, and was touched by the careand tenderness of the young man, as he tried to overcome the alarm thatwas rendering the little one impracticable, when it was desirable toexhibit his slender store of accomplishments. His nearest approach tohis natural state was when perched on his brother's knee, with his backto the strange faces, listening as Felix whistled the tunes he lovedbest.After all, little was gained by the consultation, except the assurancethat the poor little fellow was as well situated as was possible. A fewdirections for treatment and discipline were given, but very littlehope was held out of any important change for the better.The verdict disappointed Felix to an extent that surprised Mr.Audley, who had better understood the hopelessness of the case. Ofall the family, Felix had the most of the parental instinct for themost helpless; and while he warmly thanked his friend, he looked somournfully at the child who clung to him, that Mr. Audley said in avoice of sympathy, 'It is a burthen, but one that will never bring thesting of sin.''Not a burthen,' said Felix. 'No; as my father said when he gave him tome, he is the Gift of God, the son of my right hand. May it always beable to work for you!' he murmured, as he bent his head over the littleone.'And I think the gift will bring a blessing!' said Mr. Audley.Theodore was sent home with Sibby, thus restoring Stella to herself,for she had been greatly lost without her speechless companion; butFelix remained in London for a week of business and pleasure. CaptainAudley was very good-natured and friendly, and abetted his brotherin all his arrangements for showing Felix as much of life as waspossible in a week, assuring him that every new experience was a dutyto the Pursuivant--a plea that Felix, with his lover-like devotionto every detail of his paper, admitted with a smile. Edgar was ofalmost all their expeditions, and dined with them nearly every day.That young gentleman's peculiar pleasantness had very nearly avertedthe remonstrances with which his brother and his guardian had come uparmed. There he was, finding his work real, and not a royal road toimmediate wealth, idling, lounging, and gratifying his taste for artand music; and when his employer stormed and threatened, listeningwith aggravating coolness, and even sweetness, merely hinting thathis occupation was a mistake; and living all the time as a son ofthe house, with a handsome allowance, and free access to societyand amusement. Thus, when Mr. Audley talked to him, he smiled witha certain resignation, and observed that he was concerned for poorold Tom, to have been unlucky enough to have drawn such a fellow ashimself. Probably it was a judgment on him for not having come forwardsooner, when he might have had Felix! And when Mr. Audley upheldFelix as an example of hearty sacrifice of taste and inclination, itwas to obtain an enthusiastic response. Nobody breathed equal to dearold Fee, and it was the most ardent desire of Edgar's heart to takesome of the burthen from his shoulders! When it was hinted that such anallowance as Tom Underwood gave afforded the opportunity, Edgar smiledbetween melancholy and scorn, saying, 'Times must have altered sinceyour time, Mr. Audley.--No, I forgot. Expense is the rule in our line.Swells can do as they please.'However, there things rested; Mr. Underwood treated him exactly like anidle son, storming at him sometimes, but really both fond and proud ofhim, and very gracious to Felix, whom he invited once to a very dulland dazzling dinner, and once sent to the opera with his ladies.Felix's Sunday was chiefly spent at St. Matthew's, which he wasvery glad to see without Tina's spectacles. He was amazed to findso much more good sense and reality than the effect on Clement hadled him to expect; and Mr. Fulmort, who struck him as one of themost practical-looking men he had ever seen, spoke in high terms ofClement's steadiness and wish to do right; but added, 'I am afraid wehave rather spoilt him. He came up to us so unlike the kind of boy wegenerally get, that we may have made rather too much of him at first.'Felix smiled. 'Perhaps we had knocked him about, and made too little ofhim at home,' he said.'Besides, esprit de corps in so small a place as this is apt tobecome so concentrated as not to be many removes from egotism. Idaresay we have been a terrible bore to you.'Felix laughed. 'We have always been very grateful to you, Sir.''I understand. I am glad he is going farther a-field. He will be muchimproved by seeing other places, and having his exclusiveness andconceit shaken out of him; but we shall always regard him as the childof the house, and I only hope he may end by working among us.''Poor fellow! Conceit has been pretty well shaken out for the present,'said Felix.'I hope it may last. He was rather hurt at my not making his misfortuneof more importance: but it seems to have been accident, all except thepriggish self-confidence that led to it.'Felix increased much in cordiality towards Mr. Fulmort, and at the sametime mounted many stages in Clement's estimation on the discovery that,however behindhand his ecclesiastical advantages might be, the Vicarwas exceedingly impressed by his excellence.A day or two after Felix's arrival, Ferdinand Travis was firstencountered riding a spirited horse in the park, looking remarkablyhandsome, though still of the small-limbed slender make that recalledhis Indian blood. His delight in the meeting was extreme, and he seemedto be as simple and good as ever. He was in deep mourning, having newlyheard of his father having been killed in an American railway accident;and though his uncle seemed proud of him, and continued his liberalallowance, the loss and blank were greatly felt--all the more thathe had not found it easy to make friends among his brother officersin the Life Guards. His foreign air was somehow uncongenial; he hadno vivacity or cleverness, and being little inclined to some of theamusements of his contemporaries, and on his guard against others, heseemed to find his life rather dull and weary. He did not seem to haveanything to love except his horses, especially the creature he wasthen riding, Brown Murad. He had obtained it after such competition,that he viewed the purchase as an achievement; while Felix heard theamount with an incredulous shudder, and marvelled at Mr. Audley's notregarding it as wildly preposterous. It was a dangerous position; andthough Mr. Audley certified himself, through his soldier brother, thatTravis was steadiness itself--neither betted, gamed, nor ran intodebt--yet while he seemed personally acquainted with all the horsesthat ran, and apparently entered into no literature but the 'RacingCalendar,' it was impossible not to be anxious about him, even thoughhe seemed perfectly happy to be allowed to be with his two godfathers,and followed them everywhere, from the Houses of Parliament to St.Matthew's.This was not the last expedition Felix had to make to London thatspring. After many appointments of the time, and as many delays, atelegram suddenly summoned him in the beginning of May to bring Fulbertup to London, when the business would be wound up, and Captain Audleywould take his brother and the boy in his yacht to Alexandria, there tojoin the overland passengers.So Fulbert's farewells were made in the utmost haste, and mixed upwith Wilmet's solicitous directions for his proper use of all herpreparations for his comfort on the voyage; and Lance could only beseen for the brief moments of halt at the Minsterham Station, duringwhich neither spoke three words, but Lance hung on the step till thetrain was in motion, and then was snatched back, and well shaken andreprimanded, by a guard; while Fulbert leant out after him at evengreater peril of his life, long after the last wave of the trencher caphad ceased to be visible.Felix believed that this parting was more felt than that with all theother eleven; and while Fulbert subsided into his corner, the elderbrother felt much oppressed by the sense that it was his duty to givesome good advice, together with great perplexity what it should be,how it should be expressed, and whether it would be endured. He wouldhave been thankful for some of Clement's propensity for preaching whenhe found himself tte--tte with Fulbert in a cab; but while he wasstill considering of the right end by which to take this difficultsubject, he was startled by his beginning, 'Felix, I say, I'm glad youare going to get shut of me.''I believe it is for your good,' said Felix.'You'll get on better without me,' repeated Fulbert; then, with aneffort, 'Look here. It isn't that I don't know you're a brick and allthat, but somehow nothing riles me like your meddling with me.''I know it,' answered Felix. 'I wish I could have helped it; but whatcould be done, when there was nobody else?''Ay,' responded Fulbert, 'I know I have been a sulky, nasty brute toyou, and I should do it again; and yet I wish I hadn't.''I should be as bad myself if I were a junior,' was the moralreflection Felix produced for his brother's benefit. 'Only, Ful, if youtry that on with Mr. Audley out there, you'll come to grief.''I don't mean to,' said Fulbert.'And you'll keep in mind what my father meant us to be, Ful--that wehave got to live so as to meet him again.'Fulbert nodded his head emphatically.'It is his name you have to keep unstained in the new country,' addedFelix, the fresh thought rising to his lips; but it was met by a gushof feeling that quite astonished him.'Ay, and yours, Felix! I do--I do want to be a help, and not a drag toyou. I really don't think so much of any of them--not even Lance--asof you. I hope I shouldn't have been better to my father than I havebeen to you; and when--when I'm out there, I do hope to show--that I docare.'The boy was fighting with very hard sobs, and for all the frightfulfaces he made the tears were running down his cheeks. Felix's eyes wereoverflowing too, but with much of sudden comfort and thankfulness.'I always knew you were a good fellow, Ful,' he said, with his hand onhis brother's knee; 'and I think you'll keep so, with Mr. Audley tokeep you up to things, and show you how to be helped.'All after this was bustle and hurry. Fulbert had to be sent alone totake leave of Alda, while his brother and Mr. Audley transacted theirbusiness. Edgar came back with him; and after some hurried rushings outin search of necessaries forgotten, the last farewells were spoken, andFulbert, with the two Audley brothers, was out of sight; while Felix,after drawing a long, deep sigh, looked at his watch, and spoke ofgoing to see Alda.'Don't run your head into a hornet's nest,' said Edgar; 'it's all upwith me there. Come this way, and I'll tell you all about it.''All up with you!''There are limits to human endurance, and Tom and I have over-passedeach other's. I don't blame him, poor man; he wanted raw material toserve as an importer of hides and tallow, but you, the genuine article,were bespoken, and my father was not in a state for the pleading ofpersonal predilections.''What is it now?''Only a set of etchings from Atalanta in Caledon. That was the strawthat broke the camel's back,' said Edgar, so coolly as to make Felixexclaim--'How much or how little do you mean?''Separated on account of irreconcilable incompatibility.''Impossible!''Possible, because true.''Why did you not tell before Mr. Audley was gone?''It would have been bad taste to obtrude one's own little affairs, andleave him with vexatious intelligence to ruminate on his voyage. Nay,who knows but that he might have thought it his duty to wait to composematters, and so a bright light might have been lost to the Antipodes.''You actually mean me to understand that you have broken with TomUnderwood!''The etchings were the text of an awful row, in which the old gentlemanexposed himself more than I am willing to repeat, and called on me tochoose between his hides and tallow and what he was pleased to call mytomfoolery.'Felix groaned.'Exactly so. You are conscious that his demand was not only tyrannicalbut impracticable. One can't change the conditions of one's nature.''Are you absolutely dismissed?''Nothing can be more so.''And what do you mean to do?' demanded Felix, stung, though to acertain degree reassured, by his tranquillity.'Study art.''And live--?''On my own two hundred. You will advance it? I only want sixteen monthsof years of discretion, and then I'll pay it back with more thaninterest.''I must know more first,' said Felix. 'I must understand what termsyou are on with Tom Underwood, and whether you have any reasonable ordefinite plans.''Spoken like an acting partner! Well, come to Renville, he will satisfyyou as to my plans. I am to be his pupil; he teaches at the SouthKensington Museum, and is respectability itself. In fact, he requiresmy responsible brother to be presented to him. Come along.''Stay, Edgar. I do not think it right by Tom Underwood to see any onebefore him. I shall go to him before anything else is done.''Do not delude yourself with the hope of patching up matters likeAudley last winter, losing me five months of time and old Tom oftemper.''How long ago was this?''The crisis was yesterday. I was just packing to come home when Fulbertburst upon the scene.'Nothing could be worse news, yet Edgar's perfect self-possessiongreatly disarmed Felix. Never having thought his brother and the workwell suited, he was the less disposed to anger, especially as theyoke of patronage was trying to his character; but he persisted inseeing Thomas Underwood before taking any steps for Edgar's futurecareer, feeling that this was only due to the cousin to whom hisfather had entrusted the lad. So Edgar, with a shrug, piloted him tothe Metropolitan Railway, and then to the counting-house where, in thedepths of the City, Kedge and Underwood dealt for the produce of thecorrals of South America.Edgar, as he entered the office full of clerks, nodded to theirbald-headed middle-aged senior in a half-patronizing manner. 'Don't beafraid, Mr. Spooner; I'm not coming back on your hands, whatever thisgood brother of mine may intend. Is the Governor in?''Mr. Underwood is in his room, Mr. Edgar,' was the very severe answer;'but after this most serious annoyance, I would not answer for theconsequences.''Wouldn't you indeed?' said Edgar quietly, in a nonchalant tone thatmade the younger lads bend down to sniggle behind their desks, while hemoved on to the staircase.Mr. Spooner and he were visibly old foes; but the senior devoured hiswrath so far as to come forward and offer a chair to Felix, repeating,however, 'Mr. Underwood is very seriously annoyed.'Before Felix could attempt an answer, Edgar had re-descended, newspaperin hand. 'Go up, Felix,' he said, threw himself into the chair,and proceeded to read the paper; while Felix obeyed, and found theprincipal standing at his door, ready to meet him.'What, Felix Underwood! Glad to see you. This intolerable affair can'thave brought you up already, though?''No, Sir; I was telegraphed for late last night, to bring up my brotherFulbert to start with Mr. Audley.''Oh, ay. Well, I hope he'll have a better bargain of him than I've hadin Edgar. You've heard his impudence?''I am exceedingly sorry--'Then Mr. Underwood broke out with his account of Edgar's folly andingratitude, after all the care and expense of his education. He hadtaken up with a set of geniuses for friends, was always rehearsing foramateur performances with them, keeping untimely hours; and cominglate to the office, to cast up accounts, or copy invoices in hissleep, make caricatures on his blotting-paper, or still worse, become'besotted' with some design for a drawing or series of drawings, andin the frenzy of execution know no more what was said to him than apost. Finally, 'the ladies' being as mad as himself, as Mr. Underwoodsaid, had asked him to draw for a bazaar, and in his frenzy of geniusover the etchings he had entirely forgotten an important message, andthen said he could not help it. On being told that if so he was not fitfor his profession, he merely replied, 'Exactly so, the experiment hadbeen unsuccessful;' and when his meekness had brought down a furioustempest of wrath, and threats of dismissal, he had responded, 'with hisintolerable cool insolence,' that 'this would be best for all parties.''This is the offence?' anxiously asked Felix.'Offence? What greater offence would you have?''Certainly nothing can be much worse as to business,' said Felix.'But when he told me what had happened, I was afraid that he might berunning into temptation.''Oh! as to that, there's no harm in the lad--Spooner allows that--nothing low about him.''And his friends?''How should I know? Raffs those fellows always are, sure to bring himto the dogs!''Did you ever hear of an artist named Renville?''Ay?' meditatively. 'He was the master the girls had at one time,wasn't he?''Then he is respectable? I ask because Edgar wants to study under him.''Eh! what?' demanded Mr. Underwood, in manifest astonishment. 'Is thelad gone crazy?''I thought you had dismissed him, Sir.''Well, well,' said Mr. Underwood, taken aback, 'I told him only what hedeserved, and he chose to take it as final. I thought you were come tospeak for him.''You are very kind, Sir, but I doubt whether he would resume his workhere, or indeed if it would not be an abuse of your kindness to inducehim.''Eh! what?' again exclaimed Thomas. 'You give in to his ungratefulfolly! Felix Underwood, I thought you at least were reasonable!'The imperious passionate manner, rather than the actual words,made Felix side the more with the wayward genius, and feel thathaving sacrificed himself for the good of the family, he might savehis brother from the gloomy office and piles of ledgers and billsbelow-stairs. 'Sir,' he said, 'I am sorry Edgar has not been betterfitted to return the timely help you have given us, but I am afraidthat such unwilling work as his could never be of service to you.''Why on earth should it be unwilling? Better men than he have satat a desk before now! I've no patience with young men's intolerableconceit. There have I done everything for this young fellow, and heis unwilling, unwilling indeed, to give his mind to the simplestbusiness for six hours a day.''It is wrong,' said Felix, 'but his powers lie in such a differentline.''Fiddling and daubing! Pah! If anything could be more incomprehensiblethan his not being able to cast up an account or take a message; it isyour backing him up!''I am afraid he is too old for coercion.''No coercion like having not a penny in the world. Pray, how is he tolive?''His own means will help him through his studies.''His own--200! About as much as he has made ducks and drakes of in ayear. Besides, he is not of age.''No; but I have something of my own to advance for him.'Wherewith there began a fresh storm. Thomas Underwood was greatlymortified at the desertion of one brother, and still more at theacquiescence of the other. He would no doubt have been ready toretain the handsome engaging youth, grumbling and enduring, as a sortof expensive luxury; and in his wrath, disappointment, and sense ofingratitude at finding that his restive protg was not to be drivenback to him, he became so abusive, that Felix could hardly keep histongue or temper in check; but when he declared that if any supportwere given to Edgar's lunatic project, the whole family except Aldashould be left to their own resources for the rest of their lives, itwas with quiet determination that the reply was made, with studied,though difficult, respectfulness:--'Sir, we are much obliged for what you have done for us, but we hopeto be able to work for ourselves and for one another without becomingdependent. You cannot suppose that such a consideration would affectmy opinion respecting Edgar.' (N.B.--If Mr. Underwood had supposedit, he felt as if it were impossible, as all his cousin Edward'shigh spirit glowed in that young man's eyes, and strengthened thestudiously calm voice.) 'I think,' continued Felix, 'that no one canbe doing right whose work is not thorough. If Edgar cannot or will notapply himself in earnest to your business, he will be doing better bystudying art with a will than in pretending to work here, and abusingyour forbearance. That would be so improper towards you, and so wrongin him, that it would be simply unjustifiable in me to try to persuadeyou into allowing it.'Somehow, Mr. Underwood had not at all expected such a reply; and asluckily want of breath had forced him to wait and really hear it, asensation came over him of old times when Edward Underwood had arguedwith him; and it was with much less heat that he returned, with aneffort at irony, 'And so you take the bread out of the mouths of theothers to support my fine gentleman in his absurd nonsense?''No, Sir; what I advance is entirely my own.''Oh, ay; didn't I hear something about a legacy?''Yes, from Admiral Chester. A thousand pounds. It has only just beenpaid to me.''That you may throw it away on this young scamp's fancies?''No, Sir, I hope not. Half of it goes into the business at Bexley. Wesign the deed of partnership next week. It will make a great differenceto me. The rest is ready for emergencies.''Tomfooleries,' muttered Mr. Underwood. 'Pray, what are the plans forthis making a new Michael Angelo? Am I expected to give him the run ofmy house? I shall do no such thing!''No, Sir, it would not be proper to ask it. This Renville takes pupilsfor the Royal Academy, and Edgar would board and lodge there; but Ihope you will still be good enough to allow him to call on Alda, andnot let him be entirely left to himself. He is much to blame, but it isnot as if he had run into bad dissipation.''That's true,' said Mr. Underwood. 'A terrible disappointment thatyoung dog has been to me, Felix Underwood; but as you put it, there'san honesty in the thing! Where is my fine gentleman?''Downstairs, Sir.'Mr. Underwood breathed through a mysterious tube, and Edgar appeared,with his usual easy grace, and with a sharp glance at Felix as if toinquire whether there were to be any attack on his newly-found liberty.'Look here, Edgar,' was the address. 'Your brother--a much better onethan you deserve--''Thrue for you,' muttered Edgar between his teeth.'--Says what has some sense in it, that "nothing is so ruinous as doingthings by halves," and that you ought to be ashamed of hanging abouthere doing nothing--'A quick glance passed between the brothers.'--So he is for letting you have your way; and if he chooses tosupport you, and you choose to rob him--for I think it nothing lessthan robbery--why there--I can't help it. So I put it to you for thelast time: will you buckle steadily to your work here like a rationalbeing, or cast yourself loose to live as a beggarly artist on what yourbrother can give you by pinching the rest?''Thank you, Sir; I hope the sooner to help him to feed the rest, bytaking the plunge you think so desperate,' said Edgar, with moregravity than usual.'Oh, indeed!' sneered Mr. Underwood. 'Remember, not a farthing of minegoes to such folly! I don't understand it! I thought once you'd havebeen as good as a son to me,' he added in a very different tone, as helooked at the fine young man in whom he yearned to take pride.'I wish I could, Sir,' said Edgar, with real feeling. 'I wish you hadhit upon any one of us but my unlucky self. You've been very good tome, but what a man can't do, he can't; and if I gave in now, it wouldonly be the same over again. But we don't part in anger, Uncle,' hecontinued, with a trembling of voice.'Anger?! No, my boy. I'm only vexed at the whole thing; but I don'twant to lose sight of you altogether. You'll stay with us till you'vefound decent lodgings, and you'll be welcome to look in on a Sunday.'Mr. Underwood spoke in a tone between asking and granting a favour.'Thank you, Sir, with all my heart,' said Edgar.'And you'll come to dine and sleep?' he added to Felix. 'You've notseen your sister.''No, thank you, Sir, I cannot to-day; I must be at home tonight.'They shook hands cordially; but as Edgar crossed the counting-house,he paused to open his own desk and pocket some of the contents, sayinglightly as he did so, 'There's promotion in store for some of youyoungsters--I congratulate you, Mr. Spooner; you're free of a burthento your spirit.''Indeed, Mr. Edgar, I'm very sorry if--''Don't throw away your sorrow, Mr. Spooner; I was foredoomed your soulto cross, and I bear no malice to you for having been crossed. Shakehands, and wish me success as a painter.''I wish you success, Mr. Edgar; but it will not be met with in anyprofession without application and regularity.'Edgar forbore from any reply but a low and deferential bow, such as toprovoke another smothered laugh from the other young clerks, to whomFelix suspected, as he looked round, the favoured kinsman was subjectof jealousy, admiration, or imitation, according to character. However,Edgar shook hands with each, with some little word of infinite butgracious superiority, and on coming out exclaimed, 'Ban, ban, Caliban!You who are emancipated from a Redstone, congratulate me!'Felix neither observed on the vast difference between the excellentconfidential Spooner and pettily jealous Redstone, nor on the extremelydissimilar mode of emancipation. He was more occupied with themomentous responsibility of having assisted to cut his brother loosefrom the protection to which his father had confided him. Mr. Audley'swarning that he was inclined to be weak where Edgar was concerned,came before him. Yet the life of luxury and unfulfilled duties wasin his eyes such a wrongful course, that he felt justified in havingput an end to it; and his heart warmed with hope and exultation ashe recollected how Etty's success had been owing to his brother'said, and felt himself putting Edgar's foot on the first round of theladder, and freeing his ascent from all that had hitherto trammelledit. Such bright visions haunted him when talking was impossible onthe omnibus, outside which Edgar had exalted him--he did not wellknow why till on descending at Charing Cross, he found he was to havean interview with Mr. Renville, who was copying a picture in theNational Gallery, and whom he found, to his great relief, to be no wildBohemian, but a simple painstaking business-like man, who had marrieda German hausfrau, and lodged a few art students with unexceptionablereferences. Knowing Edgar already, he had measured his powers, andassured Felix that his talent was undoubted, though whether that talentamounted to genius could only be decided when the preliminary studieswere accomplished; but even if it were not of the very highest order,(a supposition that rather hurt Felix's feelings,) the less aspiringwalks of the profession would afford sufficient security of maintenanceto justify the expense of the study. He talked with sense and coolness;and his charges, though falling severely on such funds as were at thedisposal of the young pillar of the house, were, Edgar declared, andFelix could well believe, very moderate. The time was to be furtherdecided after reference to Mrs. Renville.'Will you not come home first?' asked Felix, as they descended thesteps.'Not in the character of the discarded! Who knows the effect it mighthave on old Froggy? By-the-by, I hope this advance does not make anydifference to the terms of your bondage.''Nothing important.''Draw bills to any amount on the R.A. of the future!'The light hopeful tone contrasted with Clement's grave thankfulness,and sorrow at being an expense; but Felix really preferred it, as farless embarrassing.'Could you come down in a month's time?' he continued. 'Lance is to beconfirmed at the Cathedral, and it might be an opportunity for you.''I cannot lose this month's work at the Academy, it is the mostimportant in the year.''It might be arranged for you to come down for the day. You could seeany one you pleased here.''Has Tina excited you to consign me to the Whittingtonian Fathers?''No.' Felix had almost rested there, but presently added, gravely, 'Iconstantly feel the impossibility of getting through this world andkeeping straight without help--the help that is provided for us,' headded, lamely enough.'Dear old Blunderbore,' said Edgar, affectionately; 'what comesnaturally to you, No. 1, letter A, in a flock of girls and boys, can'tbe the same when one has got out into this wicked world. Go on in yourown groove, and leave me to my aberrations. Don't vex yourself, oldfellow. A popular journalist must have got far enough to know that mendon't concern themselves about these little affairs in one another.''Brothers do.''Not unless they partake of the sister. Come! You have had nosustenance since breakfast at six o'clock, have you? Come in here, andlearn what soup means.''There's no time. The train is at five.''Time! You don't mean to walk?''I do; and get something to eat at the station.''I declare, Fee, your unsophistication would be refreshing if it werenot a disgrace to your profession. Why are you not reporter to the"Teetotal Times?" No wonder if the Pursuivant has a flavour of weaktea!'Felix smiled rather sadly, aware that this was meant to lead himaway from the last subject. He perceived that the door between hisfavourite brother's soul and his own was closed, and that knockingwould only cause it to be bolted and barred. It might be true, as Mr.Audley had told him, that Edgar's was not so much real scepticism asthe talk of the day, and the regarding the doubts of deeper thinkersas a dispensation from all irksome claims; but this was poor solace,while his brother rattled on: 'My dear Blunderbore, the hasty-puddingon which you characteristically breakfast is a delusion as to economy.Renville's little Frau will keep us better and at less expense thanever Wilmet conceived. You wrap yourself in your virtue, and refuse tospend a couple of shillings, as deeming it robbery of the fry at home.You wear out at least a shilling's worth of boot leather, pay twopencefor a roll and fourpence for a more villainous compound called coffee;come home in a state of inanition, cram down a quartern loaf and aquarter of a pound of rancid butter, washed down with weak tea; and ifself-satisfaction and exhaustion combined are soporific, it is onlyto leave you a prey to night-mare. Then, to say nothing of poornessof blood producing paucity of ideas, it is fearful to think of thedoctor's bill you are laying up!''Nonsense, Edgar; I am in perfect health.'Edgar went off into a learned dissertation on the qualities of food andliquor, and the expedience of enriching the blood, and giving substanceto the constitution. He was, in fact, much more robust and athletic, aswell as much taller, than his brother, who looked like one who led anindoor life without cultivating his strength, but had no token of lackof health or activity. Always of small appetite, he did not care howlong he fasted, and was so much used to be on his feet, that the longwalk through the streets seemed to fatigue him less than Edgar, whonevertheless kept with him, as finding real pleasure in his company.The only pauses were at the sight of an accordion in a shop windowlabelled at so low a price, that Felix ventured on it for Theodore; andagain when Edgar insisted on stuffing his pockets with bon-bons for thebabes, as antidotes, he said, to the Blunderbore diet.'I beg to observe, it was not Blunderbore that lived on hasty-pudding.That was the Welsh giant,' said Felix.'Ay! Blunderbore had three heads, and was buried up to the neck,completing the resemblance! Well, some day I'll give you all a hoist,old fellow, and then you'll be immortalized for having developed thePresident of the Royal Academy out of his slough of hides and tallow.'Felix went home through the summer twilight, tired and heavy-hearted,to find Wilmet sitting up over a supper not much less rigorously frugalthan Edgar had foretold. Telling Wilmet was perhaps the worst of itto Felix. True, she forbore to reprove or lament when she understoodthat the deed was actually accomplished, and saw that he was fatiguedand out of spirits; but her 'Indeed! Oh! Felix!' and her involuntarygesture and attitude of dismay, went as far as a volume of reproach andevil augury. He was weary beyond vindicating himself or Edgar; but thenext morning, when Wilmet and Angela had started for school, there wasa sense that the cat was away, and Geraldine looking up under her longblack eyelashes, whispered, 'Oh! it is so nice in you to have let himloose, dear Fee! It was such cruel waste to pin him down there!''It was mockery for him to pretend to work there against the grain, andlive in all that ease and luxury,' said Felix, greatly appreciatingher sympathy. 'That must be so clearly wrong, that the more I think itover, the more I trust I did right in not trying to make it up again,as Mr. Audley did.''It was only a pity he did!' said Cherry; 'but of course it was foryour sake, that you might not have him thrown back on your hands.''And for Edgar's own protection too,' said Felix; 'but I cannot thinklazy insufficient work, and constant amusement, otherwise than sounworthy, that I am sure Mr. Audley would think it more honest andright to put an end to them, even at some risk.''Risk!' said the little sister, ruffling up her feathers; 'he is sureto succeed, and you know it.''I did only mean risk in that sense,' said Felix, gravely; 'but I hopehe is safely and satisfactorily placed. Renville seems an excellentperson, and more trustworthy perhaps because he only commits himself toEdgar's capability.'Capability!' contemptuously repeated Cherry. 'No one but you and Ireally understand what Edgar can do!''I could have shaken the fellow for his coldness,' said Felix, smiling;'but no doubt it was right of him, and Edgar will soon show--''That he will! Only look at the beauty and freedom of this outline,' asshe opened her portfolio.'Don't beguile me, Cherry; I can't stay. I've all yesterday's work tomake up.''Here are all the proofs, ready. Only just look at the sentence Imarked for you. O Felix, how lucky Edgar has you for a brother, to savehim from being blighted and crushed!''Is that head yours or his? Yours! I should say he was lucky to havesuch an unenvious sister. You would draw as well as he if you only hadthe teaching.''Oh no, don't say that! It spoils his! Though I do wish my drawingcould be of some use.''Never mind about use. You are our pleasure,' as he saw herdissatisfied; 'besides, what would Pur (the household abbreviation ofPursuivant) do without the sub?'This was much pleasanter! Cherry smiled at his kiss, and he randownstairs, exulting--like herself--in their artist brother's futurefame.When he returned to the sitting-room in the evening twilight, thefirst voice he heard, through Theodore's humming, was Wilmet's, as inmitigation--'I daresay he is well educated, and not vulgar.''Oh! but the sound of it!' cried Alice Knevett's voice. 'A meretradesman!''Who is the unfortunate?' asked Felix, coming forward.'O Mr. Underwood, how you do steal upon one! Yes, I'm furious! Here'smy old friend Florence Spelman--the dearest girl in the world, and sopretty--gone and engaged herself to young Schneider, of Schneider andCo., on the tailor's advertisements, you know! It is one of the firsthouses in London, and he's very rich and handsome and all that; butisn't it dreadful? All her friends will have to drop her! And I was sofond of her.''Is it trade itself, or the kind of trade, that outrages yourfeelings?' asked Felix, in a tone of raillery.'Oh, a tailor is too horrible! As if all trade wasn't bad enough,' saidAlice, laughing; then recollecting herself she turned, blushing andconfused, to Cherry--'At least--I mean--your brother makes one forget.He isn't in the least like that!''I never wish to forget anything he is!' said Cherry, proudly lookingup to him.'Ah! you don't know what is in my pocket!' said Felix, leaning his backagainst the mantleshelf.'Oh! what!' cried Alice and Geraldine both together; while Wilmetlooked at him as if she wished to put him in mind of the presence of astranger.'Guess!' he said.'Somebody has left you a fortune! Oh! delightful!' cried Alice,clasping her hands.'Mr. Thomas Underwood will take Edgar's art study on himself,'exclaimed the more moderate Geraldine.'You burn, Cherry. It comes from that quarter. Here's a letter by theevening's post to offer me, if I have not closed with Mr. Froggatt, toinvest in Kedge and Underwood's concern, and begin with 300 a year asclerk.''It can't be possible,' said Wilmet, the only one to speak, as theother two girls looked rather blank.'Just so far that the deed of partnership here is not signed.''What is the business?' asked Alice.'He is a South American merchant, and deals with Rio for hides andtallow, if you prefer that to books and stationery,' said Felix, in awould-be light tone.'Oh, but a South American merchant! That sounds quite delightful!'cried Alice. 'And you'll have to live in dear, dear London! How I envyyou!''That must be the effect you had upon him, Felix!' said Cherry, proudly.'Well, I thought I had been a specimen of the obstinate,' observedFelix. 'Here is his letter.'He gave it as of right to Wilmet; but other eyes remarked the addressto F. C. Underwood, Esquire, an unusual thing, since, as Mr. Froggatthad never aspired to the squirehood, Felix made all his brothers andsisters write only the Mister, and thus entirely deprived himself ofthe pleasure of Alda's correspondence.'Where will you live? Oh! you'll let me come and stay with yousometimes!' cried Alice.Felix smiled as he answered, 'I'm afraid our house is not built yet.''Miss Pearson's maid for Miss Alice,' said Martha, at the door.'Oh dear, how tiresome! but you'll tell me all about it to-morrow. Howhorrid it will be here when you are all gone!''We are not gone yet,' said Wilmet, repressively. 'And if you please,Alice, do not talk of this.''No,' said Felix, 'it must be entirely a family matter. I know we cantrust to you.''Thank you! I'm so glad I was there! It is so nice to have a secret ofyours--and this is a beauty! Why, you'll be a great man with a house inLondon, just like Mr. Underwood of Centry.''Pleasing ambition,' Cherry could not help muttering, with an ironicalsmile, as Alice laughed and nodded herself away.'Ready sympathy is a pleasant thing,' returned Felix.'You don't mean that you think this feasible?' said Wilmet, with anegative inflection in her voice.'I think it ought to be considered before it is absolutely too late.'Both were surprised, having always thought that he considered hisdestiny as fixed; and as Geraldine looked on while the other twodiscussed pounds, shillings, and pence, it was plain to her that he hadan inclination to the change. The probability of rising, the benefitof lodging Edgar, the nearness to Alda, the probable openings for theyounger lads, were advantages; but against these Wilmet set the heavyLondon house-rent, rates and taxes--from which they were free--theexpense of living, the loss of her present situation, the dangers ofdeterioration of health. As to Edgar, his habits must be formed, hewas already in a respectable family, and Lance and Bernard ought notto be risked for his sake. In fact Wilmet looked on London with a sagecountry girl's prudent horror of the great and wicked capital; andwhen that experienced man of the world, Felix, tried to prove that shedid it injustice, he was met with a volley of alarming anecdotes. Hehinted that ladies' schools might need teachers there, but was met bythe difficulty of forming a new connection; and when he suggested thatCherry's talent might be cultivated, Wilmet hotly exclaimed, 'She couldnever go about to classes and schools of art!''Not alone, certainly,' said Cherry, wistfully.'Edgar is as good as nobody, and I should be of no use in places likethat,' added Wilmet.'I'm afraid you don't look very chaperonish,' said Felix, contemplatingthe fair exquisitely-moulded face, the more Grecian for the youthfulseverity that curved the lip and fixed the eye. 'If we could only turnher inside out, Cherry, she would be a dozen duennas in one!''And then the Pursuivant. You would not like to desert poor Pur,' addedCherry.'I could do that better in town in some ways.''Mr. Underwood would think that as bad as Edgar's drawing,' saidWilmet. 'No, no, Felix, you have learnt one business thoroughly, andit would be foolish to begin a fresh one now. Besides, how about Mr.Froggatt?''Of course I should do nothing in such haste as to inconvenienceMr. Froggatt,' said Felix; 'and no one is more anxious for our realbenefit, if this were possible.''But you see it won't do,' reiterated Wilmet.'Perhaps not,' he answered, with more of a sigh than his sistersexpected.Rather nettled, Wilmet set to work with pencil and paper to calculateexpenses; Geraldine looked up at Felix, who had taken up a book, andbegan to whistle, 'For a' that, an' a' that.'Presently Wilmet, by way of making assurance sure, went off for heraccount-book; when he looked up and said,' How should you have likedthis, Cherry?''I don't know. I've not thought. Did you?''I hadn't time before our Pallas Athene settled it; and I believe sheis right, if she would not lay it in quite so hard. It only seemeda pity to lose our last chance of a lift in life without at leastconsidering it.''I thought you did not care about lifts in life.''I ought not. But when it is brought home that we have slipped downtwo degrees in the social scale, it is tempting to step up one again!However, it plainly cannot be.'Yet when Wilmet mustered her irrefragable figures to prove how muchpoorer they would be in London than on their present income at Bexley,he would not go into details, saying that he wanted to hear no moreabout it, in a tone that a little hurt her. He was so uniformly gentleand gracious, that what would have passed unnoticed in most brothers,was noticed anxiously in him; and as Wilmet darned his shirt sleeve,a glistening came between her eyes and her needle, as she felt therequital of her prudence rather hard. Must all men pant to be out inthe world, and be angry with women for withholding them?Nor was Geraldine devoid of the old prick, when she thought of thedegrees in the social scale in connection with the words abouttradesmen and merchants.Wilmet was not quite happy without knowing that the letter of refusalwas written, and was more vexed than she liked to show when Felixlaughed at her for supposing he could have made time to write it on abusy Saturday, even if there had been any London post to send it by.Poor Alice Knevett got a considerable snubbing for bursting in to askthe decision, and lamenting over it when she had heard it; but shestood her ground with a certain pertinacity of her own: and so late inthe evening, that Wilmet had gone up to put Stella to bed, Felix cameup with the letter in his hand. It was so carefully expressed, thatCherry could not help saying saucily that it was worthy of the editorof the Pursuivant; while Alice, much impressed by the long words,enthusiastically broke out, 'It is a most beautiful letter, only itought to have said just the other thing!''Why, what would you have done without Cherry?' said Felix.'I'd have come to stay with her! And it is such a pity! A merchant isa gentleman, and I am sure you could get to be anything--a member ofparliament, or a baronet, or--' as if her imagination could not gofarther; but she looked up at him with a dew of eagerness glisteningin her bright hazel eyes. 'I was telling Cherry it does seem such adreadful horrible pity that you should be nailed down in this littlehole of a place for life.'Felix smiled--a man's superior, gratified, but half melancholysmile--as he answered, 'At any rate, you won't lose the pleasures ofimagination or of pity.''But I want to see you have the spirit to try,' cried Alice, eagerly.'I know you could.''It would not be right,' said Felix, sitting down by her, and in fullearnest gentleness and gravity setting before her the reasons thatCherry had hardly thought it worth while really to explain--namely, theimpossibility of their being able to pay their way and meet the needfulexpenses, and the evils of the young, inexperienced household residingin London, resigning security for dependence.Alice, flattered by being treated as a sensible person, said, 'Yes,'and 'I see,' at all the proper places; then drew a sigh, saying, 'It isvery good in you.''I knew you would see it in the right light,' replied Felix.'Oh!' but the sigh recurred. 'I can't help being sorry, you know.''There is nothing to be sorry for,' he said gratefully. 'I wasdisappointed at first myself; but for sheer usefulness to one'sneighbour, I believe that this present position, if I have senseto make use of it rightly, is as good as any; and the meredesire of station and promotion is--when one comes to look at itproperly--nonsense after all.'She opened her eyes in amazement, and made a little exclamation.'They may be well when they come,' said Felix in answer; 'but I havethought it over well to-night, and I see that to do anything doubtfullyright for their sake would be a risk for all that I have no right torun.'Alice hung her head, overcome by the pure air of the region where hewas lifting her; and in a sort of shyness at the serious tone in whichhe had spoken, he added, smiling,'Then you'll forgive the "sound of it."''O Mr. Underwood,' she said, in the simplest and most earnest voicethat Cherry had ever heard from her, 'I'm ashamed to recollect thatnonsense!'CHAPTER XIV.WHAT IT MAY LEAD TO.'I never was so berhymed since I was an Irish rat, which I canscarcely remember.'--As You Like It.'Dim memories haunt the child,Of lives in other beings led--Other, and yet the same.'--Keble.In the autumn Alda made a visit at home. She had, as usual, gone withMr. and Mrs. Underwood to their German baths, and had there fallen inwith a merry set of her intimates in London, who had persuaded her tojoin them in an expedition to the Tyrol, which lasted till the end ofSeptember. On her return, she was dropped at Bexley, where her sisterswere greatly edified by her sketch-book, a perfect journal in cleverscenes and groups, like the 'Voyage en zig-zag.' Two of the gentlemenseemed always in waiting on the graceful outline that did duty forAlda; and indeed, she gave Wilmet to understand that only the skillthat played them off one against the other had averted an offer fromeach, hundreds of miles from home, when it would have been so veryinconvenient! Every morning Wilmet considered how her dinner wouldappear if one or both should suddenly drop in to pursue his courtship.Even Felix, though he had pooh-poohed the mysterious whisper fromhis sisters, was startled at the apparition of a picturesque figure;in Tyrolese hat, green knickerbockers, belt, knapsack, loose velvetcoat, and fair moustache, marching full into the shop; and while thecustomers who were making it a rendezvous gazed in doubt betweengamekeepers and stage banditti, holding out a hand too fair and daintyfor either character, and exclaiming, 'How are you, Mr. Froggatt!Hollo, Felix!'Mr. Froggatt was amazed beyond measure, and it was only on hearing thering of the mirthful laugh that he exclaimed, 'Mr. Edgar! This is analteration! You will find the young ladies up-stairs.'Felix was disengaged at the moment, and could take him through theparlour, too glad to have him there at all to utter the faintest wishthat he would have rung at the private door; and he ushered him intothe drawing-room with the words, 'Here's the artist who has begun withhimself;' and then retreated.'Edgar! oh, you wonderful boy!' cried happy Geraldine, as he threw hisarms round her; while Alda asked:'Is that the thing now, Edgar?''Quite comifo,' he answered. 'Ha, little ones, have you forgotten me?''Stella says you're the clarionet in the brass band,' said Bernard.'What have you got in that pack?''Munitions of war!' he answered, unstrapping his bag, and producingpackets of French bon-bons, bought on his way home, from the sketchingtour Mr. Renville always made with sundry of his pupils in earlyautumn. 'Gobble them up, little mice, before the cat comes home.'Stella paused with a dutiful 'May I?' and Cherry had to interferebetween the little maiden's scruples, Bernard's omnivorous inclination,and Theodore's terror at any new article of food; while Alda and Edgarexchanged eager question and answer:'You've been at home. You've seen them all?''I dined there on Sunday--might do so any day; they can't do withoutme, that's a fact.''Nor me, I imagine,' said Alda. 'I suppose I am to go back with you?''So Madam proposed; but the fact is, that Molly has done uncommonlywell without you this time.''What do you mean?' asked Alda, sharply.'What think you of a friend of Cherry?''I haven't got any friends.''Think again! Not the great convert, the Cacique of all the Mexicos?''Ferdinand Travis! You don't mean it?''I don't; but the elders mean it, and the youngers will do it.''Do tell me! I can't understand,' cried Alda, much excited. 'We havenever met him.''The uncle or father--which?''The uncle.''Well, the uncle has been in England, and fraternized with our governorat Peter Brown's; there was a banqueting all round, and his nephew wascarried at his chariot wheels. If I am not much mistaken, gold andtimber jingled to silver and bullock-hide, and concluded a prospectiveunion in the persons of my nephew and my daughter. I'm sorry. I havelong been persuaded that a very small effort on the part of ourrespected Blunderbore might have redeemed the family fortunes in theperson of Polly.''How could you think of anything so absurd?' said Alda. 'As if my unclewould consent!''If Tom has any sentiment, it is for my father and the name ofUnderwood,' said Edgar. 'You remember he was sorely disappointed thatFelix would not step into my shoes.''And very angry and hurt,' said Alda, 'as well he might be.''Yes; but that anger proved the vastness of his good intentions.Besides there's something about our old giant--steadiness and breeding,I believe--that uniformly makes Tom knock under to him; and there's apeculiar affinity of good sense between him and Marilda, that ought tohave ripened under favourable circumstances.''And is he really cut out?' said Alda. 'I don't know how to believethis! How far has it gone?''Hanger on and oyster in love,' promptly answered Edgar. 'HonestPolly has the most comical look of anxious coyness on her jolly face,and holds her elbows squarer than ever; and a few paces off standsMontezuma, magnificent and melancholic;' and Edgar assumed the posture.'Melancholy, no wonder,' said the conscious beauty; 'Edgar, he must beover head and ears in debt.''So it struck me; but he must have managed it uncommon quietly, forthey call him the Mexican Muff; he's hand and glove with all theirholinesses up at Clement's shop, and the wildest orgie he has beendetected at was their magic-lantern.''Then it is real goodness that draws them together!' exclaimed Cherry,looking up from her presidency over the comfits.'Goodness and a balance,' said Edgar.'Did you know,' said Cherry, 'that as soon as he came of age, he paidthe Insurance all the money for the Fortinbras Arms? The agents werequite overwhelmed, and wanted to put it in the Pursuivant.'She was cut short by the return of Wilmet and Angela, accompanied byMiss Knevett. The effect of Edgar's appearance was startling. Alicegave a little scream of surprise, Angela crept behind her sisters, andWilmet stood for a moment like a stag at gaze; then, as he said, 'Well,Mettie, are you going to send for the police?' exclaimed, 'You, Edgar!What a figure you have made of yourself!''See how our eldest crushes me!' said Edgar. 'Such a face as yours,Mettie, ought not to be wedded to the commonplace.''I suppose it is like German artists,' said Wilmet, trying to resignherself.'It is such a beautiful becoming dress,' whispered Alice to Geraldine;while Edgar rattled on--'No wonder there is a deterioration in tastefrom living in the very tents of the Philistines. Why, Cherry, how doyou bear existence surrounded by such colours as these?''The paper?' asked Wilmet, surprised. 'It is rather a large pattern, tobe sure.''I call it cruelty to animals to shut Cherry up among the eternalabortive efforts of that gilded trellis to close upon those bluedahlias, crimson lilacs, and laburnums growing upwards, tied with hugeragged magenta ribbons. They would wear out my brain.''Well, I think when you remember our old paper, you might be thankful!'said Wilmet.'Precisely what I do, and am not thankful. What our paper may have beenin its earlier stages of existence, I am not prepared to say; but sinceI can remember, that hateful thing, the pattern, could only be tracedby curious researches in dark corners, and the wall presented everynuance of purplish salmon or warm apricot.''Dear old paper!' cried Cherry. 'Yes; wasn't it soft, deepening off inclouds and bars, sunsets and storm-clouds, to make stories about?''Where it was most faded and grimy,' said Wilmet. 'It is allaffectation not to be glad to have clean walls.''Clean!' cried Edgar, in horror. 'Defend me from the clean! Bare, bald,and frigid, with hard lines breaking up and frittering your background.If walls are ornamented at all, it should not be in a poor materiallike paper, but rich silk or woollen tapestry hangings.''We couldn't have tapestry now,' said Alice, in a puzzled voice.'Then,'"Comrades, take warning by my fall,And have it strong or not at all."''Not walls,' laughed Cherry.'Let them be of natural, or, at any rate, uniform tint; and cover themwith your own designs of some character and purpose, not patternsbought by the yard.''Oh! I see what you would be at,' said Wilmet quaintly. 'You arebewailing the loss of your great Man Friday.''Achilles, I beg your pardon.''He never would come out,' said Angela; 'he came through the whitewashafter the measles.''I wonder what the present inhabitants think of him,' said Cherry. 'Onecomfort is, if he is a bogy now, they may show him some day as an earlyeffort of Sir Edgar Underwood, President of the Royal Academy.''Oh dear! I must go!' cried Alice. 'I only came to fetch a pattern forAunt Maria, and she is waiting for it; but you are all so delightfulhere.''What pretty little thing have you picked up there?' asked Edgar, asshe went.'Have we not told you of Miss Pearson's niece?''You should take her likeness, Cherry, as a relief from the classicallysevere.'Cherry opened her portfolio, and showed two or three water-coloureddrawings of the graceful little head and piquant features. Edgarcriticised, and promised a lesson; and the sitter, nothing loth, thoughrather coy, was caught. She blushed and smiled, and took exception atlittle personalities, and laughed her forgiveness, going through a playof countenance very perplexing to the pupil, but much relished by themaster, as he called up the pout and smile by turns, and played withher little airs.He took Alda back on Monday, but promised to come home for Christmas,and kept his word. Perhaps the Renville wirthschaft afforded lesscontrast with home than did the Underwood mnage; and, in spite ofthe Philistine furniture, the rooms in the High Street agreed betterwith his tastes than the old house in St. Oswald's Buildings. He wasabove objecting to the shop; and whereas Clement carefully avoidedthe public precincts, he was often there, hunting up books, readingnewspapers, gossiping with Mr. Froggatt or with Redstone, and alwaysensuring himself a welcome by the free bright sweetness of his mannerand his amusing talk.It was a prosperous winter; Felix, as partner and acknowledged editor,was in a more comfortable position both as to income and authority.Other matters were going well. Fulbert, to the general surprise,turned out a capital letter-writer, and sent home excellent accountsof himself, working heartily in a situation in the post-office, whichMr. Audley's Somerville interest had managed to secure for him.Moreover, all close scholarships had not been abolished, and Felix'sopportunities in the newspaper line had enabled him to discover one atSt. Cadoc's, a small college at Cambridge, to be competed for by thenatives of the county where Clement had fortunately been born. A letterto the parish clerk of Vale Leston, to ask for the baptismal registerof Edward Clement Underwood, produced a reply from a well-rememberedold Abednego Tripp, who declared himself 'horned and rejoiced' athearing from Master Felix, and at being able to do anything for one ofthe Reverend Mr. Edward's sons. The competition was not very severe;Clement obtained the scholarship, and therewith his maintenance forthree years to come; and he was at the same time able to exercise abit of patronage on his sisters' behalf, more gratifying to his ownfeelings than theirs. Mr. Fulmort's unmarried sisters had lived inthe country with a former governess, until on the death of the elder,the survivor decided on employing her very considerable fortune inestablishing a school where girls of small means might be preparedfor becoming first-rate governesses, with special openings for thedaughters of poor clergy and of missionaries.One of the first families thought of was that of the favouritechorister; so Angela, now ten years old, was nominated at once,to the relief of Wilmet, who did not think her romping intimacieswith the girls at Miss Pearson's very desirable. Moreover, after acorrespondence between Miss Fulmort and Miss Lyveson, it was decidedthat Robina should be transferred to the new school at Brompton withher sister, partly by way of infusing a trustworthy element, and partlythat her studies might be perfected by London masters. Robina, whoseallegiance to Miss Lyveson was most devoted, was greatly grieved, butshe was a reasonable, womanly little being, aware that governess-shipwas her profession, and resolute to qualify herself; so though shecame home with tell-tale spots under her eyes, she replied to allcondolences with, 'I know it's right, what must be must;' and herspirits rose when Lance came home, bound only to return during theholidays on two or three special days when his voice was indispensableat the cathedral.Edgar and he together kept the house in continual merriment, so thatthe sober pillars of the house found themselves carried along, theyknew not whither.'I have had a serious application,' said Felix one evening. 'A solemnknock came to the office door, and an anxious voice came in--"Please,brother, I want to speak to you." There stood the little Star! Ithought at least she had broken the chandelier, but no such thing. Itwas, "Please, brother, mayn't I have a birth-day?"''Poor little darling!' cried some voices.'What could have put it into her head?' said Wilmet.'She said all little girls had birth-days, and Ellen Bruce had toldAngel all about the dance in honour of hers.''Ah!' said Wilmet, 'we'll have Angel out of the way of that kind ofchatter.''Poor little maid! of course I had to quench her,' said Felix, 'as faras her own day was concerned. I told her more about it than she hadever heard, but then she took me aback by saying Father was happy, andshe thought he would like her to be happy.''You didn't consent!' exclaimed Wilmet.'I represented that it was Theodore's birth-day as well, and thatstrangers would make him miserable. She was really very good, and Iwant you just to consider whether we could not do something--of courseon a different day--but in the course of the holidays, by way of treat.Surely you could invite some of Miss Pearson's pupils.''I don't like to begin, Felix,' said Wilmet; 'there would bereciprocity, and no one knows where it might lead to.''A few white muslin frocks--eh, W. W.? I think we could stand them.''That is not all I mean,' said Wilmet; 'it is the sort of style ofthing. It would be all very well to have a few little girls here, butthey would all ask us again, and I could not answer for what mighthappen at their homes.''It is out!' said Edgar. 'Now we know the sort of style of thing itmight lead to. Minerva under a mistletoe bough.''Hurrah!' burst out Lance, in convulsions of mirth, which infectedFelix and Cherry; while Wilmet, as simple as she was discreet, blushedup to the tips of her ears, and tried to defend herself.'They tell me of doings at their parties that are what I should notlike for our little girls, and I don't think you would, Felix.''Forfeits, to wit?' asked Edgar. 'Or cards, or waltzing. You may aswell be explicit, Mettie.''No, no,' said Felix, 'Mettie shall not be teased: she is right in themain.' But his tone was that he always used when her prudence was toomuch for him.'And the family refinement is to be secured by sitting in ashes allChristmas,' said Edgar. 'Slightly unchristian, it strikes me.''But,' continued Felix, 'out of these domestic ashes, we must get upsome sport for the children. I stand committed to Stella.''Shall I get Bill Harewood, and do Box and Cox?' suggested Lance.'Might we not get up something they could take part in themselves?'said Cherry; 'Cinderella, or some such little play?--Edgar, you knowhow to manage such things.''Wilmet doesn't know where they would lead to,' gravely responded Edgar.'To Lance's going off with a circus,' said Felix.'I always had a great mind to do so,' responded Lance. 'To sing comicsongs on one leg on a spotted horse's back, and go about day and nightin a yellow van drawn by elephants--I call that life!''Secure a berth for me as scene-painter!' cried Edgar. 'See how I'ddraw a house by the very outline of Mazeppa outside!''And Felix will print all our advertisements gratis!''Oh!' broke in Cherry; 'I have a notion. Couldn't we make a play of theconjuror in disguise? It is Dr. Knowall in German popular tales, Robinthe Conjuror in English.''Nothing foolish, I hope?' seriously asked Wilmet.'Oh no. Don't you recollect? The story is, that a set of thieves steala jewel, a man comes shamming conjuror and offering to find it for theowner, intending to trust to chance, and feast at her expense as longas he is not found out.''I remember!' exclaimed Lance; 'you used to tell us the story. Somebodysuspects him, and brings a creature shut up in a covered dish to askhim to tell what it was--and it happens to be a robin; so when he criesout, "Oh, poor Robin!" thinking himself done for, out hops the bird,and the enemy is sold.''Yes; and then he counts his dinners every day, and the thieves whohave come to look on think he is counting them, and throw themselves onhis mercy.''It has capabilities,' said Edgar.'But the moral!' said Wilmet.'What! Not the lesson against dealing with conjurors?' demanded Edgar.'I'll undertake to arm your pupils against spirit-rapping for ever.''In that point of view--' said Wilmet doubtfully.'In that point of view,' said Felix, laughing, 'it has my vote.''I don't like deception to succeed,' said Wilmet; 'but at least there'snone of the worst sort of nonsense.'Lance leapt up and performed a pas seul, insisting that Bill Harewoodmust come and be a robber; and Edgar and Cherry instantly had theirheads together as playwrights and managers.'Never mind, Wilmet,' said Felix at their bed-room doors that night.'Remember, Father never was a man for all work and no play.''I don't mind play, but I don't know what this may lead to;' then,as Felix laughed merrily at the repetition, she followed him intohis room, saying, 'I mean, I have no trust in Edgar's discretion, orLance's either, and all sorts of things may be put into the children'sheads.''You can't keep children's heads a blank,' said Felix; 'and Edgar'sgood taste ought to be trusted in his own home, for his own sisters.Even you might stretch a few points to keep him happy and occupied withCherry. Besides, I believe we do live a duller life than can be reallygood for any one. It can't be right to shut up all these young thingsall their holidays without any pleasure.''I thought,' said Wilmet, her eyes growing moist, 'it was pleasureenough to be all at home together.''So it is, to staid old fogies like you and me,' said Felix, kissingher; 'but the young ones want a lark now and then, and I confess Ishould be immensely disappointed if this fun didn't come off. No, no,W. W., I can't have you an old cat; you are much too young andpretty.'The levity of this conclusion shocked Wilmet beyond remonstrance. WasFelix falling from his height of superiority, or was her strictnesswearisome?Meantime, Geraldine's brain was ringing with doggrel rhymes, andwhirling with stage contrivances, in the delight of doing somethingwith Edgar, whether versifying or drawing; and as Felix said, to keephim happy at home for Christmas was no small gain, even though itbrought a painful realisation that their feast was not his feast.Geraldine suffered in silence, for a word from her was always putdown by some tender jest, avowing as much inferiority in goodness assuperiority in intellect. As to Clement, Edgar's sport was to startlehim with jokes, dilemmas, and irreverences, and then to declinediscussion on the ground that he never argued with sisters, and thatClement would understand when he went to Cambridge. Otherwise, thesubject was avoided at home; but Edgar consorted a good deal with Mr.Ryder, calling him the only person in the town, except Cherry, whoknew the use of a tongue; and one day, when Felix was assisting hisold master in a search through old newspapers in the reading-room, Mr.Ryder said, 'By-the-by, your brother Edgar has a good deal more of thetalk of the day than you can be prepared for.''I am afraid so, sir,' said Felix; 'but he does not put it forth muchat home.''So I hoped. It would have startled your father a good deal; but Ibelieve myself acting in the spirit of his wishes in letting him talkout his crudities.''Thank you, sir,' said Felix, not quite knowing how to take this.'It is a phase to be passed through,' said Mr. Ryder. 'Indeed, a gooddeal of it is fashion and vanity.''Mr. Audley thinks so,' replied Felix. 'He said he thought poor Edgardid not think enough to have real doubt, but that he considered otherpeople's a dispensation from attending to the subject at all.''Exactly,' said Mr. Ryder, 'except so far as repeating what he hascaught up seems to him knowing, and according to the spirit of thetime, fit to dazzle us down here. Whatever may deepen him will probablychange all that--I do not say into what you or your father would wish;but what is jargon now will pass away into something more real, forbetter or--''For worse?' asked Felix anxiously, as he paused.'I do not say so,' returned Mr. Ryder. 'Perhaps what I chiefly wishedat this moment was to clear myself in your eyes of treachery to yourfather.''No, sir, that I never could suspect.'But the conversation might well leave heaviness behind it. Was it cometo Edgar's views being such as to startle Mr. Ryder! who, for thatmatter, had of late shown much less laxity of opinion than in hisyounger and more argumentative days; and there was little comfort insupposing that these were not real honest doubts at all, only apologiesfor general carelessness and irreligion.Yet with even this trouble in the recess of the heart, this was themerriest winter the Underwood household had known since their father'stime.Edgar chose to frame the play upon the Italian form of the story, wherethe impostor is a starveling poet, nicknamed Signor Topo, or MasterRatton, because his poverty had brought him to live in a hay-loft. Thischaracter he assumed, and no doubt it fitted him better than either theEnglish cobbler or the German doctor; besides, as he said, sham courtcostume is always the easiest to contrive: but Cherry was by no meansprepared to find the Rat-like poet the secret admirer of a daughter ofthe Serene Highness who owned the jewel.'Such a monstrous interpolation,' quoth Geraldine.'Interpolations are the beauty of the thing. It would be as flat as apancake without.''And Wilmet won't like it.''Wilmet must be brought to the level of ordinary human nature.''I don't feel as if this were using her well. You know she expresslyconsented to this "because there was no nonsense in it."''I.e. if it had been Cinderella, it would have been improper; if theSleeping Beauty, highly scandalous. Eh, Chrie?''You know I think Mettie does carry her scruples pretty far,' saidGeraldine, trying not to laugh, 'but I won't be a party to cheatingher; and if this young princess is to come in, she must be told of it.''Or she will take out her Gorgon's head in the midst, and petrifyher subjects! Maybe it will be safest to prepare her. You see, suchdiscipline reigns here, that a poor Bohemian like me doesn't know whereto be.'Accordingly, Edgar said in his airy way, 'O Mettie, by-the-by, we haveput in a part for little Miss Knevett.''Indeed! I thought it was to be all among ourselves. Have you spoken toher?''Of course; and she is in the ecstatic state of preparation of spanglesand coronets.''I wish you had spoken before. It would be hard to disappoint her now.What is she to be?''Nothing less than heroine. There must be some sort of conventionalcatastrophe, or the whole concern falls flat.''I don't see why it should not fall flat,' said Wilmet, with a soberair that drove Cherry into an uncontrollable convulsion of laughter;'it would amuse the children just as well.''The children of six, maybe,' said Edgar gravely, 'but hardly thechildren of sixteen. Have you no mercy on them, my venerable sister?'Wilmet had arrived at such a pass of resignation as to perceive that'a fuss' on her part might be more mischievous than any 'nonsense' inwhich Edgar was likely to indulge in public, especially with Geraldineas his coadjutor. She tried to obtain some reassurance that there was'nothing more silly than needful in this play of yours.''No, indeed. There is just a little mock courtship; but as that is thecase with nine-tenths of the stories in the world, I don't think yougain much by turning it out.''I did hope for once in a way we ourselves might be quit of it.''It is hard on you,' said Cherry, smiling; 'but it would make a greatuproar to disturb all now.''At any rate, I have found the old receipt for tea-cakes,' respondedWilmet, whose mind was almost as much preoccupied with theentertainment of the body as her sister's with that of the mind.She had relented so far as to invite two little girls and their widowedmother, from whom there was no danger of reciprocities; Lance hadprevailed to have Will Harewood as one of the robbers; and the MissPearsons were coming to behold their niece; besides which, Stellahaving imparted the great secret to Mr. Froggatt, Felix found thegood old gentleman and his wife burning to have an invitation. Thusthe party would be the largest Wilmet had ever contemplated; and themysteries of tea and supper were so congenial to her housewifely soul,that she did not distress herself about the frequent rehearsals in MissPearson's empty school-room, the transformations of garments under theneedles of Cherry and Robina, nor even the wildness and ecstacy ofall the children from Lance downwards, all bursting with secrets, andletting them out at every corner of their grinning mouths.It must soon be over, and Felix seemed to be enjoying it thoroughly;and Wilmet could tolerate a great deal when either Felix or Aldaenjoyed. He was much too busy with Christmas accounts to undertake anypart that needed learning; but he was pressed into the service as acourtier, only with a dispensation from either speaking or rehearsing;while Wilmet utterly scouted any idea of taking any share in the drama,having enough to do in her own character.And in that character she was left alone to entertain the guests, foreven Cherry was in request as prompter and assistant dresser--nay,with the assistance of Theodore's accordion, formed the whole band ofmusicians at the ball which opened the performance, and which requiredthe entire corps dramatique. Robina, as the Elderly Princess,demonstratively dropped her bracelet, with a ruby about as big as apigeon's egg (being the stopper of a scent-bottle), and after thedancers had taken some trouble not to step on it, they retired, and itwas stolen by the gang of robbers, cloaked up to their corked eyebrowsand moustaches.Then appeared in his loft--supplied with straw culled from packages atthe printing-house--the poet, well got up in his knickerbockers andvelvet smoking-cap, scarf and guitar, soliloquising in burlesque rhymeon his fallen state and hopeless admiration, and looking very handsomeand disconsolate, until startled by the cry behind the scenes--'O yes! O yes! O yes!By command of her Highness!Lost, stolen, or strayed,Gone to the dogs or mislaid,Her Highness's splendid ruby.Whoso finds it--wit or booby,Tinker, tailor, soldier, lord--Let him ask what he will, he shall have his reward.'Thereupon the poet, communicating his designs in a stage soliloquy,disguised himself in a tow wig and beard, and a railway rug turned upwith yellow calico; and the scene shifting to the palace, he introducedhimself to the Elderly Princess as the greatest of spiritualists--sogreat, that--'Detective police are an ignorant fable;No detective can equal a walnut-wood table.'But he required as a medium a maiden fair and lovely, but with aheart as yet untouched, otherwise the spirits might be offended. Theonly lady who was available was, of course, the youthful princessFiordespina, whose alarm and reluctance had been contrived so as to behighly flattering to the disguised poet.The dinner scenes, at which the robbers presented themselves in turn,and imagined that they heard themselves counted, went off in due order;also the test, when the courtiers tried to pose the spiritualist withmaking him divine what they brought him in a covered dish, and weredisconcerted by his sighing out,'Alas! alas! see envy battenOn the unhappy Master Ratton!'while the rat leaped out from beneath the lid!Then came the avowal by the robber: but the conclusion was so farvaried, that the jewel having been judiciously hidden, the poet madeuse of his voice and his guitar to throw the Lady Fiordespina into amesmeric sleep before the court, and then to cause a table to rap outthe letters, which she interpreted so as to lead to the spot.It was the prettiest scene of all, his music and song were so graceful;and in spite of some suppressed giggling, the attitude and countenanceof Fiordespina were so very pretty in her trance. Nothing more was leftsave the restoration of the ruby, the claiming of the reward, and thefinal tableau, in which Ratton and Fiordespina, in their native goodmien, had their hands joined by the benignant Elderly Princess; while,to the equal amusement and confusion of all, good old Mrs. Froggattfairly burst out crying with excitement and admiration!Mrs. Vincent, the young widow, was likewise enchanted, and so was MissMaria Pearson; but Wilmet could not quite fathom the tone of the elderand graver sister, or decide whether it were her own dissatisfactionthat made her think Miss Pearson had not expected to see such a rolebestowed upon her niece.The doors between the drawing-room and the theatre were opened again;the boys handed round negus and lemonade; and Felix, standing overCherry, said, 'Lance's circus speculation would not be a bad one.There's plenty of dramatic talent in the family.''Did you like it, Felix?''I could tell exactly which parts were yours and which Edgar's,' wasthe ambiguous answer, as he turned to secure the Princess Fiordespinafor the dance that was to crown the performance.'O Mr. Underwood! Oh yes, thank you! but--''Is it part of the programme that wizard and medium should dancetogether?''Oh no! Only it seems so funny to think of your dancing.''What, you thought a stationer must be stationary?''O Mr. Underwood, what a shocking pun!' and she was led off sparklingwith pretty laughter; while the Conjuror, muttering,'The gouty oak began to moveAnd flounder into hornpipes,'turned graciously on little Susie Vincent, and scared as much as heelevated her, by claiming her as his partner.Will Harewood, dashing across the room, and looking earnestly with hisbold and now flushed face up to Wilmet, blurted out, 'Miss Underwood,now please, let me dance with you.''Thank you,' she said graciously; 'but I believe I must play for them.''I'll do that,' said Clement, over her head.'The Dead March in Saul?' murmured Edgar.'Nonsense!' broke out Mrs. Vincent, starting up; 'what am I good forbut to play?'So Clement, who thought he had found an escape, was reduced to thenecessity of asking the other little Vincent; and Wilmet's smile ofconsent so elated Bill Harewood, that he could not help flying acrossto that very happy and well-matched pair, the Elderly Princess andFirst Robber, to tell them, 'I've got her.''Who?''Why, your sister.''You've never been and made up to Wilmet!' said Lance, as if thisinstance of valour crowned his merits.'Yes, I have; and she will. You see there ain't another gentleman outof the family except the old Froggy, and the little one has got him.Well, I always wished beyond anything to dance with Miss Underwood!''Did you?' said Robina. 'I never should have thought of that.''Most likely not,' said Bill; 'but she is the most beautiful woman Iever did or shall see in all my life;' and he flew back to her side.'Is she?' said Robina, altogether amazed.'Well, perhaps,' said Lance; 'you know one might go a long way withoutfinding any one so handsome.''Then I wish people wouldn't say so. It seems making our Wilmet common,like any other girl, to care for her being pretty.''So Froggy's dancing with Stella,' observed Lance. 'I declare I'll tryif Mrs. Frog won't stand up with me. Some one ought. You'll not mindwaiting, Bobbie. It is not often one has the chance to dance with a caplike that.'Bobbie resigned herself amicably; and Lance, with his bright arch face,made his bow and half polite, half saucy addresses to Mrs. Froggatt inher magnificent head-gear, making her laugh herself almost to tearsagain as she declined. He held the Miss Pearsons in greater awe, andventured on neither; so that Robina had him for Sir Roger de Coverley,where the sole contretemps arose from Angel and Bear being in suchboisterous spirits that Wilmet decreed that they must not be partnersagain. Of the rest, some had a good deal of dancing-master experience;Mrs. Harewood's impromptu merry-makings had afforded plenty of practiceto the two choristers; even Clement had had a certain school-feasttraining; and Felix, with a good ear, ready eye, and natural easeof movement, acquitted himself to Miss Knevett's eagerly expressedadmiration.'Take care, Master Ratton will be jealous,' said Edgar, as he claimedher for the next dance, a quadrille.'Jealous! oh no! Some people one never thinks of complimenting.'Cherry caught the words, and wondered what they meant.A few more dances, and then came Wilmet's anxiously contrived supper.'I say,' observed Will Harewood to Lance, 'why can't we have thingslike this at home?'''Tisn't their nature to,' judiciously responded Lance.'This cream is quite up to the grub we get after a crack let-off inthe Close,' added Will; for requisitions for their voices at privateconcerts had made the choir connoisseurs in the relics of feasts.'Better, I should say,' returned Lance. 'Mettie doesn't make it ofsoap, or arsenic, or verdigris, like old Twopenny.''What! you don't mean that she made it herself?''Of course! who else should?''My eyes! And to see her looking like that!' Then, with a deep sigh,'If I could only book her for my wife on the spot!'Whence it may be inferred, that Stella's birth-day party was not only abrilliant success, but might, in Wilmet's phrase, 'lead to something.'All it seemed to have led to at present was a discovery on the part ofthe good Miss Pearsons, that the household they had been wont to pityas small orphan children, now contained three fine young men.At least Geraldine connected this with the desire they expressed thatAlice might enjoy the same opportunities as Robina of giving heracquirements a final polish, up to diploma pitch. A correspondencecommenced, resulting in Miss Knevett being engaged as teacher,being remunerated by lessons in languages and accomplishments. Thearrangement gave universal satisfaction; Cherry could not detect anyregret on the part of Felix; Alice would still spend her holidayswith her aunts; and the sense that her departure was near made theintercourse between the two houses more frequent and familiar than ithad ever yet been.One evening Cherry, while looking up a quotation for Felix inSouthey's 'Doctor,' lit on his quaint theory of the human soulhaving previously migrated through successive stages of vegetable andanimal life, and still retaining something characteristic from eachtransmigration. Her brothers were a good deal tickled with the idea;and Lance exclaimed, 'I know who must have been rhubarb, queen-wasp,and a hen-harrier.''Oh, that's too bad!' cried Robina.'Why a hen-harrier?' asked Felix, recognising, like almost all theothers.'One of the birds of prey where the female is bigger than her mate,'drily observed Edgar.'Besides,' said Cherry, 'recollect the hen-harrier's countenance inpictures, with beady eyes, and a puffed supercilious smile about thebeak.''Why, that's Lady Price!' chimed in Alice, making the discovery at last.Lengthily and gravely Edgar uttered the words, 'Puzzle-monkey, prayingmantis, sacred stork, howler.'Lance and Robin roared with merriment, and after one glance atClement's half virtuous, half offended countenance, Felix and Cherryfell into like convulsions; while Alice exclaimed, 'But who is it?'and Angel shouted the sufficiently evident answer, 'Clement, oh! thehowler, the black preaching monkey in a natural surplice!''I can't think how you do it!' exclaimed Alice.'I object to the mantis,' Cherry struggled to say. 'Nasty hypocriticalcreature that eats things up.''Praying for its living, eh, Cherry?' said wicked Edgar. 'If you hadever seen the long thin animal, with head back, hands joined, and piousattitude, you couldn't doubt.'And as he spoke he sketched his mischievous likeness, at whichthe mirth grew more furious; while Cherry, always the most easilyexcited, uttered in a strangled voice, 'A parsnip, a barn-door hen, adilapidated Guernsey cow, an old mother whale.''O Cherry, Cherry, you've immortalized yourself!' shouted Lance. 'Howdid you hit off the parsnip? the very thing that had stumped me.''The colour, and the odd sort of sweetness,' said Cherry.'Won't we have fun with it when I go back!' cried Lance.--'Not tell?Nonsense! Why, no one will enjoy it like Mother Harewood herself.''Only don't say I made it. There, Edgar has got one.''Touch-me-not balsam, blister-fly, bantam-cock (full strut), blackterrier.'He did not caricature this time except with the muscles of his face,and with these he contrived to put on four different aspects, eachso exactly like Mr. Mowbray Smith that not even Alice required theproclamation of the name; and Wilmet gravely said, 'I do not think thisis a proper sort of game. It must be ill-natured or irreverent.''That depends,' said Geraldine, now thoroughly in the swing.--'Here!Hawthornden apple-tree, stickleback, goldfinch, beaver.''The hardy Norseman's house of yoreWas on the foaming wave,'sang out Lance, recalling Theodore's substitute for Felix's name.'Exactly like--figures, tastes, and all,' said Edgar, scanning Felix'sclear, bright, fresh face, glossy hair, and rather short figure, atonce trim and sturdy. 'The goldfinch hit him off exactly, but I don'tsee the force of the apple-tree.''You would,' said Cherry, 'if you were properly acquainted with ourthree trees and their individualities. The Hawthornden is a resolutelooking fellow, but it indulges in the loveliest pink and whiteblossoms, and waxen, delicate, peachy fruit.''Uncommonly sour! Thank you, Cherry,' said Felix.'Not in a pie,' suggested Alice.'Properly treated and sweetened, eh?' asked he, smiling on her.'But why is Felix like a stickleback?' said Angela.'Don't you know?' said Cherry; 'a beautiful bright little fish, and thegood male one swims up and down taking care of the nest.''I do like the beaver,' allowed Wilmet. 'It always was my favouritebeast.''It hits off the respectable householder element,' added Edgar. 'Threeflaps of his broad tail rule beaverdom like Jupiter's nod.''I have one,' interposed Robina.--'Bella-donna lily, working bee,menura--''Hold hard!' called Lance; 'is a menura fish, flesh, or fowl?''Fowl: the lyre-tailed pheasant, that makes a shelter for its nest withits own tail.''Decided liar tale,' muttered Edgar.'Go on, Bobbie,' Felix encouraged her. 'The pheasant suits both thetwins as well as the bella-donna. Any more?''Perhaps the leading stag of the herd.''Don't make us like that proud, cowardly, tyrannical beast,' exclaimedWilmet.'I have seen you look exactly like one,' said Geraldine. 'That and thepheasant both give the notion of your neck.''Such a set of trumpery gaudy things!' grumbled Wilmet. 'Nothing butthe bee is tolerable.''I did think of a speckled Hamburg hen, and a nice quiet she-goat,'said Robina; 'but they are all dowdy, and would not suit Alda.''There's something in the theory,' said Edgar. 'That bella-donnaapproves itself perfectly--so delicate and stately, and yet soessentially unpoetical.''That Mettie takes as a compliment,' said Felix, 'only she would ratherhave been a potato, or a cabbage.''Now,' said Cherry, 'you will all know--bell-heather, the grasshopper,the lark, and the squirrel.''Is this the lark's crest, or the squirrel's tail?' said Felix, givingan elder brother's pull to the boy's highest wave of hair.'Or the grasshopper's leap?' cried Lance, springing on him for a boutof buffeting and skirmishing; in the midst of which Alice was heardwondering how the riddles, as she thought them, were either made orguessed.'They come,' said Geraldine. 'I am only afraid we shall fall into atrick of making them for everybody.''I wonder what you would make for me.'Geraldine had it on her tongue's end that Alice would be difficult, forwant of anything distinctive; but Felix and Edgar were both jottingsomething down, and Robina was beforehand with either--'Scarletpimpernel, tortoiseshell butterfly, budgerigar, marmoset.'No one answered, for Felix had pushed a slip of paper over to Alice,on which she read--'"Forget-me-not, ladybird, linnet, kitten." I don'tthink I ever saw a linnet. Isn't it a little brown bird?''With a rich glow of red, and a beautiful song,' said Felix, smiling;and the red glowed redder on her cheek, as she said, laughing, 'Kittenfor mischief, eh? For shame, Mr. Underwood!--What, another! Dear me, Ishall not know myself!'This had been slipped into her hand; and Cherry suspected that herexclamation had been a mistake of which she was conscious, as thecolour deepened on her already blushing cheeks, and her eyes werecast down, while a demure smile played on her lips. The incautiousexclamation had betrayed her, and the young ones clamoured to hearEdgar's view of her transmigration; but there was a little coy struggleof 'Oh no, she wouldn't, and she couldn't.''She smiled and blushed, and oft did sayHer pretty oath by yea or nay.'And in the midst came the message that the maid was arrived to takeher home; and this being a cross stiff personage, who might never bekept waiting, she had to hurry away; and had no sooner gone than Angelaburst out with, 'Here it is! I've got it! Listen to it: "Say, Lady--"''Stay, Angela,' interrupted Felix. 'You have no business with that.''Not Edgar's fun!' she exclaimed. 'Why, where is he?''Surely he is not going home with her!' said Wilmet in some dismay.'Oh, but it is such fun,' went on Angela, 'only I can't make it out.You read it, Lance.''Did she give it you?' said Felix.'No, I whipped it up when she dropped it. There's something aboutRatton in it.'Felix quietly took the paper out of her hand, folded it, and put itinto an envelope. 'You take it back to her the first thing to-morrow,'he said. 'Now go to bed.'Angela durst not oppose that tone, so unusually serious andauthoritative; but she contrived to prolong her good-nights, and theputting away of her goods, with a kind of half droll, half sullenresignation; and just as Wilmet was hurrying her off, Edgar returned.He always spoilt Angela a little, and she sprang to him with a kind ofdroll pout. 'You'll not be cross, Edgar. You'll let us hear Alice'stransmigrations. Look! here's Felix bottled them up in an envelope, andwon't let us peep at them! But you'll let me hear. You won't order meoff to bed.'Cherry fancied she saw a disconcerted look on his face when he saw theenvelope held up to him; but if so, it instantly gave place to themischievous entertainment of defeating a lesson on discretion.--'Theheads of the family must assert themselves sometimes, my dear, evenabout nothing,' he said consolingly.'Indeed,' said Wilmet, bristling in defence of Felix, 'of course weknew it was nothing. It was only very ill-mannered and wrong of Angelato go prying into what was not meant to be shown.''I'm sure,' said Edgar most ungratefully, 'it might be posted on thechurch door for what I care, except for its intrinsic vileness.''Oh, let's have it! let's have it!' burst out Lance and Robina, who hadbeen burning with curiosity all the time.'Don't let us have them murdered, whatever they are,' said Edgar,taking them into his own hand. 'Pity the sorrows of a poor wretchseduced into one of your horrid jeux d'esprit--a lady's excuse forfishing for compliments that sound more than they mean. Here goes,then:--'Say, Lady, what existence pastThine essence hath enfolded;What humble antecedent castThy present self hath moulded.'The hawthorn bush, with blossom whiteVeiling her branches pricking;The painted lady, fluttering light,The rash pursuer tricking.'Grass paraquit, who loves to sitIn clustering rows and chat on;Caressing, purring, traitor kit,Fatal to Master Ratton.'There, ladies and gentlemen, I hope you are satisfied,' he concluded,letting his performance float into the fire; 'the metaphors, to say theleast, are startling, but that is the fault of the game.''I don't enter into it all,' said Cherry.'Not likely another of the grass paraquits would, my dear,' said Edgar.'And it is exactly what Robin made her,' said Angela; 'both that andthe butterfly; and Felix, the kitten. You didn't borrow of course. Howfunny!''But I didn't make her inconstant,' said Robin; 'that is not fair.''Not when you made her a butterfly, and the shepherd's weather-glasstoo!''I never thought of that, only their being both bright, dark, sparklingthings; and Felix has the forget-me-not, by way of antidote.''I do not think such things are wise,' pronounced Wilmet. 'And,by-the-by, Edgar, it has always been the custom that nobody should walkhome with Alice. Miss Pearson would not like it, and it would make atalk.'Edgar laughed. 'Dear W. W., let it not trouble you! What it may leadto is a bugbear to you. You can't think how much younger and moreagreeable you will be when you have learnt that there can be passagesthat lead to nothing.'Geraldine went to bed uncomfortable and perplexed. Before she wasdressed in the morning, Alice darted in. 'Cherry, I'm so vexed; Idropped that paper. Do you think it is here?''No; Angel picked it up, and Edgar read us the verses, and then threwthem into the fire.''Burnt them!''Yes; he said the worst of such games was that they force one to paycompliments that may be taken to mean more than they do.'Cherry spoke under a stern sense of virtue doing a service to Alice;and when the quick answer came, 'He didn't say that, I'm sure it wasWilmet,' she asseverated, 'Indeed he did. I don't confuse in that way.It is a very good warning not to dwell on what gentlemen may say inmere play.''Who told you I did?' said Alice sharply. 'You've no business to saysuch things!'Happily there was an interruption. Cherry felt as if she had had ataste of the claws; but she feared she had been malicious, and she waspenitent.CHAPTER XV.WHAT IT LED TO.'Then out and spak the popinjay.'Old Ballad.Geraldine was hard at work on a drawing. Edgar's teaching had improvedher so much that, under a sore longing to obtain some good studies, shehad ventured to place in the shop one of her best imaginary groups, andto her surprise and delight, it had brought her in fifteen shillings,and an order for a companion.Vistas of hope began to rise before her, only obscured by herconsciousness of the want of knowledge and skill. It took someresolution not to attend exclusively to her art, and she was forced tomake it a rule never to touch a pencil till the lessons of Bernard andStella were both over for the day.They were finished, the children in the garden, and Cherry was in thatworld of joy and something like inspiration known to spirits imbuedwith any of the constructive poetry of art, always endeavouring tofulfil an ideal, never indeed satisfying themselves, but never so atrest as in the effort.Presently she was startled by a step on the stairs. Nothing shortof the Fall of Delhi had ever been known to bring Felix upstairs inbusiness hours; and he was especially bound to his work at present,since Mr. Froggatt was detained at home by a serious attack ofrheumatism. She looked up amazed at the eager question, 'Is there aletter from Alda?''I believe there is, waiting for Wilmet. What is the matter?''The most astonishing thing. Here is Ferdinand Travis writing to tellme of his engagement to Alda.''To Alda?''To Alda! I looked twice to be sure that there was no confusion betweenthe names, but it is my sister Alda beyond a doubt. He would not askmy consent if it were Marilda. Here's the letter, as good and nice aspossible, dear good fellow.''Then what Edgar told us must have been pure imagination.''Not the old folks' wishes, most likely. For the rest, Edgar can make agood story. One can't wonder at the preference, and there's no denyingthat it is a brilliant chance for Alda.''And what a blessing that he should be so good!''Infinite! No one could be so welcome! How pleased Mr. Audley will be!But I must go, and try not to look too much disposed to stand on thecounter and crow.'Whatever Felix did below, upstairs Cherry found drawing impossible.Ferdinand a brother! The pleasure was enhanced by the affectionatesimplicity of his letter, the outcome of so good a heart, greatly inlove, but very conscientious, and utterly unpresuming on his wealth,but showing all his old affection and reverence for Felix. What adelightful wonder that Alda should bring in a connection so faithful toFelix!Yet, what would not Cherry have given to be as unsuspicious as Felixor Wilmet? Why would misgivings come into her head such as nevertroubled theirs? Why must she be haunted by Alda's intimations abouther travelling companions, and her manner, half scornful, half nettled,when Edgar described the terms on which Mr. Travis stood?She read Ferdinand's letter a second time, and was convinced that helooked at the whole with such artless seriousness as to preclude allnotion of his having been consciously playing fast and loose; but shewas ready to torture herself for the involuntary doubt whether her ownsister were equally to be trusted.However, when Wilmet came home, her genuine wholesome overflow ofundoubting rapture could not but sweep Cherry along in the tide.Ferdinand combined the apparently impossible advantages of beingthoroughly one of themselves, and yet of being able to give Aldathe luxuries to which she had become accustomed; and Wilmet's joywas beyond expression. The contrast between the twins--one admired,praised, followed, esteemed, as one of the brightest ornaments ofLondon society; the other toiling in an obscure poverty-stricken home,a teacher in a small third-class school, her beauty unheeded or viewedas a real disadvantage--all this never occurred for one moment toWilmet, she only felt elevated in her sister.Two days passed before more letters were received, and these cameby the first instead of the second post, before breakfast wasover. Four--besides one unheeded, being only in Robina's childishhandwriting--Alda to Wilmet, Thomas Underwood and Ferdinand both toFelix, Edgar to Geraldine. There was a simultaneous opening of theletters, then a general starting and looking into one another's eyes,and Geraldine faintly murmured,'Then it was really so!''So? what do you mean?' broke forth Wilmet. 'These selfish people aretreating my poor Alda most cruelly among them; and Felix must go andfetch her home to be married from her own brother's house as she oughtto be.''I shall have to fetch her home,' said Felix thoughtfully; 'but I wishI were quite clear that she has been dealing kindly by Marilda.''You are not believing that man Thomas rather than your own sister!'cried Wilmet. 'If Alda does happen to be prettier than his daughter,she can't help it. I'm sure I should be glad enough not to be pretty,but it is a trial, and one must do the best one can.''That is just what I fear Alda has been doing,' said Felix between histeeth, as he frowned over his letter.'Read her letter, poor dear girl,' cried Wilmet, 'and see if youaren't ashamed of such a judgment! No. Some is only meant for me; butlisten--"Your letter of sisterly joy has come on troubled waters. Ialways knew I was the poor relation upon sufferance, but I have beentaught to feel it now." She does not know how she could bear it, butfor the security of Ferdinand's strength; and they will not let hersee him--say she must give him up or them--Mrs. Underwood's violenceinconceivable, and all because of a chimerical fancy.''What does Ferdinand himself say?' asked Cherry, as Wilmet looked onfor further selections.'He says,' said Felix, reading, 'that our greeting was especiallywelcome, from the contrast to what he met with from Mr. Underwood.The angry opposition took him by surprise, having always thought theyregarded Alda as a daughter; but of course nothing makes any differenceto him, and he would much rather come to us for her than to a stranger.His uncle is at New Orleans, and he is writing to him; he is afraidthey ought to wait for the answer, though there can be no doubt aboutit, and he owes him no obedience.--Now, Cherry, there is just time forEdgar's account before we go our several ways.''O Felix,' cried Wilmet, 'aren't you going to fetch her home, poordear?''Not possible to-day, Mettie. I shall have much ado to get awayto-morrow. Don't be so unhappy, you know she could come alone or withEdgar, if it were so very dreadful; or if you are so fierce, you hadbetter go yourself and encounter "Man Thomas."'Wilmet looked so much hurt, that Geraldine thought to defend Felix byreading aloud at once.'Ma Chrie'Such a bear-garden never was seen! Madame furious, Tomabusive, Alda injured innocence, Montezuma heroism, and poorPolly magnanimous--though the less said about her, the soonestmended. I saw when I went back that the crisis could not befar off. The fact is, that our dear sister cannot see any oneelse treated as "an object," and has so persuaded herself thatshe is the proverbial maltreated poor relation, as to thinkeverything fair.''Geraldine!' exclaimed Wilmet, 'how can you read? Felix, how can youlisten to such things about your own sister?''It is only what she said herself,' said Felix drily. 'Go on, Cherry.''It must be owned that it was hard, when for once Polly hadfallen in with something alike palatable to self and parents,and able to swallow her broad visage! If Madame had had anywit, she would have kept Alda away till the fish was hooked,when, it is my belief, he would have had no eyes for aughtbeyond; but the good creature is too sure of the charms ofher own goose, to dread the admission of any swan whatsoeverto her pond. While the Cacique being yet uncommitted, smallblame to him if he saw the differ, especially as he attachesto Alda all the sanctity of Bexley, which is to him at theleast what St. Matthew's is to Clem. To have been reared onthe other--or indeed any side of the Atlantic, our intendedbrother-in-law is curiously simple. He accepted the intimationthat Alda's face is her fortune with superb indifference;whether it will be the same with his uncle, remains to beseen; and I am afraid he is a good deal dependent on him, hismother's Mexican property having been speculated away. I don'tlike the look of the business; but if any one can do any goodit is Marilda herself. Tom is in a towering rage, and his wifeworse--neither perceiving that the noise they make is smallmercy to their daughter. She looks all manner of colours, butstands out gallantly that she is glad, and that all is as itshould be; and I believe that, left to herself, she will setthings straight. Felix had better keep out of the fray exceptupon compulsion.''Here is compulsion,' said Felix. 'Tom Underwood summons me; I can'tsay I like the errand.''You ought not to let yourself be led by Edgar's unkind joking way!''We ought to be off now, at any rate,' said Felix, glad to closethe discussion. 'I'll write to get Fernan to meet me at the stationto-morrow.'Accordingly, when he arrived, there was Ferdinand Travis driving amagnificent horse, the whole turn-out very far from looking like aconnection of Froggatt and Underwood. He had certainly developed into asplendidly handsome fellow, though still lithe and slight rather thanrobust, and his dignified bearing giving the idea of greater heightthan his inches testified to. His greeting was warmly affectionate,with all his old wishful reverence towards his young godfather, andeven with a sort of doubt of his thinking him worthy of his sister.As to the disturbance created by the avowal of the object of hisattentions, he seemed amazed at it, and entirely unconscious of anysupposed change on his part.'I knew my uncle wished me to be an intimate with the family,' he said,'and I was rejoiced to fall in with any one who bore your name, andknew how to appreciate you; but I had reason to think that--that therewere other views--for--' and here the olive cheeks grew crimson, and hestammered himself into a hopeless entanglement, whence Felix recalledhim charitably to an account of the explosion as it had affectedhimself.It appeared that his proposal had not been mentioned to the family tillFelix's answer had been received, Ferdinand feeling that no one oughtto hear of it before the eldest brother. The lovers had met that nightat a ball, and their consultation over the letters had taken place inthe conservatory, where they had been surprised, and partly overheard,by Mrs. Underwood. When Ferdinand arrived the next morning, he wasreceived with denunciations of underhand ways, and his explanation onlymade matters worse. A thunderstorm about ingratitude and treachery waslaunched forth, and he was told that the connection was so contrary toany intentions of his uncle, that Mr. Underwood could not hear of it,and that Alda must renounce it entirely, on peril of being cast off bythe family. That Ferdinand regarded her brother as the true head of herhouse, was only additionally provoking; and Mr. Underwood had given himwarning, which he only hinted at to Felix, that the engagement couldnot be carried on with impunity.Therewith they reached Kensington Palace Gardens, and being in ameasure forbidden the house, Ferdinand drove about waiting for Felix,who on giving his name, found himself ushered into the room where thewhole party were finishing breakfast.Alda, looking meek and pensive, but very lovely, exquisitely dressedin white and blue ribbons, flew into his arms as if her protectorwere come; Mr. Underwood, without getting up, acknowledged him by agrunt, and hand held out; Marilda came round, and put a cold hand intohis, clasping it tight; and her mother greeted him with, 'So, FelixUnderwood, you are come up about this unlucky business?''There is no reason it should be anything but a very happy one,' saidMarilda stoutly. 'Come, Mamma, we had better leave Papa and Felix;' andshe set the example, but Mrs. Underwood did not stir.'You hear the dear girl!' she said. 'It ought to go to Alda's heart!''It is of no use talking before the ladies,' said Mr. Underwood,getting up. 'That is, unless you have the good sense to join with mein telling Alda that she must give up this wild affair. The fellow hasnext to nothing of his own, and his uncle would see him at Jerichobefore he consented to a match like this!''I am hardly prepared to do that, Sir,' said Felix, as Alda clung tohis arm, and looked appealingly in his face, 'unless the objection weremore personal.''Objection!' burst forth the lady of the house, 'when he has beenmaking his way underhand--deceiving us all along.''Alda, my dear,' said Felix in her ear, 'don't you think you had bettergo upstairs?'But Alda seemed as little disposed as Mrs. Underwood to quit the sceneof conflict. 'O Felix, I don't know what she means, nor what we havebeen doing, for them all to turn against me.''Don't tell me, Miss Innocence,' retorted Mrs. Underwood, theartificial polish giving way, and the native scolding Polly Kedgebreaking out in a storm of words. 'Wasn't the young man doing just ashis uncle meant him, and my poor dear girl fancying him as I neversaw her do any one before, till you came home with your sly, artfulways--you that owed us the very clothes on your back?''Hush, Mary!' ejaculated her husband; but he might as well have triedto stop a torrent.'Ay, I know. She comes round every man of you with her smooth tongueand pretty face, till you--you are ready to take her part against yourown child, Underwood. When my poor girl's laid in her coffin, then youwill know what a serpent you've been fostering.'To Felix's surprise and annoyance, Alda must needs answer: 'I'm sureit's very hard! If people will look at me, I can't help it; and I've asmuch right to be spoken to as Marilda. She that has got everything, andpoor me--'Luckily her tears stopped her voice.'Come along, Felix,' said the master of the house, opening the door;and he, perceiving that escape alone could put an end to this mosthumiliating scene, whispered again his recommendation to Alda to go toher room, and saw her hurrying up the stairs before his kinsman shutthe door of his private room with a bounce, exclaiming, 'There! Now weare out of the way of the women's tongues, we can hear ourselves speak.I am afraid it is an awkward business, Felix Underwood.''I am afraid it is, Sir.''And the ladies make it worse by making such a din about it,' said Tom,who after all was an Underwood, and whose better breeding had come tothe perception how these ravings compromised his daughter's dignity.'How far any one is to blame, I can't tell. The truth is, that itwould have been very satisfactory to Alfred Travis and to me both ifthe lad and my girl could have made it up together, and they seemedready enough to like each other. My girl has got rather a turn for yournew-fashioned sort of saints, and he seemed just her style. Everythingdoes go contrary at times; and when your sister came home, with herpretty face and way, my wife declares now she saw a change from thefirst, but to tell the truth I never did, and I doubt her doing so;but you may guess how amazed we were when she came on them whisperingtogether, and it came out that he had been writing to you to sanctionhis proposing for Alda, as if he were ashamed to come to me, who hadalways been a father to her.''He meant no slight to you, Sir,' said Felix, eagerly; 'but you know wewere his first acquaintance, and he had a feeling that an elder brothercame nearest. I am sure he felt no shame; he was conscious of no changeof intention.''Well, well, he is a little bit of an ass. Between ourselves, Felix,I don't blame him half as much as Alda. The girl is sharp enough; shehas swarms of lovers; men come about her like wasps to a lump of sugar;and there's 5,000 ready for her the day she marries; but when therewas one my poor Mary liked for once, we liked for her, and was in theway of liking her--Mary, who has shared everything with her like asister--she might have let him alone. Indeed, her aunt gave her a hint,but it only served to make her carry it on on the sly.'Felix wished he had not known of Alda's hearing Edgar's report. Hecould only say sadly, 'If so, she is quite indefensible.'What would Wilmet have thought of his fight with 'Man Thomas?''Of course,' proceeded that gentleman, 'we know the less we say ofthat part of the story the better. Some day, Mary will know she's wellrid of a coxcombical foreign-looking fellow. She can afford to lookfarther; but for your sister, this is the maddest thing in the world.William Travis made a regular mull with his wife's fortune, and dependon it, the young man has next to nothing, and would come to beggary ifhe offended his uncle. There is nothing for it but for them to give oneanother up!''I do not think there is much chance of their doing so,' replied Felix.'Not as they are now, in the height and fury of the thing; but you area sensible lad, Felix; you will do your best to show them the utterfolly of the thing.''We do not know whether Ferdinand can afford it yet,' said Felix.'Don't delude yourself with fancying Alfred Travis will swallowthis! Not he! Why, he's set on that young Spanish don making a greatmatch--hardly thought my Mary's hundred thousand good enough.''Very likely he will refuse consent,' returned Felix; 'but, in themeantime, I see nothing to be done but for Alda to go home with me andwait.''To very little purpose,' ejaculated Mr. Underwood, 'except that maybea taste of your way of life may bring her to her senses, and serve herright. I must say,' he added, 'it is hard that both this boy and girlshould be thrown back on your hands for no fault of yours. I wish Icould help it, but you see there wouldn't be a moment's peace if Aldastayed here without giving him up.''It is not fit that she should,' said Felix.'I like the girl, too; indeed, she's almost like my own,' continued Mr.Underwood; 'the house will be dull without her, and I believe thosepretty young women can't help flirting, and think one another's beauxfair game. Eh? Well, we'll send for her and put it to her--will shegive up Travis and stay here, or hold him to it and go home with you?'Felix could make no objection, though he had no question what thedecision would be; so the bell was rung, Alda was summoned, and soonappeared with burning cheeks and moist eyes.'Now, Alda,' said her adopted uncle, 'your brother and I have talkedit over, and I am ready to overlook what has gone by--that is, if youraunt will--and to let all be as it was before, on this one condition,that you break off this foolish concern. Listen to me. You will findthat he has little enough to call his own, and his uncle can cut offhis allowance any day. It is mere insanity to think he will consent tosuch a match as you would be; and you would be doing the best thing forthe young man and yourself to tell him it is all nonsense, and you'vethought better of it.''O Uncle, I couldn't do that!''If not--you have the choice--I can't abet what Travis never intended,your aunt couldn't stand it either. There's nothing for it but that youshould leave this house. Choose between us and him!''That can't help being done, Uncle,' said Alda, with streaming eyesand a choked voice. 'You have been very good to me, but he must comefirst;' and she moved towards Felix, who put his arm round her kindly,and kissed her, saying,'Then, Alda, I will leave you to prepare; I must go and see thechildren and Edgar. I will come back for you in time for the half-pastfive train.'Alda's tears flowed too fast again for words, and she turned to leavethe room.'I shall see you again,' said Mr. Underwood. 'Can I give you a liftanywhere, Felix?''No, thank you, Sir; Travis is waiting for me.''Ay, ay, very fine with his thorough-bred; but when his allowance isdocked, how is he to live on his pay?'The brougham had long been waiting for Tom Underwood, and he left themtogether. Alda hung on her brother. 'O Felix, is it not dreadful?''I thought him very kind and forgiving,' said Felix.'Is that what you call forgiving? And oh! if you could hear Aunt Mary!You little think what I have gone through!''It will be over soon,' said Felix, kindly. 'You are going home, youknow, and Wilmet is wild to have you.''But, Felix, you don't think they mean to do more than frighten me?Ferdinand must have a real right to his own father's money; andbesides, he can't properly object to me; Uncle Tom promised me my5,000 whatever happened!''I cannot stay to discuss that now, Alda,' said Felix. 'I have a greatdeal to do, and Fernan is waiting for me. I shall come back in time.''Oh, I wish I could come with you now! Dear Fernan! Tell him I haveborne it all for his sake, but it is such an age since I saw him!''No doubt he will meet us at the station,' said Felix, escaping atlast, and finding Ferdinand not many yards off in the road outside.'Well, Fernan, to Brompton, if you please. Mr. Underwood is really muchkinder than I expected; but as things stand, you can't carry it on intheir house, so Alda comes home with me to-night.''Then the dear girl is really banished for my sake! I mean, no place islike Bexley to me. But it is very noble of her!' exclaimed Ferdinand,curiously divided between regard for Felix and sense of Alda'ssacrifice.'It is the proper place in which for her to wait for your uncle'sanswer,' said Felix; 'but indeed, Fernan, it is a question whether weought to let you risk all your prospects.'Ferdinand's vehement demand what Felix took him for, and equally eagerprotest that his uncle must know he had no right to withhold the meansthat were in all equity due to him, lasted through all the brieftransit to the farther end of Brompton, where a great old house andgrounds, once quite in the country, had been adapted and revivified byMiss Fulmort.'Might I not come in and see the little girls?' asked Ferdinand,wistfully.'I should rather suppose not,' said Felix, smiling. 'Life-Guardsmenare not exactly the visitors expected in establishments for youngladies. You had better not wait for me; I cannot give the children lessthan an hour.''I would wait if it were ten hours.''But how about your horse? He isn't in love!'Ferdinand would not, however, be denied; and when at length arendezvous was agreed on, Felix, free of the dashing equipage, of whichhe was, to tell the truth, slightly ashamed, rang at the gates, arrivedat the house door, announced himself as Mr. Underwood, asked to see hissisters; and after a long labyrinth of matted passages, found himselfin a pretty countrified room, where a wiry, elderly, sensible lady,with grey hair and a keen face, gave him a friendly reception, drew afavourable, but not enthusiastic, picture of Robina's steadiness andindustry, and said that Angela was a more difficult character. By thistime Robina came into the room with her hat on, eagerly, but with herface flushed and her eyes rather frightened, and as she received herbrother's kiss, she said, 'The little ones are not come in yet.--May Itake my brother into the garden, Miss Fennimore?'Permission was given, and Robina held his hand with an unusually tightgrasp as she led him to the wide, square, walled garden, with a broadgravel-walk around an old-fashioned bowling-green. He thought the roundface looked anxious and perplexed, and was rather uneasy as he began bysaying, 'I hope not to lose Angel. Do you always walk so early in theday?''On Herr Mller's days, because he only comes in the afternoon,' saidRobina; 'but I am rather glad; I wanted to speak to you, Felix.''Is anything wrong?' said Felix, seeing that the child's face hadbecome crimson, and hearing effort in her voice. 'You are happy here?Don't be afraid to tell me anything, my dear. Remember, there is no oneso bound to watch over you.''I know,' said Robina, looking up into those kind eyes. 'I want to tellyou--' but she panted, and he encouraged her by putting his other handover hers caressingly. 'Edgar comes every Sunday,' came out at last.'And what of that? Isn't it a pleasure?''It--it would be--but he and Alice ought not to send each other notesand messages.''What?' very low.'Indeed they do; and I can't tell what to do.''What sort of notes and messages?' asked Felix, in a half reprovingvoice, as though he thought the solemnity of thirteen was taking alarmneedlessly.'O Felix, love notes,' half whispered the girl, hanging her burninghead.'Nonsense, child; you have misunderstood some joke.''No,' said Robina, looking full in his face with sturdy offendeddignity. 'They both were in earnest when they told me about it.''About what?' said he, still severely, as he sat down on a bench,unheeding February damp.'About--' she was not far from tears, as she faltered out, 'theirengagement.''Theirs!' he wrung the hand that he still retained; 'Edgar and--''And Alice Knevett,' said Robin. 'I would not promise not to tell. Ihope it is not treachery!''How long?' asked Felix, hoarsely.'Ever since the holidays. They used to walk together when Miss Pearsonthought she was with us, but none of us ever knew it then.''You are certain? Remember, this is a graver matter than perhaps youunderstand.''I think I do understand, and it is that which makes me so unhappy;but, indeed, it can't be fancy. I have seen her ring, emerald andamethyst, for Edgar and Alice, and the locket with their hairs twistedtogether. The very first Sunday we were here, he gave me a note forher, and when I told him it was not allowed, he tried quizzing me atfirst, and at last told me I was a silly child who did not know whatwas proper between engaged people. So I said,' continued Robina, withdignity, 'that I could allow much to be proper in that case, but Iwanted to know whether this was only kept from me because I was a baby,and was known to you and the grown-up people.''Right, Robin,' muttered Felix, feeling that she needed encouragement.'Then he laughed at me more than ever about expecting things to beproclaimed on the market-cross, and tried to puzzle me out of mysenses, till I could only stick to one thing, that I couldn't takehis notes unless somebody knew. And after all I found the thing in myjacket pocket. He must have put it in when I was not looking.''And what did you do with it?''Oh! the dreadful thing! I felt as if it would bite me all the weeklong, but I didn't think it would be honourable to tear it or burn it,and I kept it. Luckily Alice didn't ask if I had a note, only whetherhe had said anything; and when she found I knew, she told me all aboutit, and said all sorts of things about my being unkind and mean tostand out, but I never promised to keep the secret.''Are you still keeping this note?''No. I gave it back to Edgar on Sunday, and told him to play no suchtricks. I thought he would have been in a rage, but he was--oh! soprovoking! just as if he didn't care for a little spite in a naughtychild.''Then is this intercourse checked?''No, that's the worst of it. When I would not, they took to Angel.You know she got very fond of Edgar in the winter, and was alwaysrunning after him and waiting on him. So she did what he told her quiteinnocently at first, till I found out what was going on, and triedto stop her; but she doesn't care for me as she does for Edgar, andthinks it grand to be in all their secrets, when I am too cross. Andthen there's a class that goes to the South Kensington Museum, andAlice is one of them, and Edgar is about there. I'm sure Miss Fulmortought not to be deceived as they are doing; it's all nonsense aboutschoolmistresses being designed by nature to be hoodwinked. It makes meso miserable, I don't know what to do; and when I heard you were come,it was as if you had been sent on purpose to help me.''Poor child!' said Felix, with a heavy sigh. 'You have kept this all toyourself.''I could not tell any one. I could have told Miss Lyveson, because sheis one's friend; but it would only be being a tell-tale and informerhere. And one's own brother, too! And I could not write, for they lookover all the letters that are not to fathers and mothers.''They must make an exception for me!' said Felix, in an indignant tone.'I knew you would say so. O Felix, tell them so! I do feel like havingPapa now I have you.''If you only had!' sighed Felix. 'My poor Bob, it is a grievousbusiness, but you have been very upright and considerate, as far as Ican see.''I'm so glad you don't want me to have told!' she said, with a sigh ofrelief, as unlike his as that of one who throws off a burden is to thatof him who takes it up.'Not if it can be helped. It would be a mischievous and cruel exposure,and would be hard on one who has been led into it,' he said, withbreaks and pauses, half for breath, half for considering. 'It is mostreckless, most unjustifiable, in Edgar!' He knit his brows, so that shegazed at him in awe and wonder, as having something in his countenancethat she did not comprehend. Then, after a silence, he said, 'Robin, Iwill speak to Edgar, and if you do not find that this is stopped afterone communication, which of course there must be, write to me. Theseladies must make an exception in favour of such as we are!''O Felix, it is so nice to hold you and feel you! Only I wish I had nothad to grieve you so much!''Dishonourable conduct is not what I was prepared for!' he said,setting his teeth.'And will you speak to Angel? I hear them coming in,' said Robina.'Yes. Let me have her alone at first. Come back in ten minutes' time.'He was still sitting on the bench, with his elbows on his knees, andhis hands over his brow, when Angela came towards him. She was of thesame long-limbed make as Clement, was nearly as tall as the squaresturdy Robina nearly three years older, and had Clement's small, almostbaby mould of features, relieved only by such arch deep blue eyes asshone in Edgar's face. She looked such a mere child, that when herstep and exclamation caused Felix to raise his head, it seemed absurdto imagine her to be knowingly engaged as go-between in a clandestinecorrespondence; and with a sort of pity and compunction for the blamehe had intended, he held out his arms to her.'O Felix, how cold you are! Your face is like marble. Now if I was tosit there, in this weather, wouldn't they be at me like wild cats?'Thus reminded, Felix rose, and certainly shivered after the exercise ofhis privilege. 'Are you happy here, Angel?' he asked in a constrainedtone.'Yes, it is jollier than Miss Pearson's. There are more girls, and wedo have such fun!''I hope you are good and steady, and very careful of all the rules.'Angela fidgeted, as if she didn't like the style of the conversation.'You know,' he continued, 'there may be rules that you may not see theuse of, but that must be obeyed for all that.''What a tiresome dry old Blunderbore you are!' broke out Angela, withill-assured sauciness; 'this isn't the way Edgar goes on when he comesto see us.'Felix could not check a sort of groan or grunt; and Angela, whosepertness was defensive, quailed a little. She had driven him out of thedue sequence of his discourse, but he resumed it. 'Angel, I must tellyou; if anybody asks you to break rules--by giving letters--you mustnot.'Angela kicked pebbles about.'Have you ever been asked to do so?'She hung her head, and a pout came over her face.'Angel,' he said, in a voice from the sadness of his heart, 'I willnot ask any questions, in case you have made promises not to betraysecrets; but you must never make such promises again. Tell me you willnever do--this thing again.'She was silent.'Angela!' he said, reprovingly.'I don't know why I should promise you more than Edgar,' broke outAngela, petulantly. 'He is my brother too, and he isn't cross; and Ilove him, and will keep his secret.'Between this flat defiance of his authority, and his scruple aboutinterfering with the child's sense of honour, Felix was in no slightperplexity even as to this interview with his little sister. Hisdisclaimer came first. 'I ask about no one's secret,' he said; 'but,Angel, I must have you understand this. If you break the rules thatforbid the giving of notes from any person outside the school, it willbe doing more harm than you can understand. I shall put a stop to it atonce, and most likely you will be sent away in disgrace.'She was somewhat awed, but she did not speak.'Whatever any one may say to you,' said Felix, 'recollect that it isdishonesty and treachery to do anything underhand, and the greatestpossible mischief to those you wish to be kind to. Don't you see, it isno kindness to help any one to do wrong?'She began to cry. 'They don't want to do wrong. It is very nasty andmean of Bobbie to have told.''You will know some day how good and trustworthy it is in Bobbie,' saidher elder brother. 'You cannot understand the rights and wrongs in sucha manner as this, at your age, Angel.' (To tell the child this was amistake, if he had but known it.) 'You must be satisfied with knowingthat whatever breaks rules and must be kept secret is necessarilydisobedient and deceitful, and may have terrible consequences. Do youbelieve me? Then give me your word to have no more to do with it.'She muttered something among her tears like 'I won't,' and Felix wassatisfied, for the exaction of promises had necessarily been thechief mode of government with the two youthful pillars of the house,who spent so much time apart from their dominions; and it was almostunprecedented that such a promise was not observed.Robina was lingering near, and as they joined her Felix found that histime was up. He was taken back to the drawing-room, where he foundhimself in presence of the lady he had seen, and of a much youngersmaller person, with a slight cast in her eye, and a peculiar jerkingmanner such as he could well believe would frighten away a young girl'sconfidence. When he made his request for free correspondence from hislittle sisters, there was no demur; only Miss Fulmort said, half vexed,'It ought to have been mentioned before; she did not know why thechildren had not told her.' And then she made a point of ascertainingFelix's individual address; for she said, 'A great deal of undesirablestuff may be scribbled to brothers and sisters.'Felix possessed no card, unless such might be reckoned the announcementof photographs and stationery, &c., which was wont to be put upwith parcels for strangers; and when he tried to write 'Mr. F. C.Underwood,' the shivering chill so affected his fingers that he couldhardly guide the pencil. He took leave, and soon found the assiduousFerdinand, who presently asked, shyly, 'What the little ones thought ofit?'Felix bethought himself. 'Really, Fernan, it was put out of my head;and, moreover, perhaps it had better not be known more widely thanneedful.''You do not doubt--'All the ground that had been gone over before was argued out once againby the eager Mexican before they reached the National Gallery, theappointed place of meeting with Edgar. He was not within, but without,and, throwing away his cigar, hailed them as Fernan drew up his horse.'At last! The storm must have been pitiless, to judge by the effects!You are blue with cold, Felix.''Ferdinand, thank you,' said Felix, getting out. 'I am sorry, but Imust have Edgar alone a little while.''Look here, Travis,' said Edgar, seeing his blank look, 'we'll give youthe honour of giving us a spread. You go on and order it at ----'s, andI'll walk this fellow there. Curry soup that will astonish him, andwarm the cockles of his heart, mind.'Ferdinand nodded, and drove off, perfectly satisfied with thiscompensation.'Let's see if we can walk a little life into you,' said Edgar, takinghis brother's arm. 'Bless thy five wits, Tom's a cold! Was it Madame! Ialways thought she could not be many generations from Billingsgate.''I have been to Brompton.''That tragical hoarseness would lead me to conclude something. Eh!has that Robin been chirping out her fancies? And do you mean tosay that you are struck all of a heap by the awful discovery of aboarding-school mystery?''It is naturally distressing to find you acting such a part.''Then I am afraid you have a good deal to go through in the courseof your life. If every little flirtation on the part of your"Geschwister" is to produce this effect, there won't be much left ofyou by the time it comes to Stella.''What meaning do you attach to the words "little flirtation?"''When the head of the family puts the question in that solemn tone, howis it to be answered? Bless me, Blunderbore, such a countenance canonly proceed from being smitten yourself! To be sure, when there wasonly one girl you ever spoke to, it was no wonder. Poor old fellow! I'dnever have poached on your manor, but how was I to imagine a pillar ofthe house giving way to such levities?''This is mere bravado, Edgar,' was the grave answer, in a tone notdisconcerted, but full of repression, and with a pale but steadycountenance. 'Gloss it over as you will, a correspondence such as youhave begun is unjustifiable. It risks damaging for ever the prospects,at once not only of--of the object--but those of your little sisters.''O Felicissimo mio, how green a spot is Bexley! As though secrets andmysteries were not the elixir of life to the boarding-school.''Have you ever considered what a discovery must involve?''I need not, it seems, since you had not the sense to box thatchild's ears for a meddlesome tell-tale. Did the scene equal Madame'sperformance?''You do not imagine that I mentioned it.''Oh! The revered prop of the state soars so far above my head that Idid not know what he might regard as his duty.''You shall know it now, Edgar. There are two choices. If you are reallyengaged to this young lady' (Edgar made a nod of impatient scornfulacquiescence, but certainly of acquiescence), 'then ask her honourablyfrom her friends, and let whatever you do be open! Otherwise, giveit up as an impossible imprudence, but drop all attempt at what isclandestine. Unless you do one or other of these, I warn you that Ishall speak to Miss Pearson.''If you were a reasonable and experienced paterfamilias, instead ofonly a poor conscientious over-harassed prig of a boy, with morebrothers and sisters than he knows what to do with, I'll tell you, incandid unprejudice, what you would do. Just let it alone! There are asmany of such little affairs going as there are midges in a sunbeam;and they never do any one any harm, unless the higher powers make anunadvised hubbub.''Am I to understand that as an avowal that you know yourself to betrifling?''I know nothing about it. I don't live in the heroics, like some of myfriends. In the rural seclusion of Bexley I saw a pretty lively girl,who, not to put too fine a point upon it, made quite as much up to theromantic young artist as ever the young artist did to her. Of course,there was an exchange of prettinesses, and life on either side becamea blank when she was immured at Brompton, and the only solace left wasthe notes that so outrage your and Bobbie's united sense of propriety.''And what is to follow?''Is it to lead to?' he corrected, with a mimicry of Wilmet's tone.'That depends. If you make the explosion, I shall have to rise to theoccasion--keep the slip-knot ready and patent, and as soon as I get myhead above water, have a wife and family on my back to keep me down,and hinder me from coming to your rescue. If not--why, it will takeits chance, and we shall have a reasonable chance of trying whetherwe get tired of one another--the best thing that could happen tous, by-the-by--though she is such a saucy little darling, that werethat picture of mine painted, I should be fool enough to marry herto-morrow.''And why--may I ask--seeing these things so clearly, did you draw thepoor child into an engagement?'Edgar shrugged his shoulders. 'You had better ask why she drew me.If you didn't know it before, my dear Felix, "'Tis human natur to befools."''Allowing it to be folly, you do not mean to persist?''As if a poor fellow must always have a meaning! Life is not worthhaving if one is to be always so awfully in earnest.''I have the misfortune to be in earnest,' said Felix, with theformality of one past patience, but resolved to keep his temper inhand, 'when I warn you, that if I find that this intercourse iscontinued, unless you choose to ask her properly of her father, it willbe my duty to let Miss Pearson know.''So be it,' was the answer, in a tone of half mocking, halfcompassionate submission, that was more provoking than all, exceptfor the sudden change to the gay kindliness that followed, as Edgarthrew aside his own affairs, to laugh over Ferdinand Travis's honestsimplicity of adoration of Alda and all her household, declaring thatit had been as much for his delight, as to be rid of him, that hehimself had devised that commission of the luncheon. 'What a spread itwill be!' Edgar chuckled to himself; 'and how it will be thrown away onthe present company! not that there ever was a man who wanted it more!'he added, as he saw how white his brother's face was. 'You've been andgot a chill!'Felix did not deny it; and if his unsophisticated palate did notappreciate all that Ferdinand had ordered on the principle thatnothing could be too good for him either in his individual capacity oras Alda's brother, he at least submitted to what his two companionsrequired of him in the way of hot soup, and even of one glass ofwine, before he grew restive, and insisted on carrying the head thattheir solicitude had succeeded in rendering heated and flushed toburning pitch, to do the business in the City that always sprang upwhenever any one had to go to town.Edgar bade him adieu; and the faithful Ferdinand drove him whereverhe had to go, and finally to Kensington Palace Gardens, where hewas ushered into the drawing-room, to find Marilda, resolved uponunconsciousness, but only succeeding in a kind of obstreperouscordiality and good will, which, together with the hot room, madehim quite dizzy; and his answers were so much at random, that hesent Fulbert to an examination at Cambridge, and Clement prospectingin Australia. Neither Mr. nor Mrs. Underwood made their appearance;but when Felix spoke of getting a cab, Marilda said the carriage wasordered. Then Alda was explicit about the boxes that were to follow,but on the whole she was behaving very prettily and unobtrusively.Marilda kissed her warmly, and detained Felix a moment to say, 'Thiswill blow over, and then she will come back, unless things have settledthemselves better. If I can do any good, write to me.'So Alda quitted her adopted home; but the change might be lightenedto her by being handed out of the carriage at the station by amilitary-looking figure, who announced that he wanted to see a fellowat Aldershot, and meant to dine there. It was not his fault that he gotout at Farnborough.CHAPTER XVI.THE WINTER OF DISCONTENT.'Peace, brother, be not exquisite,To cast the fashion of uncertain evils;For, grant they be so, while they rest unknown,What need a man forestall his date of grief?'Milton.Wilmet was so devoted to Alda and her hopes and fears, that she letFelix escape with less reproof than usual, for the cold that satheavily upon him after the last day's chill. He did not give way to it.There might have been some temptation to sit over the fire if Geraldinehad been alone there; but Alda, when Wilmet was out of reach, engrossedCherry's ears with descriptions of her feelings, and cravings forsympathy in her suspense, treating every other subject as futile, andthe interruption of the children's lessons as an insult. No one mighttalk of anybody but Ferdinand; and Cherry did not wonder that Felixlooked wearied and harassed, and always betrayed some anxiety to comefirst into possession of the morning post. One day, nearly a fortnightafter his visit to London, he called Wilmet away from the breakfasttable into the sitting-room: 'Wilmet,' he said, 'I must go and see MissPearson before school hours.''You! Is there anything the matter with Alice?' asked Wilmet, startledat his tone.'Had they--had you--any notion of anything between her and Edgar?''No! Miss Pearson has taken to saying, "My dear, your brothers arequite grown into young men," and I thought she did not like the play.''Ah! that play! It threw them together!''Is it really so? I suppose nothing is too foolish and provoking forEdgar!''The fact of admiration is not wonderful,' said Felix, rather in atone of defence; 'but the worst of it is, that he has been trying tocommunicate with her through those poor girls at school.'Wilmet's horror was surpassing; and when she found that he had knownit all this fortnight, she was so indignant, that to his reply that itwas not fair to leave both parties the chance of acting honourably, shereplied with scorn for his weakness in expecting anything from Edgar,and exposing the children to the chance of expulsion, which might bea lasting blight, such as merely in thought put her into a perfectagony. Nevertheless, angry and excited as she was, she flew at himwhen he gave her the letters, and was off to Miss Pearson's--'Go therewithout breakfast, in the sleet, sitting and still with that bad coldnot half gone!' and she dragged him back reluctantly to the other room,where, ignominiously ordering off Bernard and Stella to finish theirstir-about elsewhere, she insisted on his breakfasting while she toldthe story. She was far too loyal to blame him except tte--tte, butshe burst on him now and then.'You are not eating, Felix!''A cup of tea, then, please, Cherry. No one can swallow stir-about inhot haste but Wilmet herself.' He spoke good-humouredly, but with aforce upon himself that Cherry detected; and she further saw that hetook nothing but that one cup and a fragment of bread, and then hurriedoff, saying that he must catch Miss Pearson for the little girls' sake.The letters he had left were Robina's and another enfolding itcontaining these words:Dear Sir,According to my promise, I have refrained from opening thisletter, though I own that the discovery of the purpose forwhich free correspondence was asked, has been no smallamazement to me. In the first shock, I will not trust myselfto say more, until after consultation with my brother; but youshall hear from me again respecting your sisters.I remain, your obedient servant,B. M. FULMORT.The letter within was--My Dear Felix,It has all come out. There is a dreadful uproar, and nobodywill believe me. If only Miss Lyveson was here! This was theway. Edgar came yesterday and took us for a long walk inKensington Gardens, and afterwards I saw Angela going towardsAlice Knevett's room; and as we are not allowed to run intoother people's bedrooms, I stopped her and put her in mindof what you said; but she began to cry and struggle with me,and Alice came out, and made a fuss to get the note Angel hadfor her, till I got into a passion, and spoke so loud thatMiss Fennimore came out upon us. Angel did not know what shewas about by that time, and cried, saying that I was unkind,and was hurting her; and Alice took her part, accusing me oftyrannizing and being jealous, so that I faced round and toldall on the spot. Miss Fennimore took us all straight downto Miss Fulmort, and it was a dreadful business. They arefrightfully angry with us all, and me the most, for having toldyou instead of them. They cannot understand the differencebetween you and any common brother. They think I have not toldthe whole truth, and it is very hard. Nobody ever distrustedme before. We are just living on sufferance till Mr. Fulmortcomes to see about it, and then I think we shall be sent away.I hope so, for I know my own dear Miss Lyveson will believeme and take me back to justice and confidence. Here the girlsare as angry with me for telling as the ladies are for nottelling; they have no idea of such loyalty and love as we hadat Catsacre. There is a report that Miss Pearson has been sentfor. If we are sent home with her, it will be a horrid shameand injustice; but I shall not be able to be sorry one bit, forI know you will stand by me.Dear, dear brother Felix,Your affectionate Sister,BOBBIE.When the three sisters had made out all that could be understood,Geraldine owned herself less amazed than Wilmet; and Alda laughedat both for not being aware that Edgar was a universal flirt. Allthat surprised her was his having let it proceed to such dangerousextremities; but of course that was the girl's own fault--he would giveit up when it came to the point.'Why should you expect Edgar to be more inconstant than Ferdinand?'asked Cherry.Both twins turned on her, and told her she was a child and knew nothingabout it--their favourite way of annihilating her; and then Alda, inher excitement, walked with Wilmet to the school, leaving Cherry, asusual, to wash up the breakfast things. She felt a conviction thatall this accounted for the weary oppressed look, broken by occasionalstarts of vivacity, which ever since Felix's day in London had beenlaid to the score of the cold he had brought home.She was glad she was still alone, when Felix looked in for a momentto say, 'Miss Maria goes up by the 11.30 train. I am going to send aletter by her, and I think she will save Robin. Angel is so mere achild, that it matters less.''How can they all be so unjust?''They have not had time to know the child.''I did not mean Robina, but you.''I don't mind that,' he said, with a smile, 'though I am glad there isone lady who does not scold me;' and he bent down to kiss her.'Did the Miss Pearsons?''They allowed that I meant to act for the best, and you know what thatmeans. However,' he added,' they are earnest to save the little girls,which is more to the purpose. Wilmet or I would have gone up, but MissMaria thinks she can do better than either, and I believe they aremore likely to trust an old schoolmistress, who is the injured partybesides. I must write my letter. Shall I help you into the other room?''No, thank you; I have the lessons here, for they tease Alda. If youwould only send Theodore to me as you go.''Does Alda never help you?''Only by criticising my French pronunciation. She is much too restless.O Felix, what a cough! You have made your throat worse.''It is only this black east wind.''You ought to stay upstairs and be taken care of. Can't you, and letRedstone call if you are wanted?''I am wanted. It is quite as warm in the office as here, when thedoor is shut. What I want is, only to be twenty years older. Good-bye.'Cherry's ponderings were divided between that sigh and the possiblesighs of the wind if that door were not shut, until her own door wasopened by Felix's hand, to admit a little figure still in petticoats,with the loose flaxen curls, tottering feet, limp white fingers,and vacant blue eyes, whom she daily put through a few exercises totrain his almost useless fingers and tongue. The sight of this, Aldadeclared, made her ill, though the little boy was as docile as he washelpless; but it was quite true that to nerves and ears not inured fromthe first, Theodore's humming and his concertina were a trial fromtheir perpetuity.Late that evening came a message to beg Mr. and Miss Underwood wouldstep up; and they stepped, though the east wind was blacker thanever. They found that in great tribulation Miss Maria had broughtAlice Knevett home, and sent her to bed all tears and exhaustion, butthat Robina and Angela were forgiven--a word so offensive to Felix asrelating to the former, that he sorely lamented that prudence forbadetheir removal, but was somewhat consoled by a letter that Miss Mariabrought him from the Vicar of St. Matthew's, who had had a privateinvestigation of the whole subject. He wrote to Felix that his sisterwas new to the management of the girls, and was a good deal annoyed atthe secrecy observed towards herself, not making full allowance forRobina's exceptional circumstances; but that, for his own part, he wasconvinced of the girl's genuine uprightness and unselfish forbearance;and though he feared her position must be unpleasant just now, hethought it would be for the good of all if she had the patience tolive it down, and earn the good opinion he was sure she deserved.Miss Maria reported that Miss Fennimore had been brought round by hisopinion, though Miss Fulmort remained persuaded that Robina had 'comeover him' in some way; and while yielding to his stringent desire that,as he said, 'one of the worthiest of her girls should not be unjustlyexpelled,' only let the child herself know that she was tolerated inconsideration of her youth, her orphanhood, and her relationship toClement. Poor Robin! No one could help grieving for the tempest thathad fallen on her guiltless head, and hope that all would result inher final good; but the sorrows of an absent school-girl could hardlyoccupy even her dearest friends, in the full and present crisis of twolove affairs.For Edgar and Major Knevett both arrived, the lover as dispassionate asthe father was the reverse. Edgar did, however, as he had undertaken,rise to the position. He joked at it a little in private, to theannoyance and perplexity of Cherry, and even of Felix; but he wasperfectly steady in maintaining his perfect right to address MissKnevett, in avowing his engagement, and in standing by it.To Major Knevett, the affair appeared outrageous impudence on thepart of a beggarly young painter out of a country bookseller's shop,encouraged by the egregious folly of the aunts. What was said ofclergyman's sons and good old family went for absolutely nothing; andEdgar's quiet assurance of success in his profession was scoffed atwith incredulity not altogether unpardonable. In the encounter thatFelix had the misfortune to witness, since it took place in his ownoffice-parlour, he could not help thinking that Edgar, with his perfecttemper, unfailing courtesy, calm self-respect, and steady sense ofhonour towards the young lady, showed himself the true gentleman incontrast with the swaggering little Major, who seemed to expect thathe could bluster the young man out of his presumption, and was quiteunprepared for Edgar's cool analysis of his threats. But instead of,like Tom Underwood, cooling down into moderation and kindness so soonas his bolt was shot, the finding it fall short only chafed him themore, and rendered him the more inveterate against all conciliation.There was an appeal all round to Felix, but he was not so practicableas the universal compliments to his good sense showed to be expected.He had expressed his opinion that it was a rash engagement, hithertoimproperly carried on; but he could not be brought to advise hisbrother to break it off on his side while the lady held to it on hers.It might be best to give it up by mutual consent; but as long as oneparty was bound, so was the other; and he thoroughly sided with Edgarin not being threatened out of it whilst Alice persisted. Still moreflatly did he refuse Miss Pearson's entreaty that he would see thewilful girl, and persuade her how hopeless was her resistance, andhow little prospect of the attachment being prosperous. Nothing butdespair and perplexity could have prompted the good aunts to try sucha resource, but they were at their wits' end. They really loved theirniece, and they dreaded the tender mercies of her father, who hadindeed petted Alice as a young child, but had made her mother suffergreatly from his temper. If she would yield, they hoped to procure forher a home at York, with their brother's widow, and to save her froma residence in Jersey with the step-mother; but Alice, upheld by asecret commerce of notes ingeniously conveyed, felt herself a heroineof constancy, and kept up her spirits by little irritations to whoevertried to deal with her. She could deftly insinuate, on the one hand,that her aunts had always preached up the Underwood perfections; andon the other, hint to her father that if her home had still remainedwhat it was, she should never have looked out of it; and whenever heflew into a rage, or used violent language, she would look up under hereye-lids and whisper something about 'real gentlemen.' Those thorns andclaws that had figured in the scale of her transmigration were giving agood many little scratches, which did her feelings some good, but hercause none at all, by the vexation they produced. 'If she could onlybe made to understand,' said poor Miss Pearson, 'how little she gainsby irritating her father, and that he is really a very dreadful personwhen he is thoroughly offended! Poor child! my heart aches for her.'So Wilmet was turned in upon her, and before she could utter a word washugged and kissed all over because she was the very image of darlingEdgar, and his dear violet eyes were exactly the same colour.Unsentimental Wilmet extricated herself, saying, 'Eyes can't be violetcoloured. Don't let us go into that silly talk, Alice; things are tooserious now.''You are come to help me and be a dear!' cried Alice, clasping herhands. 'How does he look? the dear boy!''The same as usual,' said Wilmet, coolly. 'But, Alice, if you thinkthat I am come to--''Does he--really and truly? I saw him out of the little passage window,and I thought he looked quite thin! And Lizzie Bruce said Mrs. Hartleyasked who that handsome young man was who looked so delicate.''He is particularly strong and healthy. Alice, I want to set it allbefore you as a reasonable being--''Only do tell me; has he got his appetite? For you know he is used tolive where everything is recherch, and when one's out of spiritsthings do make a difference--'Was that the claw in the velvet paw?'He eats three times as much as Felix any day,' said Wilmet, with acertain remembrance of the startling nudity of the bone of yesterday'sleg of mutton. 'He is doing very well. You need not be afraid for him;but it seems to me that you should consider whether it can be right--''Come, Wilmet, you were my first friend; you can't help being kind tome.''I want to show you true kindness.''True kindness means something horridly cross! Now don't, Wilmet. I getever so much kindness as it is! I know what you are going to say. It isvery naughty of people to like each other when neither of them has gota sixpence; but if they can't help it, what then? Must they leave offliking, eh?''They ought to try to prevent their liking from leading to disobedienceand concealment.''Ah! but if they can't?''People always can.''Were you ever tried?' asked Alice, slyly, for all the simplicity.'I hope never to be, if deceiving my friends and making others deceiveis to be the consequence.''Well, luckily there isn't much chance,' crept out of the demure lips.It was intended as the thorn beneath the may-flower, but it was nosuch thing. Wilmet was quite ready to accept the improbability as veryfortunate.'That has nothing to do with it,' she said. 'The question is, what itis right to do now. It seems hard for me to say so, being your friendand his sister--''Oh, never mind that. People's sisters never do like the girls they arefond of.'Decidedly Wilmet could not get on. Her mouth was stopped either bya little rapture about Edgar, or a little velvet-pawed scratch toherself, whenever she tried in earnest to set the matter before Alice;and when, being a determined person, she at last talked on throughall that Alice tried to thrust in, and delivered her mind of theremonstrance she had carefully thought over, and balanced betweenkindness, prudence, and duty, and all the time with the conviction thatnot one word was heeded! If it was not English malice it was Frenchmalice that pointed the replies and sent Wilmet away as much provokedas pitying, and not at all inclined to be examined by Edgar on herinterview, and let him gather that she had not had the best of it. PoorAlice! what were these little triumphs of a sharp tongue in comparisonwith the harm she did herself by exacerbating whoever tried to arguewith her? There was one person she did profess to wish to see, namely,Geraldine; but the flying rheumatic pains, excited by the black eastwind with sleet upon its blast, could not be trifled with; and MajorKnevett's wrath put an effectual stop to Alice's entering the houseduring the Saturday and Sunday of his stay at Bexley. Perhaps Cherrywas not sorry. She could not have pleaded against Edgar, in spite ofher disapprobation of both; and moreover, the thought at the bottom ofher heart was, 'How could any one who had been the object of such tonesof the one brother's voice be won by the showy graces of the other?Edgar could easily have thrown off a disappointment; but Felix camefirst--and oh! can he shake it off in the same light way?'She had not the comfort of talking it over. Felix made no sign, andEdgar's line was to treat the whole complication as a matter ofpleasantry, pretending that he had only gone into it to please Felix!and yet, as came to their knowledge, privately exchanging billets andcatch-words with Alice, while he openly declared his engagement andresolution to work his way up and lay his laurels at her feet.He went away the very same morning as Major Knevett carried off hisdaughter to Jersey, audaciously following them to the station, where heexchanged a grasp of the hand with her in the very sight of the 'greytyrant father,' who actually gnashed his teeth, in his inability eitherto knock him down or give him in charge.There was no time to breathe between the departure of this pair oflovers and the arrival of Alda's splendid Life-Guardsman, who, horsesand all, took up his abode at the Fortinbras Arms, and spent hisdays in felicity with Alda. A very demonstrative pair they were. ToGeraldine, often unwillingly en tiers, they seemed to spend theirtime chiefly in sitting hand in hand, playing with one another's ringsand dangles, of which each seemed to possess an inexhaustible variety.Ferdinand's dressing-case and its contents were exquisite in their way,and were something between an amusement and a horror to Wilmet, whocould not understand Felix's regard for so extravagant and wastefula person, who gave away sovereigns where half-crowns would have beenmore wholesome, half-crowns instead of shillings, shillings instead ofpence, and who moreover was devoted to horse-flesh. His own favouritesteed, Brown Murad, had been secured at a fabulous price; and thepossession of him seemed to be the crowning triumph over a certainmillionaire baronet in the same corps, evidently his rival. What waseven more alarming was that every detail about races and horses intraining was at his fingers' ends, so that he put Felix up to a gooddeal of knowledge useful to the racing articles in the Pursuivant; buthe declared that he never betted. His was a perilous position, homelessand friendless as he stood; and this rendered him doubly grateful forthe brotherly welcome he received. Yet the days would have been long toany but lovers, in spite of the rides and walks, one even to Minsterhamto see Lance. Ferdinand liked to recur to the old remembrances of hisconvalescence; but in these Alda had no part, and they seemed to jar onher. She might sometimes seem half fretted by his impetuous southernlove, but she could not bear a particle of his attention to be bestowedon aught save herself; and when Geraldine would have utilised his finestraight profile as an artistic study, the monopoly was so unpleasingthat the portrait had to be dropped. The odd thing was that Aldashould have a lover whose most congenial spirit was Clement. He was agreat frequenter of St. Matthew's, and had no interest save in kindredsubjects. Felix always found them alike difficult to converse with,from a want of any breadth of sympathy with subjects past or present,such as would have occupied him even without the exigencies of hisprofession. They seemed to talk, not church, but shop, as if they didnot look beyond proximate ecclesiastical details, which they discussedin technical terms startling to the uninitiated; and yet Felix trustedthat Clement's soul was a good deal deeper and wider than his tongue,and that Ferdinand's, if narrow, was thoroughly resolute, finding inhis enthusiasm for these details a counterpoise for the temptations ofhis position.His seemed to be a nature that would alternate between apatheticindolence and strong craving for excitement. He could go on fordays with a patient, almost silent, round of mechanical occupationsperformed well, nigh in his sleep, and then, when once stirred upbecame possessed with a vehement restlessness, as if there were still alittle about him of the panther of the wilderness.At first he awaited his letter from his uncle much more philosophicallythan did Alda, but when it tarried still, he became so eager that hemade two journeys to London to meet the mail, and pestered every onewith calculations as to time and space.The letter came, and was all that every one else had expected. AlfredTravis had always detested the family into which his nephew had beenthrown by his accident, and the tidings that the heiress had beenrejected for the sake of one of these designing girls could not bewelcome. So he gave notice that nothing more could be expected from himif his nephew stooped thus low. This, however, did not much concernFerdinand. He curled his black moustache, and quietly said his unclewould not find that game answer. The affairs of the brothers had alwaysbeen mixed together, and Ferdinand had been content to leave the wholein his uncle's hands, only drawing for his own handsome allowance; butthe foundation had been his mother's fortune, and he had only to claimhis own share of the capital, and disentangle it from the rest, eitherto bring his uncle to terms at once, or to be able to dispense withhis consent. The delay was vexatious, but it could be but brief; andin the meantime Bexley was felicity. Yes, in spite of the warning hereceived at the Rectory, which my Lady followed up by a remonstranceto Felix--over the counter, for in vain he tried to get her intothe office. He could only tell her that he much regretted Edgar'sconduct, but as to Alda, there was no disobedience, and the young man'scharacter was high. He was just as impracticably courteous as hisfather, and Lady Price shrugged her shoulders and hoped. 'For, FelixUnderwood,' she said, 'I am convinced that after all you are a verywell-meaning young man.'This was her farewell, for Mr. Bevan had been more ailing than usual,and had obtained permission to leave his parish for a year, to be spentpartly in the south of France, partly at the German baths.Well was it for those who could get away! Never had the spring beensourer; Easter came so early as itself to seem untimely, and theWednesday of its week was bleakness itself, as Lance and Robina stoodon the top of the viaduct over the railway, looking over the parapetat the long perspective of rails and electric wires, their facesscrewed up, and reddened in unnatural places by the bitter blast. Felixhad asked at breakfast if any one would be the bearer of a note toMarshlands; Lance had not very willingly volunteered, because no oneelse would; then Robina joined him, and they had proceeded through thetown without a syllable from either of the usually lively tongues, tillas they stood from force of habit watching for a train, the followingcolloquy took place, Robina being the first speaker.'What is it?''What is what?''What is the matter?''What is the matter with what?''With it all?'There came a laugh, but Robina returned to the charge. 'Well, but whatis it? Is it east wind?''Something detestable--whatever it is,' grunted Lance.'You've found it so too,' said Robina; for Lance had only come homeafter evening cathedral the day before.'Haven't I, though!'He said no more, being a boy of much reserve as to his privatetroubles; and Robina presently said,--'I say, Lance, did Alda use to be nice, or is it love?''Never nice, like Wilmet or Cherry.''I am sure,' proceeded the girl, 'I thought love was the most beautifuland romantic thing--too nice to be talked about, for fear it shouldturn one's head; but here it seems to be really nothing but plague andbother and crossness.''Poor Bob!' said Lance, 'you got the worst of it up at Brompton.''I got it every way,' said Robina. 'There was Edgar treating me like alittle contemptible baby, and Alice sometimes coaxing me and sometimesspiting me, and Angel poisoned against me; and when I thought I mustbe acting for the best in telling Felix, somehow that turned outaltogether horrid.''I suppose a girl must be telling some one,' said Lance; 'and if it wasto be done, Felix was the right one.''So I made sure,' said poor Robin; 'but Miss Fulmort and Miss Fennimoreseemed to think it no better than if I had told you. They say I amforgiven, but I hate their forgiveness. I've done nothing wrong, andyet they don't like or trust me; and they seem to grudge me all mymarks and prizes. "For proficiency, not for conduct," they say, in thathard cold voice. And then the girls nod and whisper. Angel and all,think me a nasty spiteful marplot. Alice set half of them against mebefore she went!''Poor Bob. And you can't have a good set to, and punch their heads allround! That's the way to have it out, and get comfortable and friendly.''For choir boys? O Lance!''Choir boys aint girls, I thank my stars.''Well,' continued Robina, glad to pour out her troubles, even for suchcounsel as this, 'when I came home last week, I did think it would bemade up.''Well,' said Lance, as Robin grew rather choky, and drew the back of awoolly glove across her eyes, not much to their benefit.'Clem looks black, because he says his sisters were meant to raise thetone of the school.''Confound the tone of the school! I know what that is! But who caresfor Tina?''Then Wilmet says I ought to have asked leave to write to her, and shecould have managed it quietly, and kept everybody out of a scrape.''Whew--w--w--' whistled Lance; but at the melancholy tone, heabsolutely took his red hand out of its comfortable nest in his pocket,to draw his sister's arm into his. It was well, for her voice was farmore trembling now. 'I could bear it all if it were not for Felixhimself. I know he is angry with me, but he won't talk, nor tell mehow; he only said, "We both meant to act for the best; but it is apainful affair, and we had better not discuss it," and then he began towhistle to Theodore. If any one did know how I hate being told I meantto act for the best!''Something is come over Felix,' said Lance. 'I never knew him give sucha jaw as he has to me. To be sure, he was set on to it.''Set on?''Yes, by Wilmet for one! You should have seen the way she was in--as ifI hadn't a right to do what I please with my own money.''What?''My violin! Ferdinand Travis tipped me when he rode over to theCathedral, and by good luck it was the day before the auction at oldSpicer's. Bill and I went in to see the fun; and by all that is lucky,there was a violin routed out of an old cupboard. Nobody bid against mebut Godwin, the broker, and it was knocked down to me for twenty-twoand six. Bill lent me the half-crown; and Poulter, our lay vicar, whois at a music-shop, says 'tis a real bargain, he's mad to have missedit himself; but he showed me how to put my fingers on it, and I canplay Mendelssohn's "Hirtenlied." You shall hear by-and-by, Robin. Well;Wilmet comes on it when she was unpacking my shirts. I'm sure I wishshe'd let me unpack them myself, instead of poking her nose there; andif she wasn't in a way! Wasting my money, when I ought to be saving itup to buy a watch; and wasting my time and all the rest of it--till onewould think 'twas old Scratch himself I'd brought home!''Oh don't, Lance. And did she set on Felix?''Ay; and then, you know, our new Precentor, Beccles, isn't one quarterthe man Nixon was; and he has been and written a letter to Fee that anyschoolmaster in creation should be licked for writing, to go and pisona poor chap's home--all about those cards.''What cards?''The pack Jones found in the middle of the north transept ten days ago.''Of the Cathedral! How shocking! But why should he write to Felix?''Because the big-wigs make sure some one out of the Bailey must havedropped them, getting into the town through the Cathedral at night.''But they don't suspect you?''No; but Beccles got into an awful way, and swears--''You don't mean really swears!''No, no--stuff--vows--that unless he gets to the bottom of it, not oneof us shall have the good-conduct prize. Now I did think I might havehad that--though I'm not a church candle like Tina--for I never washad up for anything; and it is precious hard lines! Such a beauty,Robin, the Bishop gives it--all the Cathedral music, bound in redmorocco; and this beggar hinders us all this very last chance! Andthen, he is dirty enough to write and tell Felix to get out of me whohas been getting out through the Cathedral, and dropping the cards.''Do you know?''Hold your tongue; I thought you had a little sense! Felix had that; hesaw I could not tell him, and said it must be as I pleased about that;but then he rowed me, as he never did before, for wasting time, and notmugging for the exhibition--as if that was any use.''Why shouldn't you get the exhibition?''Put that out of your head,' said Lance, angrily; 'Harewood is sureof that! A fellow that construes by nature--looks at a sentence, andspots the nominative in a moment--makes verses--rale, superior, iligantarticles.''But I thought he wasn't always accurate. Can't you catch him out? OLance, don't look so fierce! I only said so because he can't want theexhibition as much as you. He can go to some other school, or be paidfor.''Not conveniently,' said Lance; 'they are not at all well off, andJack helps them. Besides, I wouldn't get the thing in a sneaking way;and besides, Bill could no more make a mull in construing out ofcarelessness than I could a false note--it's against nature. I can'tbeat him, except in arithmetic. My birth-day comes at such an unluckytime. I should get another year if I'd only been born in July insteadof June! I might be second, for Shapcote is only dogged by his father;but that's no good for the exhibition: and then there's an end ofCathedral and all!''What should you do then, Lance?''Whatever costs least! I'd as lief work my way out to Fulbert, if thisis to go on.''Oh, don't! don't do that, whatever you do!' cried Robina, clinging tohis arm.'I don't see why not, if everybody is to be as savage as a bear whenone comes home. One always trusted to Felix to see sense, if nobodyelse did; but what with his jawing one about the exhibition, and Wilmetabout the tin and every spot on one's clothes, and Alda growling atwhatever one does in the parlour, I'm sure I wish I'd stayed at Bexley.'The boy and girl had never before been tried by want of sympathy,and what seemed to them injustice, when they had thus descended intothe perturbed atmosphere of what they were used to regard as a happyhome. There was a long mutual communication of grievances--irritablespeeches--inattention from their elders--fancies and complaints ofAlda's enforced peremptorily by Wilmet--appeals to Felix either quashedor unheeded; the strange thing was, in how short a time so much hadmanaged to go wrong with them, except that they added the vexations ofthe last quarter to the present discomfort, real or fancied; and thoughthey were both good children, each had the strong feeling that therewas not as much encouragement as usual to goodness, and that it couldnot have been much worse if they had been seriously to blame. One hadexpected to be caressed for her endurance in a good cause; the otherhad not expected to be severely rebuked for what he scarcely viewedas faults. It was the first time this younger half of the family hadever suffered anything approaching to neglect or injustice from theirseniors, and the moment was perilous. The discussion was forming theirdiscontents into a dangerously avowed state, if it had the beneficialeffect of raising their spirits by force of sympathy. At any rate, theywere in no gloomy mood when they reached the tidy little villa, withits beds of open-hearted crocuses defying the cold wind, and admittingthe sun to the utmost depths of their purple and golden bosoms, as theylaughed their cheery greeting.No less cheerful was the welcome from kind old Mrs. Froggatt, whomet them at the door. 'Master Lancelot, Miss Robina, this is anunlooked-for pleasure, to be sure! My dear Miss Robina!' as the girlgave her hearty embrace.They were the prime favourites next to Felix, and were the more gladlyhailed that Mr. Froggatt was anxious about the business on which theycame, and had been trying to get leave from his wife to peril hisrheumatics by coming in to Bexley about it. They must stay to luncheon;and while Mr. Froggatt went off to answer his note, they were made muchof over the fire, in the way that had of late become so abhorrent toBernard, with difficulty avoiding a pre-luncheon or nooning of cake andwine within an hour of the meal of the day.'And how is Mr. Underwood?' asked Mrs. Froggatt, when Robina hadbeen divested of her wraps, placed close to the fire, screened andfootstooled, and when Lance had transferred the big white cat from thearm-chair to his own knee.'Oh, very well, thank you,' said Robina, rather surprised that thelengthy catechism on the family health did not as usual start from'poor dear Miss Geraldine.''He was looking so thin, and had such a cough, I was quite concernedwhen he walked out here on Good Friday afternoon,' continued Mrs.Froggatt. 'I hope he is taking care.''Wilmet is always at him about it,' said Lance.'That is right. And I hope he minds to keep the office-door shut. It issuch a draughty place! Does he wear flannel, do you know, my dear?''I think so,' said Robina. 'Sister Constance told Wilmet he ought, whenhe had that long cough after the measles.''Ay. You know--you'll excuse me, my dears, a cough is not to be trifledwith in your dear family.''You should write to the clerk of the weather-office, Mrs. Froggatt,'said Lance, rather gruffly.And as Mrs. Froggatt was not good at understanding jokes, but wasalways ready to accept Mr. Lance's, she thought he meant AdmiralFitzroy; and much explanation and banter followed, which the childrenmade the louder from dread of the subject. Mrs. Froggatt was by nomeans the cultivated person her husband was; but, being of a good oldplain farmer stock, she was quite as unassuming, and her manners withthe young Underwoods were a good deal like those of a superior oldhousekeeper, only perhaps less authoritative and familiar; but she wasnot to be kept away from the subject of her real anxiety. 'I wish Icould see your sister, and speak to her; he ought to have some advicerather than let it run on in this way. I'm sure Mr. Froggatt would bewilling to do anything. It has been a great concern to him to have toleave such a heavy charge to him this spring, and with all the familycares on his head too, at his age. Miss Alda's wedding put off too--isit? And is the young gentleman here still?''No; his leave was over last Monday,' said Robina, 'a week after I camehome.''I should like to have seen him! Your brother says he is grown up sucha fine-looking young man, and quite got over his lameness. A handsomecouple they will be! I did see them ride through the place, but MissAlda didn't see me.''You saw his horse?' broke in Lance, who considered Brown Murad as asuperior specimen to either of the lovers; and Mrs. Froggatt, whosefather had bred horses, and whose son was much more addicted to themthan was for his good, was a much more intelligent auditor of theperfections now dilated on than could have been expected.Yet nothing could keep off the dreaded subject, and even at table,Lance's disappointing deficiency in schoolboy voracity became the causeof a lamentation over his brother's small appetite, and an examinationof Robina, resulting in her allowing that Felix seldom gave himselftime to do more than snatch a crust of bread in the middle of the day,and did not always make up for it at tea-time. Mr. Froggatt shook hishead and looked distressed, and his good lady went on discoursing aboutthe basin of soup she always used to keep prepared for him, evidentlylonging, though not quite daring, to send a lecture to Wilmet on takingcare of her brother. But what made more impression on both the childrenwas, that after they had been into Mr. Froggatt's little conservatorywith him, and had received into their charge a basket of camellias,violets, and calycanthus, with a pot of jonquils in the middle forGeraldine, the old gentleman said, as he bade them good-bye, 'Tell yoursister, that if she thinks a day or two of laying by would be goodfor your brother, I should be ready and glad to change places withhim. A little change might take away his cough; and I don't like hislooks--no, I don't. He ought to be careful;' this to himself, with along sigh.Then the children got out into the garden, and with the naturalimpatience of the evil omen, exclaimed at the same moment--'Croak, croak, croak, went the frogs,'and'Were there ever such a pair of good old coddles!'But then they walked on for a full quarter of a mile before either saidanother word; and then it was, 'You don't think Felix looking ill, doyou, Lance?''I never thought about his looks at all,' said Lance.'No more did I,' said Robina; 'but he does cough; I hear him throughthe wall in the morning. Do you think there is anything in it, Lance?''How long has it been going on?''Ever since he came up to London. He got a chill in our garden when Iwas telling him about--' said Robina, stopping short of what she hatedto mention.'Then that's it!' said Lance, turning round with a face of one who hadmade a great discovery.'It? What is the matter with him?''Yes,' said Lance. 'Hold your tongue, Robina; but Cherry and I thoughtlong ago that he fancied that little Knevett himself. Then I made sureit was all a mistake; but now, depend upon it, that's what he is so cutup about!'It carried conviction to the hearer, perhaps because it fitted in witha girl's love of romance. 'Then that's why he won't talk to me!''Of course!'And then they began putting together all the tokens of inclinationwhich their small experience and large imagination could suggest, tillthey had pretty well decided the point in their own belief, and hadamused themselves considerably; but the anxiety came back again.'Do people get over such things, Lance? There was Ophelia, and therewas Wilfred in "Rokeby"--only she was a woman, and he was pipy. Did youever know of anybody really and truly?'Lance meditated, but his experience reached no farther than thesurgeon's assistant at Minsterham, who was reported to be continuallyin love, but who did not look greatly the worse for it.And then Robina suggested that she did not remember that either Wilfredor Ophelia had a cough.'But my father had,' said Lance in the depths of his throat. 'Don't youknow, Robin, it was hard work and trouble and poverty that--did it?''Was it?' awe-struck, for she had been so young as to have no clearideas.'I've heard it told often enough. My Lady cut off the third curate; andthat--and all the rest of it--helped to bring on the decline.''But, Lance! At least, that wasn't--love.''Nonsense, Robin! Don't you see, whatever takes the heart and spiritout of a man, makes him ready for illness to get hold of?' Lanceplucked desperately at the hazels in the hedge, and his eyes were fullof tears.'O Lance, Lance, what can we do?''I don't know! I'd let him pitch into me from morning till night ifthat would do him any good!''I'm sure I am very sorry I grumbled. We'll give Wilmet Mr. Froggatt'smessage, and see what she thinks.'Poor children! their consternation was such, that they must judge bytheir own eyes of Felix without loss of time; so they both marched intothe shop with Mr. Froggatt's note, and there felt half baffled to seeFelix looking much as usual, very busy trying to content a lady withnursery literature, and casting a glance at Robin as if she had nobusiness there.Wilmet received Mr. Froggatt's message without excitement. Shethought it would be a very good thing, but she did not believe Felixwould consent; and Alda broke out, 'Then we should have Mr. Froggattinflicted on us all the evening!'Nor did Felix consent. He said it was very kind, but his cold wasalmost gone, and he did not need it. Moreover he had his privatedoubts whether Alda would be decently gracious to Mr. Froggatt; andWilmet, whose one object in life was to keep her sister contented andhappy at home, could press nothing so disagreeable to her. Altogether,the reception of their hints at home was so prosaically placid, thatthey were both rather ashamed of the alarm into which they had workedthemselves up. Even when Robina privately asked Cherry whether shethought Felix looking well, the answer was eager.'Oh, very--very well! He looked pulled down when his cold was bad, buthe is quite well now.''Mrs. Froggatt thought--''Oh, you've been talking to Mrs. Froggatt! She thinks nothing so kindas to say one is looking poorly. I said, "How well you are looking,Mrs. Froggatt," one day, and I assure you she only swallowed it by anact of Christian forgiveness. She is fondest of Felix, so of course helooks the worst.'Robina got no more out of Geraldine, whose fears at that moment werein the form of utterly denying themselves. Commonplace life greatlyreassured the two young things, and of the alarm there chiefly remaineda certain shame at their own former discontent, and doubly tenderfeeling towards their fatherly elder brother. Now that they guessedsomething to be amiss with him, they had no irritation for him--andindeed he gave them no cause for any; the discomfort was partly indeedoccasioned by the lack of his usual quiet mirth, but far more by Alda'sfastidiousness, and Wilmet's vigilance lest she should be annoyed. Thiscaused restrictions that weighed more heavily on the younger ones thanon Lance and Robina, and had the effect of making Angela and Bernardrebellious. They had neither the principle nor the consideration oftheir two seniors; to them every one seemed simply 'cross,' and againstthis crossness there was a constant struggle, either of disobedience orof grumble.Both were at rather an insubordinate age. Angela, having begun schoollife with getting into a scrape greater than she understood, hadacquired a naughty-girl reputation, of the kind that tempts the youngmind to live up to it; and her high spirits, boisterous nature, and'don't care' system made her irrepressible by any one but Wilmet,whose resolute hand might be murmured at, but was never relaxed. WhileBernard, hitherto very fairly amenable to Cherry, and a capital littlescholar, became infected with the spirit of riot and insubordination.Whatever fastidiousness the children took for fine-ladyism in Alda theytreated unmercifully, and resented in their own fashion her complaints,and Wilmet's enforcement of regard to her tastes; nor was Lance alwaysblameless in the tricks played upon her.It was strange to see the difference made by one incongruous element. Afew sneers at Cherry's pronunciation, an injudicious laugh when she wasrebuking, and a general habit of making light of her, on Alda's part,upset all Bernard's habits of deference to the sister who had taughthim all he knew. His lessons grew into daily battles--miseries tohimself and far greater miseries to his teacher, and sufficient miseryto the spectator to induce her to do that which the other sisters couldscarcely have brought themselves to do on any provocation, namelyto complain to Felix, and by-and-by make a representation, for thegeneral good, she said, that it was a mere farce to leave the boy underCherry's management.Cherry, with bitter tears, was forced to own that she could no longerkeep him in order nor make him learn, and there was no alternative butto send him to Mr. Ryder's. He had no voice nor ear, so that he couldnot follow in Lance's steps; and for the present, Bexley was the onlyresource.Of course Cherry charged the whole of this upon her poor little self;and some amount of the trouble certainly was due to her incapacitynot to show in voice and manner when she was under fret, anxiety, ordepression; and now, poor child! all three at once had come upon her.Whether Alda's conversation or the children's naughtiness frettedher most, it would be hard to tell; she was in a continual stateof unuttered, vague, and therefore most wearing anxiety on Felix'saccount, and the physical discomfort of the ungenial spring told onher whole frame and spirits. Alda's talk, when good-humoured, openedsuch vistas of brightness, amusement, conversation, and above all ofbeautiful scenes, that they awoke longings and cravings that Cherryhad hardly known before. The weariness of the grinding monotony ofhome seemed to have infected her. She knew it for discontent, and wasthe more miserable over her want of power to control it, because ofthe terror that hung over her lest repinings might bring on them allthe judicial punishment of a terrible break-up of the home she loved,even while the tedium of the daily round oppressed her. Alternateplaintiveness and weary sharpness of course aggravated both Alda andBernard, and they knew nothing of the repentant wretchedness thatrather weakened than strengthened her.Little Stella's unfailing docility and sweetness were her great solace.Even Alda was exceedingly fond of Stella, and would have spoilt herif the child had not been singularly firm in her intense love andloyalty to the heads of the family. Angel and Bear were too rough forher, and alarmed her sense of duty; but Lance was her hero; and thehappiest moments of those holidays were spent in a certain loft abovea warehouse in the court of the printing-office, only attainable bya long ladder. Here, secure that none but favoured ears could hear,Lance practised on his beloved violin, at every hour he could steal,emulating too often Mother Hubbard's dog 'fiddling to mice,' buthis audience often including his three younger sisters. He had hadscarcely any hints, but his was the nature that could pick music out ofanything; and Angela, much more than Robin, was ecstatic in all thatconcerned the sixth sense, and watched and criticised with rapture,wanted to learn, and pouted at being told that it was not fit for awoman. Among those stacks of paper in the dusty loft, with the stampand thud of the press close at hand, it was possible to forget, increating sounds and longing to fulfil the dream of the spirit, thatAlda was exacting and trying, Wilmet blind to the annoyances shecaused, Cherry striving hard, and not always successfully, with thefretfulness of anxiety, and Felix--they durst not think in what state.That loft and that violin made their fairy-land, and one that renderedit most unusually hard for Lance to learn his holiday task.'I'll tell you what, Lance,' said Robina at last, when he had vainlybeen trying to repeat it to her, with his eye on a sheet of music allthe time, 'you can't do two things at once. If I were you, I would lockup that violin till the summer examination is over.'He turned on her quite angrily. 'Very fine talking! Lock up all thepleasure I have in life! Thank you!''I'm quite sure you'll never get the exhibition if you have your headin this.''I shan't get the exhibition any way.''But if you do your utmost for it?''I shall do my utmost!''You can't if you have these tunes always running in your head, and arealways wild to be picking them out.''Well, Robin, I sometimes think I should do more good with music thananything else.''Maybe,' said Robina, a sensible little woman; 'but you'll do no goodby half and half. If you don't do well in the examination, Felix willbe horribly vexed, and you'll always hate the thought of it.''I tell you I shall be as dull as ditch-water, and as stupid asShapcote, if I don't have any pleasure.''I only don't want you to be stupider.'Lance chucked up a pen-wiper and caught it.'The fact is,' said Robina, 'all we've got to do is our best. If wedon't, it is wrong in us, and it makes us more a weight on Felix; andI think it is our real duty to keep everything out of the way thathinders us, if it is ever so nice.''Is that Cock Robin, or Parson Rook with his little book?' said Lance,throwing the pen-wiper in her face.But the week after, when Robina was at school again, she was called toreceive a letter which had something hard in it.'Did you leave a key behind you?' she was asked a little suspiciously,for there was nothing about it in the brief note.'No, Miss Fennimore; but my brother has sent it to me to keep for him.It is the key of his violin-case, and he is not going to touch it tillhe is past his examination.'From that time Miss Fennimore entertained a better opinion of RobinaUnderwood; but little recked Robina. She only felt secure that afterthis act of heroism Lance could not but gain the exhibition.CHAPTER XVII.MIDSUMMER SUN.'For Phoebus' awful self encountered himAmid the battle throng invisible,In thickest darkness shrouded all his face;He stood behind, and with extended palmDealt on Patroclus' neck and shoulder broadA mighty buffet.'Iliad, Book xvi. (Earl of Derby.)Warmer weather came at last, and brought Mr. Froggatt back to his dailywork, lifting a weight of responsibility from his young partner'sshoulders.The cough mended too, but did not entirely cease; and when June camein with an unusual access of summer heat, there were those who felt itas trying as the sharp wind had been. One evening, when the home partyhad been sitting in the garden, and the fall of the dew sent Cherryindoors, Felix, as usual, gave her his arm, and lifted her step bystep up the stairs. She felt, all over her frame, that what used to bealmost nothing to the boy was a severe exertion to the man.'You should not do it!' she said, as they both stood resting at thetop, he leaning back against the wall, and wiping his forehead, wherethe big blue V of the veins stood out prominently.'Having so often carried the calf--I should be able to carry--the cow,'he said, the smile not disguising the panting of his voice.'You are to be at the agricultural meeting at Dearport to-morrow. Iwish you would just go and see Dr. Lee.''I think I shall.' And there they were interrupted.Poor Geraldine! What worlds of apprehension were founded on that quietassent, his first intimation that he believed himself unwell! Shekept absolute silence. She could not have uttered her terrors for tenthousand worlds.She was on her couch under the apple-tree, in the late afternoon,trying to force her thoughts out of miserable possibilities, when shesaw Felix come out of the house, flushed, heated, dusty, tired; butsomehow she gathered hope from his air, as he threw himself down on thegrass by her side, saying, 'Mr. Froggatt sent me out to cool.''Stella, dear,' to the little one, who had her story-book at hand, 'runand ask Sibby to bring Felix out a cup of tea.' Then she tried to guessat his face, but durst not look at him fully. 'Are you very tired?''Rather! That place was a mere oven of roaring! Well, Cherry,' pullingoff his neck-tie, and settling himself, with an elbow on her couch, andhis back against the tree, 'there's nothing amiss with my lungs.'She shuddered all over, and almost bounded; then put her hand tenderlyon his shoulder.'Your doctor is a clever man, I can see,' he continued. 'He seemed toguess about me directly. He sounded my chest, and says it is all rightnow, but that there had been a little damage; he thought the long coughI had after the measles had left traces that this winter has told upon.''Ah!' A great gasp.'But there's no active disease--none at all; nor likely, if I can shakeoff this remnant of cough, and get into condition before the winter.'Cherry sighed again at the white hand, and the net-work of blue veinson both it and the temple that was propped against it. 'You mustindeed!' she wistfully said.'I must,' said Felix, sighing too, as with little mind for thestruggle. 'I've brought home a detestable bottle of cod-liver oil onthe spot, and am to take to all the good living I can swallow. Won'tthat delight Mr. Froggatt's good old soul? Then the worst of it is thatI am to go away to some sea place for the hottest of the weather.''Oh, I'm so glad!''He taxed me with not taking food enough; and when I allowed that I hadno turn for eating, insisted on this sea plan: but he laughed me toscorn when I asked whether I might not get a room at Dearport, and runbackwards and forwards. "Ay," he said, "you have a good deal on yourmind;" and I fell into the trap, and told him my partner had been ill,and we had a great deal to work up. And he went on to ask if I had notthe charge of the family, and was not apt to get anxious about them;and he turned round on me, and ordered me to get a thorough holiday,and turn my back on everybody and everything; for there's nothing thematter with me but overwork and harass--' Something that did not amountto and finished the sentence.'O Felix, I know, I have felt,' she said, the tears standing in hereyes, and the colour rushing into her face at this first venture.'Have you--little foolish thing?' he answered, but shifting hand andelbow so that nothing of his face could be seen but a bit of brow andtemple, and that was crimson to the roots of his hair. 'Don't take itfor more than it ever was,' he muttered.'It was enough to hurt you grievously,' whispered the sister.'It ought not,' he said. 'It was only the putting out of a vain foolishhope I had no right to indulge. Eh, Cherry!' as she made a littlesound, 'tell me one thing; was it all imagination and folly thatshe--she could have--liked me?' He bent his head with almost as muchsuppressed emotion as if it had been a matter of present hope.'Certainly not,' said Cherry. 'She liked your--your attentions; and Ithought sometimes you were quite pulling her up to your level. If noone else--''I did not imagine it was visible,' he interrupted. 'I tried to be veryguarded, but one does not know--''You were. Somehow one feels more than one sees.''And you thought she did? Then at least I was not quite a fool! Ifancied that there was response enough to what seems to have shown inspite of me to warrant the dream that if ever a time came--!''If she had had depth enough!''But, of course,' said Felix in a tone of defence, 'she never reallyknew; he guessed still less.''No, I am sure he never guessed. There is that comfort,' said Cherry.'It is the greatest I have had all along,' said Felix. 'For the rest,it was no wonder.''No,' said Cherry; 'but it all managed to fall in the very hardest wayon you. No wonder it was too much for you!''It is odd,' mused Felix, 'how this one dream has seemed to take allthe heart and soul out of one; there seemed no elasticity to meet otherthings. I must say all this doctor's advice has been seeming an amazingamount of trouble for what is not very well worth having in the end.''O Felix, Felix you will--''My Chrie, you don't think I'd drop off the coach while you are in itif I can help it, to say nothing of the rest! I suppose every one hassomething of the sort in his turn, and I'll take good care not to belet in for it again. Thank you, Cherry,' he added presently, and nowlooking at her, 'I am very glad to have had this out with you. I thinkI can make a fresh start now. What, silly little thing! crying, when Ithought I had brought you good news!''You are quite sure you have told me all Dr. Lee said?' she demanded,holding his hands tight, and gazing into the face, which certainly,with the still heightened colour, looked both delicate and weary. 'Youhave been so much worse than you told!''No, indeed, I have felt very little but weariness and want of energy;but I am better now than I have felt for weeks. And what is more,Cherry, I don't feel like getting worse. I mean to set myself to liveto get through the work my father left me.''Taking care of all of us! Is that all you care to live for, Felix?''All, just now. Don't look shocked, Cherry. You know it is all veryfresh' ('Five months--poor Felix!' thought she), 'and there is thecontinual pain of knowing how wretched those people make the poorchild. When she is happier, perhaps the shade will lighten. Don't beafraid, you dear little thing' (he was answering her piteous eyes),'there's plenty of time to recover it. I suppose I am really very youngstill.''Not quite three and twenty! Oh, Felix! I am sure God will give youback happiness, you are so good and patient! Where will you go, andwhen?''How I wish you could go with me! Dr. Lee said he should like to sendme to Switzerland; but as he might as well have said the moon, he saidany sea place would do. Rest and good air are all that signifies; so Ithought of Ewmouth, and then I might see Vale Leston again. I believeyou want it as much as I. You are a little washed-out rag.''I shall be all right when I know you are better.' Then as Sibbybrought out the tea, and Stella the toast she had insisted on making,he began to look at his short-hand notes. 'Never mind those. You areto rest, you know.--Stella, little one, run to the office, and if Mr.Froggatt is not busy, get him to come and have some tea.'This was always a mission to Stella's taste; and Mr. Froggatt wassoon installed in the only basket-chair that would hold him, and wasprofessing his relief and satisfaction that Mr. Underwood had been wiseenough to take advice at last. He had better go any day, the sooner thebetter; and even his desire to take the newspaper work with him wouldhave been overruled, but for the simple fact that there was nobody elsecapable of it, in the present state of Mr. Froggatt's eyes.Alda had been lying down in her own room. Her cup of tea--aninstitution that for any one else Wilmet would have deemed sinfulwaste--had been rung for, when she saw from the window that Mr.Froggatt was one of the party in the garden; and whereas Sibby did notchoose to hear or attend to her whims, she came down full of wrath andindignation, as soon as she saw that Cherry was left alone under hertree, and Wilmet coming out to her with the step of one who was gladher day's work was over.'Really, Sibby's inattention was shameful! Not choosing to bring thetea upstairs when it was rung for!''You forget how much Sibby has to do, Alda.''You have quite spoilt Sibby. I would not have such a servant on anyaccount. I'm sure I don't know why the tea was so early, either. Cherryordered it, I believe.''Yes,' said Cherry, 'because Felix came in so hot and tired.''He could have waited, I suppose,' began Alda; but Wilmet was askinganxiously, 'Is he so very tired? Where is he? I was afraid he would beknocked up, he looked so pale when he set off.''He is gone to write out his notes,' said Cherry; 'I think he is restednow. And, Mettie,' she added, knowing that he had rather not have tobegin the subject again, 'I am glad to say he has been to see Dr. Lee.And he says that his lungs are all safe, only he must be careful, andgo away for a change.''Just as I say,' exclaimed Alda; 'no one can be well, living in such ahole! When are we to go?''My dear Alda,' said Wilmet, 'you forget. No one can possibly go butFelix; and it will be hard enough to manage for him.''Then I do think it is very selfish in him,' said Alda, 'when every oneof us wants change! I'm as languid as possible; and look at Cherry.'Felix selfish! Even Wilmet could not stand that, and answered with hermost severely gentle manner, 'Nothing but necessity will induce Felixto do so. I beg you will say nothing of the sort again.'Cherry was alarmed lest Wilmet might not be convinced of the necessity,and might think more of present pounds than future health; but in fact,Wilmet was as much relieved as Cherry herself by the medical opinion,for she had charged the failure of health entirely to the constitutioninstead of the heart, and moreover never was troubled with misgivingsand heart-sinkings for the future. So, as for a needful and infalliblecure, she set herself to arrange, writing again to Abednego Tripp,the Vale Leston clerk, whose possession of a market boat kept himconversant with Ewmouth, and who recommended rooms in the house of aformer servant at the Rectory who had married a sailor.Felix only waited to put his business in train, and make over Theodoreto the care of Clement, who had just come home from Cambridge. Thequantity of work and bustle had not been beneficial, and his sistersdid not feel at all happy in sending him off by himself; while Aldawas inclined to think the time a particularly cruel one, just as allthe most unquiet spirits of the household would be coming home for theholidays, and his authority would be most wanted.However, Wilmet was free first of all, and she was a more efficientguardian of the peace than ever Felix could be downstairs. Lance wasto come on the evening of the 26th of June, after the examination forthe exhibition, which, as he had told every one, he was quite sure notto gain. And then what was to be done with him, small and boyish as hestill was?The question was sighed over on that day by the three sisters asthey sat endeavouring to be cool, and looking out at the glowingstreet where the few passengers seemed to be crawling like flies on awindow-pane.Presently a rather hesitating knock at the door was followed by theentrance of Mr. Froggatt, ushering in no other than Mr. Harewood.In the moment of shaking hands, Cherry had foreboded enough to set herpulses throbbing so violently as to deafen her ears. Lance had failed,had run away in despair, to go to Fulbert rather than be a burthen;Felix would go in search of him--break a blood-vessel--and--Nay--what was it? Lance? It really was Lance! Was not Wilmet talkingof going? Mr. Harewood saying something about trains? She made agreat effort to clear her senses, and the first thing she reallydistinguished was Wilmet saying, 'Thank you, I will put a few thingstogether.'Then she hurried away, and Cherry found Mr. Froggatt standing over her,saying kindly, 'Dear Miss Geraldine, don't be alarmed. There is oftenno bad result.''How was it? I don't understand,' said Alda.Mr. Harewood owned himself not perfectly informed, but he feared thetrouble had been in great part occasioned by his own poor boy William'scarelessness. The two boys had strolled out the evening before, alongthe bank of the river, and had compared the copies of verses whichwere to be shown up at the examination. Afterwards they had bathed,and Will had left his verses meantime in the hollow of a tree, neverremembering them till he found himself in his place in the Cathedral onthe very morning of the examination. When he came out, not only did hisduties as senior chorister chain him to the spot, but he had put off tothe last moment the fair copying of his algebraic exercises, and hischance of the exhibition was as good as lost (the very loop-hole thatRobina had predicted his carelessness would make), had not Lance, whosepreparations were all made, as soon as he understood the difficulty,dashed headlong off, bare-headed as he stood at the school door,without waiting to fetch his cap, and laid the verses on his rival'sdesk just in time for them to be shown up. He had been absent abouttwenty minutes, and had scarcely been missed; but when his turn came,a few moments later, to bring his papers to the examiners, as soon ashe stood up, he staggered, gazed round, cried out, and fell forwardon his desk insensible. A doctor, who like Mr. Harewood himself hadbeen present to hear a son's performance, had helped to raise him,and pronounced it to be a case of sun-stroke; nor, when, half an hourlater, the librarian set off to fetch his sister, had there been anysign of consciousness.Mr. Harewood tried to be calm, but he was evidently in great distress;and Mr. Froggatt could not restrain large tears from dropping.As to Cherry, she could only tremble, unable to speak or cry; and Mr.Froggatt called out to Alda to do something for her, when Alda said shewould call Wilmet, which made Cherry burst out with 'Don't, don't!' andshudder the more with tearless sobs; but happily, Clement coming down,fetched her remedies, and did more by whispering a few kind words ofhope and comfort.He was going with Wilmet, who was as usual the self-possessed one; andwhile passively allowing Mr. Froggatt to give her biscuits and evenwine, she left her few parting directions. 'Alda, take care of themall.--Stella, try to keep Tedo happy.--Cherry, don't give way and fancythings.--Above all, don't write to Felix! He must not be hurried homewithout necessity. I could telegraph if there was--' and there hersteady voice faltered, she drew down her veil and turned to walk to thestation, Clement carrying her bag, and Mr. Froggatt accompanying themto the train.Very little was said on the way, before they reached the town whoselast associations were so joyous. Mr. Harewood would have given Wilmethis arm, dreading the tidings that might meet her; but she was walkingstraight on, with head erect, as though neither needing nor seekingsupport.They reached the low wicket-door of the Bailey, and as they entered thelittle court and passed the window, they saw that people were stillstanding about the bed in the corner. Everything was open, to admitsuch air as might stir that sultry heat. Some one came to the door, andsaid, 'No change.'Then Wilmet and Clement advanced to the narrow old dark oak bed,and Mrs. Harewood made way for them, fresh tears starting at theirpresence. There he lay, their bright agile boy, with eyes half closedand fixed, and circled half way down his cheeks with livid purple, likebruises, the purple lips emitting a heavy breath, his crest of sunnyhair hanging dank with the melting of the ice on his head.Clement's lips trembled, and he dropped on his knees, hiding hisface and stifling his sobs in his hands. Wilmet, after looking forpermission to a gentleman at the foot of the bed, whom she took for thedoctor, laid her hand on the helpless fingers, and bent to kiss thebrow, saying softly and steadily, 'Lance, dear Lancey!'The eyelids moved, the hand closed, there was a struggling stifledutterance: 'Wilmet, Wilmet, bring me back! Oh, bring me back!'She looked up, and read in the watchers' faces that they were glad.'Yes, dear Lance,' she said, in her soft steady voice, 'I am here. Youwill soon be better.'He clung to her, as if blindly struggling with some terribleoppression, and the effort ended in violent sickness, exhausting himinto unconsciousness again; but just then the real doctor came in,having been summoned by a message at the first symptom of change fromthe state of stupor. At the same time the Cathedral bell began toring for evening prayer, and Lance at once was roused to endeavour toobey it, and when he was gently held back, murmured on about findingthe places, and seeing Bill was not late. Mr. Harewood had to go, butwhispered that he would ask the prayers of the congregation. It wascomfortable to remember that Lance was thought of there, when, as thedeep roll of the organ vibrated round the building, psalm, chant,anthem, and response came thronging thick and confusedly on thoseunconscious lips.Dr. Manby, however, told Wilmet not to be too much alarmed at thisdelirium, for the most immediate danger had passed when the lethargyhad given way, and that though fever was probably setting in, therewas fair hope that so healthy a boy would be able to struggle throughit without permanent harm. There was a gentleness and consideration inhis manner quite new to her after her dealings with Mr. Rugg, and shefelt at the same time that he was not concealing the truth from her.She told how it was with her eldest brother, asking whether he ought tobe sent for; and it was a great lightening of present fear to be toldthat there was now no need for haste, and that any change for the worsewould give full time to bring him; moreover, that new faces were to beavoided. Should a nurse be sent from the hospital? Wilmet raised hersteady sensible eyes, and said she could manage, she was well used tonursing.'I see you are,' he answered, well satisfied, since there were besidesthe Precentor's housekeeper, who was used to act as matron to theboarding choir-boys, and apparently an unlimited power of Harewoods.As to the place, Lance had at first been carried to his own bed, andeven if there had been a regular infirmary, he was in no state to bearbeing moved. The other boys' goods had been removed, and they all weregoing home that evening; so that it was as cool and as quiet a placeas could be had, since there was no doubt that the sounds from theCathedral would be hushed for so critical a case.Indeed, just as Dr. Manby had said this, both the Dean and thePrecentor were seen coming through the Bailey on the way out of churchto ask after the patient; and the former promised Wilmet that the bellsand organ should both be silenced, and that the daily service should bein the Lady Chapel.It appeared there had been little but the instrumental music thatevening, and strangers who had heard the praises of the Minsterhamchoir must have been disappointed; for the psalms so entirely overcamethe senior chorister that he could do nothing but sob, and at last wasfain to stuff half the sleeve of his surplice into his mouth to hindera howl such as the least of the boys actually burst out with. Most ofthe other lads were far past singing, and even two or three of themen; and such voices as did uplift themselves were none of the best orclearest.That poor senior chorister--he crept back after his father into theroom. It was his first entrance, for he had been kept all day at theexamination, with what power of attention may be guessed; and whensome half-recognition of him set the sufferer off into wanderingsthat showed habitual vigilance over his carelessness, he was so muchdistressed that he rushed out, and was heard crying so piteously inthe court, that his mother went out to hush and comfort him. Neverstrong, the shock, anxiety, and exertion had so worn her out, that herfamily would not let her come back; but their attention to the nursesdid not relax--they were viewed as guests both by Mr. Beccles andthe Harewoods; and when it was found that neither would come away toanother house to dine, a little table was prepared in the court, closeto the door, and the sister and brother, coaxed one by one, and made toeat and drink; while, as Clement could not bear to go home, a note waswritten, the delivery of which to the sisters Mr. Beccles undertook tosecure. All the evening, Mr. Harewood or his eldest son, the engineercaptain, the same whom Wilmet had taken for the doctor, sat at theother end of the room; while Lance lay, sometimes babbling school tasksmixed with anthems and hymns, sometimes in something between sleep andtorpor, but always moaning and fevered.This strange temporary infirmary, of which Wilmet was made free,consisted of two long narrow rooms, each with a row of quaint black oakbeds and presses, between the double row of narrow lattice windows,looking into the court on one side, and the cloister on the other.There was a smaller room dividing these two chambers, and openinginto both, which the under-master had vacated, and where the matroninstalled Miss Underwood's little bag.Clement was a good deal impressed with the place, in the grand quietshadow of the old Cathedral; and the room itself told much of hisbrother's daily life, in his own little section of it. The deepwindow-seat and old oak chest were loaded with piles of 'Punch,' sheetsof music, school-books, and grotesque sketches; bat, hockey-stick, andfishing-rod were in the corner; trencher cap and little black gownhung on their peg on the white-washed walls, and pinned beside themlists of the week's music, school-work, &c. In the corner by the presswas a little rough deal table, covered with an old white shawl thatClement remembered as his mother's; and on it lay Lance's old brownBible, the Prayer-book given him by the Bishop, 'Steps to the Altar,'and Ken's Manual; over it hung the photograph of his father, and nextabove, an illumination of Cherry's, 'The joy of the Lord is yourstrength;' while above was a little print of the Good Shepherd. Norwas it a small testimony to the boy who had been senior in the room,that Clement found one or two other such little tables, evidently forprivate prayer. He had never believed such things could be out of St.Matthew's, nor where the books were not more of his own exclusive typethan were Lance's; and perhaps there was some repentance for harshjudgment in his spirit as he knelt on by that little table long afterMr. Harewood, near midnight, had read a few prayers and gone to hishouse.When Clement stood up, his sister made him lie down, as well as hislong legs would permit, on one of the other beds, where he soon fellasleep; while she sat on, where she could see the spire rising aloftinto the pale blue of the summer night's sky, while the perfectstillness was only broken by the quarterly chiming of the clock,re-echoed from its fellow in the town-hall. Every window and doorwas open, but the air was heated and oppressive till the early dewycoolness before dawn crept in, making her bend over Lance to cover himless slightly. Then she met his eyes, heavy and blood-shot, but withhimself in them.'Wilmet, is that you?' he said, in a wondering tone.'Yes, here I am, dear Lance.''Is it night or morning?''Morning. There, it is striking three-quarters past two.''Oh!' a long sigh. 'I'm so thirsty!'She brought some drink; but as he tried to raise his head, thedistressing sickness returned in full force, and in the midst thegasping cry, 'My head, my head!''Some more ice, Clem,' said Wilmet; but Clement looked up from theice-pail in despair, for all was melted; and she could only steephandkerchiefs in the water and in eau-de-cologne, and lay them on thehead, while Clement wondered if he could find a shop; but where wasthe use at three in the morning? and poor Lance rolled round wearily,sighing, 'Oh, I did not know one's head could ache so!'Just then a step crossed the court, and a low voice said, 'Is he awake?I have brought some more ice.''O Jack, thank you!' faintly breathed Lance.'Thank you!' fervently added Wilmet; 'we did not know what to do forsome more!''I thought you must want some by this time. I have a little ice-machinefor Indian use,' he added, as Clement looked at him like a sort ofwizard.He was small, sandy, and freckled after the Harewood fashion, andwas besides dried up by Eastern suns; but one who brought suchsuccour could not fail to be half celestial in the sister's eyes; andas he said, 'You are getting better,' her response was fervent inits quietness, though poor Lance, conscious only of oppression andsuffering, merely replied with a groan, and seemed to be dozing againinto torpor in the relief the ice had given.Clement and Captain Harewood besought Wilmet to rest--the latterdeclaring himself to be too much of an East Indian to sleep at dawn;and she consented to lie down in the little room, where she had enoughof wakeful slumber to strengthen her for the heat of the day, when thefever ran high, and all the most trying symptoms returned.The doctor continued to forbid despondency, building much on thelucid interval in the cool of the morning, and ascribing much of theexcitement of brain to the excessive, almost despairing, study thatLance had been attempting in the last weeks before the examination.There had, too, been a concert given by one of the great ladies of theClose, for which there had been a good deal of practice, harassed bycertain amateur humours; and the constant repetition of one poor littleshallow song in the delirious murmur greatly pained the Precentor, andmade him indulge in murmurs that boded ill to the ladies' chances withthe choir-boys. The sultry weather was likewise a great enemy, andcould hardly be mitigated by the continual fanning kept up chiefly bypoor Bill Harewood, who seemed to have no comfort except in working thefan till he was ready to drop, and his brother or Clement took it fromhim.Mrs. Harewood was quite knocked up, and her daughters were curiouslyinefficient people. Their father came and went all day; but theserviceable person was the engineer, with his experience ofsun-strokes, his devices for coolness, and his cheerful words, stillingthe torrent of rambling restlessness, so that Wilmet depended upon himas much as on the doctor himself.On Saturday, the third day of the fever, which had rather increasedthan diminished, Wilmet begged Clement to go home for the night, tocarry a report to the sisters, and fetch some things she wanted. Helingered, grieving and reluctant; while the heated atmosphere was likea solid weight on the sufferer, who lay, now and then murmuring somedistressed phrase, as though labouring with some forgotten task; andWilmet shunned touching the pulse again lest the reckoning should behigher than the last, and strove to construct a message conveying thehope that seemed to faint in the burthen of the day, insisting, aboveall, that guarded accounts should be sent to Felix, keeping carefullyto Dr. Manby's report.'I can be here before nine,' said Clement; 'I wish I could help going.I feel as if something must happen!''A thunderstorm,' said Captain Harewood in a reproving voice, as heplied the fan, with heat-drops on his brow; 'a thunderstorm, which willprove the best doctor. Take care, you will miss the train.'Clement stooped to kiss the unconscious face, as though he had neverprized his little brother before, and as some association of the touchof the lips awoke the murmur, 'Mamma, Mamma!' he sped away with eyesfull of tears.Before he could have reached the station, the storm was coming--greatrounded masses of cloud, with silver-foamed edges and red luridcaverns, began to climb slowly up the sky, distant grumbles of thundercame gradually nearer, a few fitful gusts of wind came like sirocco,adding to the stifling heat, and were followed by exceeding stillness,broken by the first few big drops of rain, the visible flashes, and thenearer peals of thunder, till a sudden glare and boom overhead startledLance into a frightened bewildered state, that so occupied Wilmet thatshe hardly heard the roaring, pattering hail-drops on the roofs andpavements; but when a sweet fresh wind blew away the hail, the wearyhead was more at rest, the slumber more tranquil, the breathing freerand softer than it had been since that Wednesday.Some two hours later she saw him looking at her with a sort ofperplexed smile; and the first words upon his tongue were, 'Is Billfirst?''Nothing is settled till the Bishop comes home,' Captain Harewoodanswered.'What time is it?' then asked Lance.'Half-past eight.''It seems always half dark, said the boy, dreamily, 'and yet there's nocurfew.''They have been so kind as not to ring the bells,' said Wilmet.'Not ring the bells!' repeated Lance, in a feeble voice of amazement.'No, nor play the organ,' said Wilmet; 'you have had to be so quiet,you know.''No organ! and for me!' repeated Lance, impressed almost as if the'unchanging sun his daily course' had 'refused to run;' but it ratherfrightened him, for he added, 'Am I very ill, then?''Not now, I hope,' said Wilmet, tenderly, and possessing herself of hiswrist; 'you are so much better to-night.'He looked wistfully into her face. 'What's the matter with me?' hesaid. 'What does make my head go on in this dreadful way?''Dear Lance! It was that running in the hot sun.''Oh!' (a sort of sigh of discovery) 'I hope he had the verses.''Yes, indeed you gave them.''Then he must be first,' said Lance; and then, as his thankful nurseswere preparing to give him some nourishment, he spoke again. 'Mettie,please come here;' and as she bent over him, 'is this being veryill?--like dying, I mean.''Not now, dearest,' said Wilmet, kissing him. 'You must be through withthe worst, thank God.'He asked no more, for his voice was low and faint, the pain anddizziness still considerable; and the being fed without raising himselfoccupied him till the doctor came for his evening visit, and confirmedthe sister's comfort in his improvement. She sat gazing as he fellasleep again, till Captain Harewood reminded her that her letter toEwmouth must be sent before the mail closed. She turned to the window,where still lay her anxiously-worded bulletin, not yet closed; but asshe took the pen, the blinding tears fell thick and soft as the summerrain outside.'This will be a happy ending,' said John Harewood, as he saw hersilently striving to clear her sight.'Would you be so very kind as to write it for me?' she answered,pointing to the paper, with a lovely smile through her tears. 'He willbelieve it all the more.'And as he took the pen, she retreated in quiet swiftness to her littleroom; but came back as he finished the few freshly hopeful lines; thengoing to the door with him, looked up with the same sweet tremuloussmile. 'Thank you! What thankfulness it is! What a merciful rain thisis! If you knew the relief it is to send this report to Felix! Youcannot guess what this dear little fellow is to him.''I think I can, a little,' said John Harewood, with his heart in hisvoice; and Wilmet smiled again, her stately but usually rather severebeauty wonderfully softened and sweetened by emotion.The improvement continued when Clement arrived on the Sunday morning;and though fevered, confused, and beset by odd fancies, especiallyabout the silence of the Cathedral, Lance knew his brother, smiled athim, and returned his greeting. Clement had a more cheerful task thanusual in what seemed to be his day's work--answering inquiries at thedoor, and taking in presents of fruit. All the Chapter and half thetown seemed to call, or send, at least once a day; and little boys usedto hang about the court, too shy to come to the door, but waiting tocollect tidings from the attendants, and mutually using strong measuresupon one another when either was betrayed into noise.Clement called his sister aside to ask whether she could spare him,since she had the help of the matron and the Harewoods. 'I should bevery glad to stay,' he averred, 'but somebody is really wanted at home.'Wilmet had not been so much accustomed to consider Clement in the lightof 'somebody,' as greatly to care whether he went or stayed, and onlysaid, 'I can get on very well. No one is of so much use as CaptainHarewood.''Just so,' said Clement; 'and I think I am doing more good at home.Imagine my finding all the windows open in that pouring rain, andCherry sitting shivering.''Very foolish of Cherry,' said Wilmet.'Poor Cherry! she could not help herself, and was only thankful when Ihad the courage to shut them in Alda's face. Then they don't know whatto do with Theodore.''Poor Tedo--that's the worst of it!''You see he is used to a man's hand and voice. He is very good with me,but Sibby has had dreadful work with him every night till I came home.And, Wilmet, couldn't you send a message who is to be mistress whileyou are away?''Alda, of course.''Alda doesn't seem to understand, and she will not let Cherry tell her.''Cherry always does bother Alda. I can't help it, Clem, they must rubon somehow; and if you can make Theodore happy, the rest does not somuch signify.'Not signify! Clement did not know whether he was standing on hishead or his heels, and never guessed that not only was she too muchabsorbed in the present thoroughly to realise the absent, but that shewould not venture to send orders based on his report, which in hersecret soul she qualified by his love of importance and interference.However, he went away, and was not seen again all the ensuing week--theearly part of which was very trying, for the fever recurred regularlyabout noon and midnight, and always brought rambling, which sincethat conversation with Wilmet, had taken the turn of talking aboutbeing buried in a surplice, and of continually recurring to the 134thPsalm, which, it was now remembered, Lance had shortly before takenpart in, over the grave of an old lay-vicar, who, boy and man, hadserved the Cathedral for nearly sixty years. Often, too, the poorlittle fellow seemed struggling with some sense of demerit--whetherpositive disgrace, or suspicion, or the general Christian feeling ofunworthiness, Wilmet and John Harewood could never make out; and theydid not choose to speak of these wanderings either to Will or to Mr.Beccles. In the intervals of consciousness, the thought of danger anddeath seemed to be lost in the weakness of exhaustion, and the dread ofwhatever brought back the pain, from which there was no respite exceptin cool air and perfect quiet. The least movement intensified it, andbrought on the sickness that showed the brain to be still affected; andstill worse was any endeavour to attend to the shortest and simplestdevotions, when Mr. Harewood attempted them. Yet all the time there wasamendment; the fever was every day less severe, the intervals longer,the sleep calmer, the doctor more securely hopeful; and by the end of aweek from the time of the accident, recovery was beginning sensibly toset in.Clement, meanwhile, did not appear; nor was he seen till the ensuingMonday, when he stood on the threshold of the open door at the Bailey,bewildered at the emptiness of the bed where he had last seen hisbrother--till a weak voice said, 'Here, Clem,' and he saw on another ofthe little old beds a small figure, in a loose soft white silk Indianrobe de chambre, the face shrunken into nothing but overhanging browand purple haloed eyes, though the eyes themselves were smiling welcomein all their native blueness and clearness, and two thin white handswere held out.'Out of bed, Lance! That is getting on!''Yes. They thought I should be cooler, and sleep better for it.''And are you all alone?' said Clement, hanging over him.'The maids are about somewhere. Wilmet is gone to the Cathedral, whileJack got me up.''Then you must be a great deal better.''Oh yes; I haven't had any of that horrid fever since Friday.''And the pain?''Better, if I lie quite still and it is not hot, but I couldn't stand abit when I tried. I hardly know how Jack carried me here.''You are little and light enough,' said Clement; 'but I'll help tocarry you back. I am sorry not to have been here more, Lance, but I wasso much wanted at home.''Thank you, I didn't want any one. Jack is such a fellow; andWilmet--somehow, Clem, I never seem to have cared enough about W. W.''Nor I, till I saw what home is like without her,' muttered Clement.'And isn't she beautiful, too?' added Lance; 'it is quite nice to lieand look at her at work. Don't you think her much better looking thanAlda?''If handsome is that handsome does,' said Clement. 'You wouldn't likeme to stay with you instead of Mettie, old chap?'The helplessly alarmed look of illness came into Lance's eyes. 'Oh no,no; I couldn't spare Wilmet yet. She doesn't want to go?''No; I have said nothing to her; but Cherry is not well, and everythingis at sixes and sevens; but there, never mind,' as the tears startedinto the sick boy's eyes, 'we'll manage; I should not have saidanything about it.''Please don't,' said Lance. 'If she ought to go, let her, and don'ttell me. I can't help it, Clem; I'm afraid to think if it ought to be,or I should make my head rage, and I should begin to talk nonsenseagain, and that's worst of all.''Do you know when you are talking nonsense?' said Clement, surprised,and eager to lead off from the subject he felt he ought not to havebroached.'Oh, yes, I know that it is not the right thing, and the right thingwon't come; and the worst of it is,' lowering his already feeble voice,'saying one's prayers is hardest of all; I can't remember what I knowbest. I couldn't so much as go through the Magnificat if you were toshoot me.''But holloa! They don't generally come out of the Cathedral this way,do they?''Who?''The Bishop! Ay, and the Dean! Speaking to Wilmet. I believe they arecoming here. Lie still, Lance.''I must,' he acquiesced, after half raising himself and falling back.'Oh, can it be about the prize? Some of that stuff on my forehead,please, Clem.'Wilmet came in first, ascertained that all was ready, put an arrangingtouch to Lance's pillows, and ushered in the two dignitaries, who shookhis languid hand, and asked after him kindly.'You have put the Chapter into great difficulties by disabling yourselfand Harewood,' said the Bishop. 'What! did you not know that the poorfellow entirely broke down?' as the eager eyes inquired.'Nobody would tell me anything about it,' said Lance.'It could not be helped,' continued the Bishop, 'but the examiners saidthey felt it a great cruelty when they saw how utterly astray distressrendered him. However, his papers and yours were both so good--hisverses especially, and your arithmetic--that it was impossible toreject them, so the decision was put off till my return on Saturday.''We think,' said the Dean, who was very old, very gentle, and veryslow of speech--'we think, my little fellow, that though there is nodoubt that Shapcote did best in the examination, and ought to have theexhibition, yet under the peculiar circumstances, you and Harewood canbe retained as choir scholars for another year, so as to try again.You don't look sixteen, I'm sure, and we should be sorry to lose yourvoice.''I'm only just turned sixteen,' said Lance, 'only on the 14th of June.Thank you, sir;--thank you, my Lord;' and his face beamed joy, thoughhis words faltered.'Moreover,' proceeded the Bishop, 'I have the greatest pleasure ingiving the good-conduct prize where, so far as I am able to judge, ithas been well deserved.'A perilous flush of joy overspread the pale face; he started up on hiselbows, and his eyes danced rapture, as some one at the door handedin the beautiful red morocco quarto of the Cathedral music; and theBishop, with a fatherly hand making him lie down again, laid the bookbeside him, as he gasped out something like thanks.'We are quite convinced that you have deserved it,' repeated the Dean,again shaking hands with him, and then taking leave; but the Bishopremained, talking kindly to Clement about Cambridge, and inquiring forFelix; while Wilmet helped Lance's feeble fingers to turn the thickcreamy pages on which he durst not fix his eyes.Presently the Bishop sat down again, and said, 'I have acted on myown judgment in giving you this, my boy. I have seen enough of ourchoir these six years to know that what caused so much displeasure wascertainly not to be laid to your charge.'Lance made an uneasy movement, became alarmingly red, and said in achoked voice, 'I don't know but what it might, my Lord.''You mean that you knew of this custom of getting out at night throughthe Cathedral?''Yes, my Lord; I found out the way.'There was a silence.Then the Bishop said, 'After this, I can only leave it to your ownconscience whether you ought to keep this book; but I think you woulddo wisely to let me know, remembering that I have no authority in theschool.'Lance brightened, and he answered, 'My Lord, I did get out once, butonly once, and I don't think I did wrong. It was a long time ago--inthe autumn.''Last autumn! Was it not then that there was a report of a choristerin his shirt sleeves being seen at the Green Man at eleven o'clock atnight?''That was I, my Lord.'Clement was ready to start forward, under the impression that Lancewas talking his 'nonsense;' but the Bishop said, 'You were named, butnobody believed it for a moment.''One of our little fellows was very ill, my Lord,' said Lance,excitement restoring something of his natural briskness. 'We thought hewas going to have the cholera, and I went to get something for him. Thechemists' shops were shut, so I went in there.''May I ask the question,' said the Bishop, rather as if taking aliberty, 'why did you not call up Mr. Stokes?''We couldn't, my Lord, for it was all Mr. Shapcote's swans' eggs.He caught them--three of our least fellows, I mean--jumping at thebranches that hung over the river wall, and he blackguar--abused themso that they got into a rage and vowed he shouldn't have a plum lefton the tree. We seniors knew nothing about it; but they got over thewall at dark, and one ate eighty-five and the other eighty-one; but,little Dick--one of them, I mean--could only get down nineteen, andbrought the rest in his pockets. It was the first time such a thinghad happened, and it put me in a proper rage. The little one was theone I found out first; and I thought he was sulky, so I licked himtill he howled, so that I was afraid I'd done him some dreadful harm,like a regular brute; and when I found it was his inside instead ofhis outside, I was so glad, I could have done anything for him. But wecouldn't call Stokes, or the poor little chap would have suffered forit three times over.''That would have been hard measure! And did your remedy succeed?''Yes; I think a good deal was fright. He went to sleep on the brandy,and was all right next day.''And the gentlemen with the eighty-five and eighty-one suffered noinconvenience, of course?' said his Lordship, much amused. 'May I hearhow you got out?''With Mr. Harewood's key,' said Lance. 'He used to keep it on a nailinside the study door, which opens into the passage leading into thiscourt, and is never locked.''That is the key of the Cathedral library.''Yes, my lord; it unlocks the outer door, and the door into the northtransept.''And after that--''You can shoot the bolt on the inside of the little side-door at thewest front, and climb over the railing.''Boys are animals not to be kept in, that is certain! So you werepioneer! But you had nothing to do with those cards?''No, my Lord. But I ought not to have told how I got out, for therewere some who would do it afterwards. However, those cards were none ofours.''Whose were they?''Walter Shapcote's, my Lord. He is gone now, so it does not signify.''That nephew Mr. Shapcote had in his office?''Yes, my Lord; he had got the command of poor Gus, because he had lenthim money for some debt that Gus was afraid to let his father know of,and made him get the key, and let him out and in.''You all knew of this?''Yes, my Lord; but poor Gus was sure that his father would be sodreadful, that we durst not let out a word. Mr. Shapcote makes everysoul afraid of him.''The young man is gone?''Yes, my Lord, to London.''And there is no danger of the like with Gus?''Oh no, my Lord. He's too like a sheep! and now his debt is paid--afterthe last concert--he's sure not to get into the same scrape again.''Thank you very sincerely,' said the Bishop. 'It is a great relief tome to know all this; and it is safe with me. I am only afraid I havemade you talk more than is good for you.''And may I keep this, my Lord?' he wistfully asked.'Indeed you may, my dear boy. If you have transgressed the letter ofdiscipline, you have kept the spirit of charity. I am glad to keepyou, as well as your voice. But I have tired you out.'And laying a hand of blessing on his brow, the Bishop took leave,Wilmet going to the door with him, to answer his fears that theinterview had been too much for her patient, with assurances that therelief and gratification must do good in the end.He told her that the threat of the withholding of the prize had notbeen made by his authority, and that he had much regretted it. Just asthe tidings of the sun-stroke and its cause had reached him, he hadbeen with Mr. Nixon, the former Precentor, who had spoken warmly ofLance, saying that the whole tone of the boys had improved since hiscoming, though he was too much of a pickle ever to get the credit.Wilmet's pleasure was great; but before she could get back, Lance wasnervously calling for her. The excitement was still great, his headwas aching violently, and yet he could not leave off eager talking,which, as feverishness came on, began to degenerate into such ramblingas terribly frightened Clement lest a relapse should be coming on. Hewanted to hurry off to the doctor at once; but Wilmet, well knowinghe would not be at home, repressed him, and quietly said she had somedraughts ready, and knew what to do. While she was out of sight,preparing them, a great alarm came over the patient lest she shouldhave left him; and all the rest of those noonday hours were spent ina continual restless desire to keep her in view, hold her hand, andelicit her assurances that she was not going home, nor going to leavehim--no, not on any account. The very presence of his brother seemed toincrease the uneasiness; and in the deepest humiliation and despair,Clement allowed himself to be invited away by Captain Harewood to seethe process of ice-making, and be so far comforted that the Bishop'svisit was probably far more likely to have done the mischief than hisown rash suggestion, and that there was no reason to fear it wouldlast many hours. In fact, Lance was recovering favourably, and had hadfew drawbacks. 'So I tell everybody,' said John Harewood, 'especiallypoor Bill, who is still ready to break his heart every time Lance hasa headache, and would chatter him to death when he is better. Andthat's the way with them all! There seems no one that can be tender andreasonable both at once, except your sister.'Clement did full justice to that tenderness, when, out of sighthimself, he had watched Wilmet's soothing firmness and patientreassuring softness, at last calming the feverish agitation intoa sleep, which he was allowed to see for himself was gentle andwholesome. Only then--towards four o'clock--could Captain Harewoodpersuade her to let him keep guard, while she went to take the foodthat had been long waiting for her, and over which she could hearClement's penitent explanation of his own unlucky proposal.'I thought he seemed so well--able to get up and all; and they dothink me a good nurse at St. Matthew's. I nursed Fred Somers almostentirely when he had the scarlet fever.' (Wilmet looked as if shepitied St. Matthew's.) 'But of course I see now that it is out of thequestion.''Entirely so,' said Wilmet, too kind to remind him of thequalifications he had evinced.'And you cannot guess when he can come home?''Not in the least. Even if he could be moved, think of the noisiness ofour house!'Clement groaned. 'It was very wrong in me to speak to him before you,Wilmet,' he said; 'but I should be thankful if you could tell me whatis to be done! Cherry was thoroughly chilled that evening of thethunderstorm, and has been very poorly ever since.''She always feels changes of weather.''That's what Alda tells you. She won't believe there is anything thematter; but poor Cherry has had rheumatic pain all over her, and herbad ankle seems to have a bit of bone coming out. Sibby thinks so. Now,ought she not to have her doctor?''Well! if--I wish I could be quite sure! It is such an unlucky thingthat she has that dislike to Mr. Rugg.''Wilmet! You are as bad as Alda!''Clement,' she answered gently, 'you do not know what it is to have toreckon the expense. There is Felix's journey; and what this illness maycost, I cannot guess; and now Cherry! It is not that I grudge it; but Idon't see what is to become of any of us if we spend unnecessarily--ornecessarily either, for that matter.''I thought her doctor didn't charge.''He did not when she was at St. Faith's, but at home it is a differentthing; but, of course, if it be really needful it cannot be helped.''And you couldn't come home and see--even for one hour?''Not yet, most certainly.''I think I had better write to Sister Constance!''If you really do find it impossible to get on, and Cherry is morethan just ailing, and--and fractious' (the word came out at last); 'Idon't like always calling for help, it seems presuming on kindness, andRobina will be helpful when she comes home; but no doubt Alda does notknow what to do,' she added, in a deliberating tone.'Then you authorize me?''I don't know what you mean by authorizing.''Only that Alda will neither do anything herself, nor let any one elsedo it.''Poor Alda! It is a hard time for her, and she is not used to it. I amafraid she is out of her element among you all. Don't be vexed, Clem;you all ought to make allowances for her.''I make allowances from morning to night,' said Clement. 'I wonder howmany Travis will have to make!'Wilmet had finished her hasty meal, and wanted to get back to herpatient, so she only protested by a reproving look and shake of thehead; while Clement stood disconcerted, but less surprised than if hehad not been familiar with the part of the family Cassandra.CHAPTER XVIII.BY THE RIVER.'And Lancelot look'd, and was perplext in mind;And being weak in body, said no more.'Tennyson.It was a lovely afternoon, and the sun shone outside the green traceryof a hornbeam alley in the Deanery garden, leading from the cloisterto the river. Here lay Lancelot, on the long cushion of a sofa, whileWilmet sat stitching at the last of the set of collars that wouldalways bring so many recollections. For this was a Saturday afternoon,and on the Monday Lance was to go to Ewmouth to join Felix, who wasto have his holiday extended another month on that account. Alda, whohad had a quarter's allowance from her uncle, had made this possible;and Wilmet was doubly gratified by its having been her twin's gift andthought.Wilmet would of course go home, and she found herself almost regrettingthe close of a time that had of late been very pleasant. She had notfelt, as Geraldine would have done, the romance of living in the oldmonastic buildings, in the calm shadow of the grand old minster;yet something of the soothing of the great solemn quiet rested uponthe spirit that had--since six years old--never known freedom fromresponsibility, and--since fifteen--had borne the burthen of householdeconomies and of school teaching. It was a strange novelty to havemeals provided without care of her own, no shortcomings of servants tomake up, no claimant for her attention save a solitary patient, andthat one with Lance's temper. Wilmet had undergone a good deal fromAlda's clashes with the rest, even Felix's was only a temper well inhand, and alternate fretfulness and penitence were regarded by heras part and parcel of Geraldine's ailments; so that it was almost asurprise that her present convalescent never visited his discomfortsupon her, but was always patient and good-humoured, smiling wheneverhe could, like his father before him, as if, according to the prettySpanish saying, the sun had shone on his cradle at his birth. Hisunselfish nature had made him a little uneasy when with cooler senseshe remembered Clement's hint, while love and instinct alike made himfeel utterly unable to dispense with his motherly sister; but when shehad assured him that nothing could make him leave him as yet, and whenSister Constance was known to be at Bexley, he threw it from his mind,and was perfectly happy and contented.He could still exert no attention, could neither read nor be read to,nor occupy himself in any way; but he was amused by talk around him,and companionship was never lacking. Wilmet, whose forte had never beenconversation, found herself in a stream of small talk with inquiringfriends of all degrees in the hierarchy; but was most at her ease whenthe female Harewoods were prattling good-humoured inconsequent chatter,Willie lying on the grass murmuring with Lance, or John lured intostories of Indian surveying adventures in the cause of the OrdnanceMap. And when she was carried off to have her meals with the family,she had put herself so entirely at the mercy of circumstances, that shenever seemed scandalised by their crazy unpunctuality, their wonderfulfree and easy ways, and customs of putting things to every use butthe right, did not censure Grace or Lucy for dawdling and gossipingwhole mornings away, and took it naturally when their mother inquiredafter her eldest brother by the alternate names of Festus and Frank,and when she mentioned Lance's disaster as his coup d'tat. And herewas the last of these pleasant afternoons, full of still sweet sounds,midsummer hum above, the soft ripple of the water close by, the cawingof the rooks in the Close--all such peace, that her heart quailed asshe looked forward to the din of the High Street at Bexley, and shestrangled a sigh half way up her throat.The click of the cloister door was heard, and Lance awoke from adoze, saying, 'Is that Bill?--You've not been here since morning, youvagabone.''See what I've got for you,' said Bill. 'What do you say for that, now?'For Lance, with sparkling eyes, was rising to his feet. 'Hurrah! Robinherself! O Robin a Bobbin, isn't this jolly?' and Robina was entangledin that wonderful embrace peculiar to their own two selves, tooecstatic for a word between them, though as she received her sister'skiss, she spoke rather pleadingly--'Cherry and Sister Constance said Imight, Wilmet; and Mrs. Harewood was so very kind as to send Willie tofetch me to spend Sunday. Do you mind, Wilmet?''Mind! Of course she doesn't,' said Lance. 'I was hungry to see you,Bob.''It was very kind in Mrs. Harewood,' said Wilmet. 'I must go and thankher. Only, first, how is Cherry?''Much better. She has been out for a drive with Mr. Froggatt. It willbe all right now you are coming home, Mettie! Oh! and Dr. Lee isdelighted to hear of Lance's going to Ewmouth to make Felix stay longerthere. Oh! if ever anything was so delightful as this place! only Imust see your prize, Lancey.'As the two children linked their arms round one another's waists towalk along the alley, all-sufficient to one another, maybe there shota little pang across Wilmet's breast. No one had raptures for her. Shewas Felix's housekeeper, and represented mother to all; but since Aldahad been taken from her, she had ceased to be any one's perfect equaland delight. She might be valued, but only like air, or bread, or anyother necessary of life, but she was foremost with no one. Lance hadbeen everything to her, and she to Lance, for full four weeks; butshe should never awaken the look on his face she had seen for Robin.Such thoughts as these had never troubled her before; it had beenquite enough to know herself indispensable to all, and there was notime for sentiment; but this strange time of nursing had inspired anew sensation of yearning, a softness and melancholy, that she stroveagainst vainly as weak and unnatural.The change had not been unperceived by Lance; for as his little sister,looking at his sunken cheeks, and feeling his thin bony hand, pouredout her pity, he answered, 'I've had rather a jolly time of it oflate; Mettie is so delicious, you can't think how her very voice andeyes seemed to do me good. I'm sure that the bella-donna lily, coldhard painted thing, was a mistake; she must have been something muchsweeter. What do you think of a honeysuckle? That's bright red andwhite, and its leaves come out when nothing else does.''But it trails about, and doesn't stand alone.''It has got a good stout hard stem, that can make a bush of its ownwhen it hasn't anything to twine upon. I say, Robin, that's just whatyou women-folk should be, always ready to twine, and yet able to stickup for yourselves when you've got nothing to hang upon.''Well, if Wilmet was the honeysuckle, I'm sure Alda wasn't. O Lance,it has been so horrid coming home without any one I wanted, and allso queer and uncomfortable. I would as soon have been at school, orsooner, for there I had home to think about.''The last holidays weren't first-rate,' said Lance.'No; but then I'd got you!''I wish Dr. Manby would prescribe you to come with me,' said Lance.'It's something to have this little sight! And here! I wanted to givethis back, Lance.''Ah!' as he took the key of the violin-case, 'we'll take a look at her,Robin, to see if she's quite well; but I couldn't make her speak, itwould be like sticking daggers through my head.''Poor little key! I looked at it so often when you were so bad, andgrieved to think you had missed all that pleasure. Only it was acomfort to know you had been so good about it.''I am glad you took it, Robin; I know I should have grown idle if I hadhad it. Depend on it, 'twas that gave me this year of grace and theBishop's prize.''Oh! come and show me that! I hope it is not packed up.''No; I wanted to take it to show Felix, but Mettie says it is too big,and would come to grief. What prizes have you, Robin?''Three. General good marks, catechism, and history--beautiful books.''Then the avenging harpies have forgiven you?''Pretty well; and they were very kind when you were ill, and the girlsare much nicer; I am glad we stayed on, except for Angel's sake. Do youknow, Lance, I really am afraid she is going in for naughtiness.''Give a dog an ill name--' quoted Lance. 'Is that it?''I do believe it is that! She is such a Tom-boy! Fancy! One afternoon,there was an awful uproar, and her class were all found playing atraces, some riding astride with handkerchiefs round the forms, whichthey had named after the real horses; and the others pretending to beton them, with their books in their hands, shouting out at the top oftheir voices.''Go it, Angel,' said Lance, laughing; 'that's the way Clem's sistersimprove the tone of the school.'Robina still looked distressed, but that was soon forgotten in visitingLance's quarters, and admiring his books, peeping respectfully at hissilent violin, and being lionised as far as his strength would permit.They were hand in hand the whole evening, till he was sent to bed, andhis sisters were claimed by the Harewoods.The Cathedral was resuming its usual voices on the Sunday morning; andwhen the early bell brought Wilmet from her room, she found Lance upand dressed, his little black gown on, and his trencher cap in his hand.'That's nice!' he said in admiration, as she advanced in her freshwhite piqu and blue ribbons. 'O Mettie, I'm so glad this isn't my lasttime here!' and he added, as she bent over him and kissed him, notquite able to speak, 'Please, Mettie, I beg your pardon for all thetimes I have been tiresome or cross.''My dear little boy--' She broke down, and finished with anotherkiss, for Robina was at hand, shy in her thankfulness, and clingingto Lance's hand; but as Will Harewood followed, grave and subdued,Lance went up to him, and put his arm into his. Mr. Harewood, theCaptain, and Lucy, were all likewise there; but the greetings weresilent, and then Mr. Harewood led them all through the library, and wasfollowed by the two boys to the sacristy; for though the celebrationwas not choral, all those of the choir who were present were alwaysrobed. Wilmet hardly liked not to keep her boy beside her, but shecould not be sorry when she saw the two friends once more heading thelittle procession together; and with such happy grave faces, though sodifferent: one broad, ruddy, sandy; the other fair, wasted, delicate,the hollow cheeks scarcely more coloured than the white linen, and yetwith a pure fresh air of bright hope and recovery.The Cathedral was nobly and calmly beautiful in the summer morning;the sunbeams high up in the slender brilliant windows that crowned theeast, and the voice sounding low and solemn in the distance at theAltar. To Wilmet and Robina it was a great deal more than the joyousfestival they had last shared in there, even though then they hadexulted in their brother's jubilant notes; and now he scarcely breatheda faint response, left his book unopened, and knelt in the dreamypassiveness of one incapable of actions of the mind, but too simplyhappy and thankful to doubt of his welcome. In his place, Clementwould have distressed himself and his advisers over this inabilityto perform his usual mental exercises of devotion; but Lance neverseemed to question but that he ought to lay himself before the Altarin thankfulness as soon as he was able, as certain of being welcomedthere, as by the kind hands that shook his in the sacristy.He came to breakfast afterwards at the Harewoods', to put an end to hisinvalid ways; but the clatter soon was too much for him; and he spentthe chief part of the day lying on his bed, able now to follow dreamilythe echoes from the minster, the full glories of which his sisterswere enjoying. There was afterwards a rush of his choir mates to shakehands with him; and little Dick Graeme, a delicate, sallow, black-eyedboy, in whom Wilmet believed she recognised the hero of the swans'eggs, could not be got rid of the whole day. He lived at a farm threemiles off, and had been sent in to take his part on the Sunday; indeed,he had often been at the door to inquire, but had only been allowedmomentary glimpses of Lance, whom he followed about like a little dog,till at last, late in the evening, the proposal was started of walkinghim down to the river, along which lay the path leading to his home.It was a charming summer evening when they set forth; the threeUnderwoods, the two Harewood brothers, and little Graeme, slowly movingalong, Robina in ecstasies with the loose-strife and forget-me-nots,and the boys absorbed in fish and water-rats, till Bill, holding Robina little back, pointed to a pollard, and told her in a low hoarsevoice, 'That was where I left those verses.''There!' Robina tried to measure with her eye the distance, whichlooked immense for such a run. She could not speak; but little Dickturned--'Ay, 'twas a jolly run in the time. Spyers and I tried it, and both gotblown; but nobody runs like Underwood.''Well, it does look a goodish distance,' said Lance. 'And Robin, do youknow, it all came of this fellow being too good a poet. He thought itwas the Tiber, you know.''The subject was the Tiber, wasn't it?''Ay; and Bill here got to spouting about Horace Cocles till he didn'tknow, nor I either, whether we were heathen Romans or not. It was amercy he didn't go home in Cocles' costume.'Bill did not laugh. He seemed to forget everything, bystanders and all,and threw his arm round his friend's neck. 'O Lancey, don't say a wordmore. If you only could guess what--what this month has been like tome! And now to see you standing here, like your dear old self again!Oh! if I could only--' and he broke off and rushed away behind thetree, where they heard him sobbing.Lance shrugged his shoulders. 'Poor old Bill! he will treat himselfas if he did it on purpose, but he'll be better now he's had it out.But d'ye see, I can't go no farther now. So you, Dick, be off. Sparethe feelings of your dutiful parents, and get home in Christianabletime.''I say, please Underwood, may I have the bed by yours next half?''That's not as it pleases Underwood, but Mrs. Drake; but look here,Graeme, there's a little brat of a new treble coming into ourdormitory. You stand his friend, and speak to Harewood if Bolt takes tobullying him.''But you'll be back?' said the child, his face all consternation.'I hope so; but for fear of accidents, you know. Good night, Dick, andthank your mater for those stunning raspberries.''That's a good dodge,' said Will Harewood, emerging, 'to keep thelittle ape from bullying the little one himself. But you will be ableto come back, Lance; 'tis as dull as ditch-water without you.''I shall be glad enough to come back,' said Lance, 'and make the mostof this year. I didn't know how I cared for this place. There's nothinglike it!' and he leant against a tree, looking back at the Cathedral,where the sunbeams were 'weaving a parting crown' for the tall tower,and the soft grey of the exquisite stone-work of the chapter-housecontrasted with the fresh green of the trees, rising up from thesparkling river and emerald meadows. Presently he burst out, 'Youbeautiful old thing, and did you hush your grand glorious old voiceonly for me? I should like to be your own, and to serve you for ever!'The other two felt a little awed at the outburst, and possibly Lance alittle ashamed, for he suddenly started from his tree trunk, crying,'I'm sure we ought to go home. However, there are Jack and Mettie onbeyond ever so far.' And he elevated his voice in a coo-ee, after whathe believed to be Australian fashion; but his weakness prevailed, andhe laughed at his own want of power to shout much above his breath.'You do it, Bill.''Not I! Coo-ee indeed? 'Tis coo-coo there, river and moonlight and all.'At one and the same moment, Lance exclaimed, 'Jack and Mettie! Thunderand ages!' and Robina, 'For shame, Willie!' while that personage cuta caper, at once expressive of affirmation and amusement at theirsurprise.'After all,' sagaciously observed Lance, 'I'm not so much surprised. Ithink I've made a pretty good Cupid.''You believe it, then?' cried Robina.'Bless you,' affirmed Willie, 'we've been roasting Jack about it forthe last fortnight--only the pater was so awfully afraid of yoursister's hearing it, that he said any one who breathed the ghost of ajoke near her should be shipped off to old Aunt Grace that instant.''Well, they have my consent and blessing,' said Lance.'Amen,' responded his friend.'Ho!' continued Lance, 'that's the meaning of old W. W. being so jolly.I wondered whether it was only that I thought so because I had nothingto do but to look at her.''Oh, you know she is a real true beauty and no mistake,' said Bill,beginning to feel a personal pride in her; 'there's Miles raving abouther, and every one runs about saying, "Have you seen little Underwood'shandsome sister?" Half the folks that came to ask after you did it toget a look at her; and if she stayed a week longer, she might have adozen offers, only luckily Jack cut in first.''Well, I'm glad she is even with Alda,' was Lance's next sentiment.'That's the one that is booked for the Red Indian you converted, ain'tit?' asked Bill. 'Fact, Robina; we heard a new fellow was coming whohad converted a Cherokee, and that the Bishop had christened him inhis war paint and feathers. Mrs. Shapcote sent out invitations to amissionary tea in honour of him.''What, of the Cherokee?''No, no, of the little brute of a missionary chap, and we made up ourminds to tar and feather him before he converted us; but long beforewe had found out which of the new trebles was the model Christian, oldShapcote had caught us two pitching into one another, because I saidBexley was a snobbish place full of pots and pans.''And that founded your friendship?''No, not quite, for we had a worse fight because I shut his Bible up inhis face when he tried to look over the Lessons in the Cathedral.''Why, you all do,' said Robina.'Yes, now; but before Nixon came we were a horrid set of littleruffians. Do you remember, Lance, how Roper offered you a bull's-eye inthe Cathedral, and thrashed you afterwards because you wouldn't haveit?''O Lance! but that was persecution!' cried Robina. 'Who would havethought you went through things like that?''Ay,' said Bill, 'you believed in the little cherub chorister boys,that sing and look out of their great violet eyes, till they die ofdeclines.''Ah!' said Lance, who was leaning on his arm rather wearily, 'Jack willdo for himself if he tells Wilmet her eyes are violet; it is like a redrag to a bull.''Yes,' said Robina, 'she says nobody ever had eyes the colour ofviolets, and they would be hideous if they were.''I have seen them,' said Willie, gravely.'Oh! where?' cried Robina. 'Darker blue than Edgar's?''It's generally only one at a time.''After a cricket match, eh?' suggested Lance.'But, depend upon it,' said Bill, while Robina was recovering herlaughing disgust, 'he may tell her her eyes are any colour he pleasesby this time.''How do you know that?' sharply protested Robin; 'as if she would carefor him more than for all of us, who can't spare her either!''I thought you were thick and plenty up the country?''Not of that sort,' said Lance.'I don't believe it,' insisted Robina; 'why, she had never seen him afew weeks ago; she can't have had time to get to like him.''That's your simplicity,' said Bill. 'Now ain't that oracular--I meanocular--demonstration? There they are, very moral of people makingfools of themselves in books.''I wish they'd have done with it, then,' sighed Lance; 'my legs won'thold out much longer.''Yes, you must go in,' said Robin, bringing her sturdy shoulders forhis other arm to rest on.'But those two?' said Lance. 'Some one must stay to make itrespectable. Don't laugh, you vagabond, you shake up the marrow of mybones; I'm her brother, and bound to see to her.''I'll stay out with Willie if that will make it right,' said Robina;'only you must go to bed, and you have to be up so early too.'So they saw him to the Bailey door, beyond which he declined furtherassistance, saying he could tumble into bed alone, and leaving them totheir pleasant task of making propriety.It was made after this sort. Bill delivered himself of a deep sigh, andobserved, 'Well! if she's done for, I suppose I must take up with you;and after all, you're the jolliest.''I shall never be jolie, like Wilmet, if that's what you mean,' saidRobina, not quite understanding whether it were jest or earnest.'Well, if you ain't a regular stunner like her, it doesn't much matter.I never did see a face that I liked better than your round one, and Iknow I shall like it more and more. Won't you have me, Robina, one ofthese days?''O Willie! oughtn't one to wait till we are old enough to think aboutit?''I don't see why. I shall always be thinking I'm working for you, and Idon't see why you shouldn't think the same of me. Won't you?' again herepeated. 'At least, of course I shall do all the work for you.''Oh no! I should not like that. I had rather be doing something foryou, Willie. Look here, I am learning all I can now, and when I goout--''Go out?''For a governess.''Murther! I'll hinder that!''But, Willie, you can't make a fortune in five years, and I shall goout at eighteen. I think I shall begin the fortune soonest;' and shelaughed merrily.'Mother didn't make a fortune.''I didn't mean that exactly; but I'm learning all the superiorbranches, and if I got a hundred a year! Think of that, Will! If I wenton with that till you are a clergyman and have a living, how nice itwould be! There would be plenty to give away; and if we were poor, Iwould take girls to teach.''Do you think I shall ever let you do all the work that way?' saidWill, strong in boyhood's infinite possibilities. 'I don't know howit's to be, but I'll keep you out of slaving, though you're a dear girlto think of it. Any way, Robin, you and I will hold together--always.''I am sure I shall never like anybody half so much,' said Robin.'Shall we break a sixpence and keep the halves? That's the thing, ain'tit? I believe I've got one--or fourpence, which is all the same.''No, no,' said Robina, backing; 'I don't think Mettie would like it. Itdoesn't seem right.''But aren't you in earnest, Robin?''Oh yes, indeed, indeed I am;' from the depths of a very earnestchildish heart that little knew to what it pledged itself.'And so am I! I'll never care for any one else, Robina--never.''Nor I, William. Here they come!'The other two had not got near so far, though Captain Harewood wastalking, and Wilmet listening, as would never have been the casewithout the influence Willie asserted; but the special charm thatenchained Wilmet was entirely unapprehended by her, till just as thefirst star brightened, and the hues faded from the landscape, shebethought her of her patient, and perceived that he had gone in. 'Howlate it must be! I must go and see after him. I hope he is equal to thejourney.''I will come and bring you an account of him on my way home, if I may.''Oh, thank you; but it is taxing your goodness too--too much.''Cannot you believe how glad I am to have a good excuse?' and thetone gave Wilmet a sudden thrill, so that she answered not; and hecontinued, 'I am going to beg leave to be sometimes at Bexley.''When Felix is at home,' faltered Wilmet.'I can hardly afford to wait. My time at home is so short. I shall, Ihope, make friends with him to-morrow, and perhaps you will neither ofyou forbid me to come again. I am asking nothing now, only opportunityto try to make you--''Oh, don't!' hurriedly broke in Wilmet, standing still in consternation.'Nay,' he said in a pleading voice, 'I know it would be presumption tothink so short an acquaintance could suffice, but you see I have solittle time, and all I want is leave to use it in coming to see you.''Oh, don't!' she repeated. 'Indeed you had better not. It would beonly pain. I couldn't! and I can't have Felix worried;' and there wasa startled sob in her voice; but he answered with the strength andsweetness that had upheld her in Lance's most suffering moments.'I would not distress you or Felix for more than words can utter! Iwould not have breathed a hint of this most earnest wish of my hearttill you had had some preparation, if it were not so impossibleotherwise to have any chance of being with you and striving--''Please,' entreated Wilmet, 'that is just what should be avoided; itcan never come to anything, and the sooner it is stopped the better.''Why should it never come to anything?' he asked, encouraged bydetecting tears in her voice.'Because you know--no, you don't know, or you never could think of sucha thing--how wrong and impossible it would be for me!''No, I don't know. That is what I want to have the opportunity ofknowing.''I can tell you before,' she answered, faintly. 'Oh, if you would buttake my word for it, it would save so much--''No, that I cannot do,' he repeated. 'I must see for myself yourpreciousness at home.'She broke in again. 'Please, please, I'm saying what I ought not; butit is to hinder distress. Don't want to let us get to like each otherany better, for as yet it can't be more than what could be got over,and it is only making pain to let it grow.''That I deny. So far as I am concerned, the thing is done. If youwanted to save me that pain, you should have turned me out the moment Isaw you call the boy back to life. A month like this is not so easilygot over.'Wilmet drooped her head, and made no answer.'So, since you see,' he continued, 'you will spare me nothing byholding me aloof, will you not let me come and gladden myself whileI may in your presence? And then when my time is up it may be morepossible to judge--' (there was a faint 'Oh no,' but he heeded it not)'--whether you can bear such an ugly fellow enough to let him look tothe time when home claims may be less pressing. I look for no answer. Ionly want to be able to ask for one three months hence, and I shall begyour brother to put it into my power so to do.''Ah! but to have Felix disturbed and worried is just what must not be.It has made him ill already; and if he thought--''I promise not to harass him,' said Captain Harewood, gently. 'You maytrust me to take care that what I shall say will not cause him any verytrying perplexity.''If you knew--' sighed Wilmet.'I hope to know,' he replied. 'I do know enough already to beaware that you stand in no common relation to the rest; and if youhave my heart, Wilmet, it must follow that somehow I share in yourself-devotion. Do not fear my trying to make you less yourself. I wantnot to take you away from your burthens, but to share them.''Yes, you--that is your goodness; but would it be right in us?' shefaltered.'Leave your brother and me to judge of that,' he said.They were already at the Bailey door, in the shadow of the buildings,the flood of moonlight lying on the tower above, and one littlemysterious lamp under the deep brow of the archway of the passage.No more passed but one 'good-night' from each; he had not even seenher face, under her shady hat; while she hastened to her little room,glad to ascertain that Lance was fast asleep, and with a rush of newsensations bursting on her, against which she was strengthening all thedykes of her resolute nature. 'He--he--that it should be he! how good!how generous! how kind! Oh, it would be so happy! It will make mehappy that he only just thought of it; but it won't do, it is no use.I'm not in love with him; I won't be, I'm not, I'm not!'And as ardently as Wilmet had ever prayed for Lance's life and reasonby that little bed, did she beseech not to be tempted to desert herduties; and all night she lay between sleep and waking, ever repeatingto herself. 'I'm not in love, I'm not, I'm not!'CHAPTER XIX.THE HOUSE WITHOUT PILLARS.'And who save she could soothe the boy,Or turn his tears to tears of joy?'Samuel Rogers.Lance's train was at six o'clock, and that by which the sisters wereto return to Bexley so little later, that they would await it at thestation, so the household was betimes more or less afoot. There wasa frenzied scramble of maids and young ladies in hasty toilette; yetbreakfast was only forthcoming by personal exertion on the part of theCaptain, who made the coffee, boiled the eggs, and sent his brotherforaging into the kitchen. Then a message came that mother must seethe sweet girl to bid her good-bye; and Wilmet was dragged up to findthe paddy good-natured face in bed, in an immense frilled nightcap,whence two horn-like curl-papers protruded. She was kissed, cried over,and told she was the dearest girl, and Jack the best boy, in the fourkingdoms; and while her head was turning round between dizziness at allthat this cordiality implied, and a governess's confusion whether thesewere the four kingdoms of Ireland, or England, Ireland, Scotland, andWales, a demand followed for the darling boy; but when she had gravelytold the Captain that his mother wanted him, the result was to send himdown laughing. 'No, no, I'm not the only darling boy in the world! 'Tisyou, Lance. You know the way.'Between finding her in bed, and being powerfully embraced, Lance'ssense of decorum brought him down with his blanched cheeks so rosy red,that the family were choking with suppressed mirth when the omnibuscalled for the luggage, and the party set forth to walk to the station,Lance in a grass hat, enfolded by the Captain's hands in an amplepuggery, and provided with a natty blue umbrella, presented by theLibrarian, 'as a shield against the far-darting Apollo.''If this had been in my day,' he said, 'some wit would have produceda neat epigram on Phoebus playing his old tricks out of jealousy ofWill's verses; but dainty feats of scholarship are gone out of date.Well, Patroclus, when we have you back again, I think we shall none ofus mourn over the effects of your generous action.'Wilmet was near enough to hear, and colour. She had imagined the lastnight's conversation unknown to all; but Underwood reticence was soincapable of guessing at Harewood communicativeness, that it neverentered her brain to suspect the topic of conversation between thethree juniors as they walked up the drowsy street.Thanks to the difficulties of getting under weigh from the Harewoodhouse, there was barely time for John and Lance to take their places,while Mr. Harewood got their tickets, and they were whirled off,leaving the others to promenade the platform, just then a completesolitude.Mr. Harewood, with the attention of the old school, backed by somethingwarmer, gave Wilmet his arm. He and his son John never seemed to belongto so ramshackle a household as the rest, and he was so gentle andfatherly, that when Wilmet found him aware of all, it was a relief totell her objections without being answered by a lover. After all, shecould only repeat that leaving home was so impossible for her, that, asshe murmured, 'He had better not get to like me any more, it would besuch a pity for him.''That,' said Mr. Harewood, with his air of old-fashioned gallantry,'depends on the esteem in which wealth or merit is held.''And station,' said Wilmet, in an undertone.'For that, my dear, one would be a fool not to honour you and yourbrother; besides, it may make you more at ease to hear that my fatherwas an apparitor, and I went to Oxford as a servitor, so that in birthyou have the advantage of us. Of course, I do not mean that every onedoes not in the abstract prefer prosperous matches; but John has a fairindependent competence, and can afford to do as he pleases; and, for mypart, I should be very sorry if this were not what he pleased.''You are so very kind, but surely if--even if--it must be such longwaiting, and you would not like that for him.''Let us arrive at the if before we settle about the waiting,' saidMr. Harewood. 'In truth, I have long looked on John as so much the mostsensible person in my house, that all I feel called on to do is to hopefor his success. I know both you and he will be wise enough not to beeither selfish or unselfish in the wrong place.'Wilmet did not quite understand, but she carried away the convictionthat she need have no scruple as to the parents' cordial approbation;and she had had her cure from yesterday's sense of want of individualaffection. As to the future? Of course it swelled her heart to thinkof such love and generous kindness; but she tried to believe that shewas as much touched by the goodness of the father as by that of theson, and she would be on her guard against herself unless she saw somereasonable hope that home would ever dispense with her. Dear Wilmet;would she not at any other time have thought it an outrage to think ofsuch a possibility? At any rate, she thought, nobody but Felix needever know.Little guessed she, as Robina sat opposite, kept silent by the presenceof two stout old females, that the child was revolving the questionwhether she might tell Cherry. She knew that Wilmet would not likeher affairs to be discussed without her own permission; but it seemedunfair that when all the Harewoods were open-mouthed, her own sistershould know nothing. After all, much would depend on the chances of atte--tte.At the station stood Clement: 'That's right! I thought you would comeby this train. What a comfort! How is Lance?''Almost well. How are you getting on?''You will soon see for yourself,' in an ominous tone.Just then she was accosted by Mr. Ryder, who was waiting for his owntrain; and after courteous and anxious inquiries, said, 'I was thinkingof writing to your eldest brother, but perhaps a word from you would doas well.''About Bernard?''Why, yes, I don't quite see my way about him. He is a sharp littlefellow, and very well taught; in fact, he can afford to do nothing butwaste time. Somehow, a boy will now and then seem to come into schoolwith the wrong foot foremost.''Has he fallen in with idle boys?''So I fear. I placed him in a form high for his age, but where the lagshave got hold of him, and make him think idleness the thing. So Igather. I conclude he is not to remain here?''Do you mean that you wish him to be taken away?' asked Wilmet, inconsternation.'No, no; don't understand it in that sense,' said Mr. Ryder, anxiously.'I only meant that he is doing no good here, and that possibly achange, or the stimulus of preparing for an examination, might rousehim. Good-bye.'And there Mr. Ryder had to rush off to secure his seat.'Oh! good morning, Miss Underwood!' This was from Mr. Mowbray Smith,a few steps beyond the station. 'I am glad to see you back. So yourpatient is gone to join your eldest brother? But we shall have you hereon Sunday? Then there's the less occasion to name it; but some noticeshould be taken of the behaviour yesterday evening.''It was very sad,' interposed Clement; 'but when once set off by thechristening, they could not stop themselves.''Scarcely a valid excuse,' said Mr. Smith, severely, as he made hisparting bow. 'You know this was not all.'Clement shrugged his shoulders, exclaiming, 'So he made that into apersonality! You must know there was an unusually squalling baby,whose godmother went on giving its name as Huggeny; and there was afive minutes' exchange of "What?" on Mr. Smith's side, and Huggenyon hers, till a whisper came all along--forwarded from the mother, Isuppose--"Same as they does their 'air;" and then Mr. Smith looked moremystified than ever; some one suggested, "Same as the Empress of theFrench."''Something might be excused on such provocation,' owned Wilmet,laughing.'If that had been all,' said Clement; 'but Angel and Bernard choose togo and sit by themselves, and I could see, from Felix's place in thechoir, that they were tittering long after. I shook my head, but Naresmust needs make up an odious imitation; and Bernard not only touchesAngel to make her look, but grins impudently at me. I found myselfgrowing burning hot with shame, and whenever they looked at me theirheads went down and their shoulders worked.''Naughty children,' said Wilmet, but with more than usual lenience tothe combined effects of Huggeny and of Clement's severe countenancein producing one of those paroxysms of giggle that seem invincible inproportion to their unbecomingness. The door was reached and instantlyopened, Stella springing into her arms in ecstasy. 'Sister's come!--OSister, Sister, Sister, don't ever go away any more.'There was a great deal of confused kissing and embracing as she madeher way upstairs. 'But oh, my Tedo, what has happened?' for she behelda fine sample of Bill Harewood's violet eye.'It was Bernard's stick went into his eye when we were playing athockey,' said Stella. 'He did cry terribly, but Sister Constance putsuch nice stuff--''Sister Constance! oh, thank you! but hockey in the garden?''I thought it rather a remarkable proceeding,' quietly observed theSister.'I must hear more about it,' said Wilmet. 'My poor dear little man,can't he let Sister go for one instant?--Cherry dear, how are you?''All right now you are come. But dear little Lance, how is he looking?''Not much worse than you do, my Cherry,' said Wilmet, as she saw thatthe wizened old fairy look was come back. 'You have been worse than Iknew.''Oh, I am all right now; and I have had such a treat of SisterConstance.''I want to take her back with me,' said the Sister. 'Dr. Lee would liketo have her under his eye; and if you can spare her, I would writeto-day, and she could go with me to-morrow.''It is very kind; it might be better for her.''Of course,' interrupted Alda, 'it is good for any one to be away fromthis horrid smell of baked earth, and all these riotous children.''Ah!' said Wilmet; 'didn't I see the shade of the lamp in thelanding-place broken? How was that?''Oh! the children, of course,' said Alda.But neither child spoke; and Wilmet perceived that only the twins werein the room, both hanging upon her, while she swallowed her hurriedsecond breakfast.'No one will tell,' said Clement. 'It was done the day I went over toMinsterham. I did all I could to find out.''Yes; and made them more obstinate than before,' said Alda.Another catastrophe here suddenly struck Wilmet, namely, a long andvery badly-mended rent in Stella's spotted pink frock, which, to saythe truth, did not look as if it were Monday morning.'Yes,' said Stella, 'I did try to mend it as well as I could, Sister,but there wasn't another work-a-day frock clean.''Your mending!' exclaimed Wilmet; 'but how did you tear it?''When I tumbled into the brambles, and was lost.''Lost, my dear? What does she mean?''It is quite true,' said Cherry. 'Angela and Bernard took her outfishing to Ball's hatch on Saturday, and lost her, only luckily we didnot know anything about it till she was safe at home again, dear littledarling!''But, Stella, how was it?' cried the horrified Wilmet, clasping her thecloser.'I could not bear to see the poor worms,' said Stella. 'Bear would cutthem up to stick on his hook, so I got away out of sight of them, andgathered the dear little wild roses and honeysuckles; and when I wantedto find them again I couldn't, and nobody heard me when I called, and arobin looked at me, and I thought he wanted to bury me, and I ran away,and a great bush caught hold of me and scratched my legs, and tore outa great piece of the rim of my hat; and just then a good lady cameby, and helped me up and to look for them, but we could not see themanywhere; so she took me to her house--such a dear little house allover roses--and she mended my hat, and I mended my frock, and she gaveme some tea and plum-cake, and two dear little ponies came to the door,and a carriage, and she brought me home.''Who was she?''Miss Crabbe; she is new to the place,' said Cherry. 'Mr. Froggatt saidshe had only been once in the shop before. Tell Sister how you told herabout yourself, Stella.''She asked my name,' said the child, 'and she said it was a very funnyone, and she could not understand it; and then she wanted to know whoselittle girl I was, and I said, "Brother Felix's;" and then she said,"Have you no papa or mamma?" So I told her I hadn't a papa or mamma,but a father and mother up in heaven; and she said, "I should thinkso, poor little dear, if there is no one to take more care of you."I really did think she wanted to take me and keep me for an adoptedchild, so I told her that I had lots of dear good brothers and sistersthat wanted me very much indeed, and I must go home to H. Froggatt andF. C. Underwood, High Street, Bexley.''I fancy,' said Cherry, 'that she thought Mr. Froggatt was Stella'sgrandfather, for she made him quite a speech about the neglect of thechild--"such a nice-mannered little girl," she said; but she would notcome in, nor let Alda be called.''Nor should I have gone down if Mr. Froggatt had thought proper to callme,' said Alda. 'Imagine me in his office!''I can't imagine not going anywhere to thank the person that broughthome my little Star,' said Wilmet, holding her arm close round thechild, and kissing her repeatedly. 'But what became of the other two?''I went out after them,' said Clement, 'and found them rushing wildlyabout after her, afraid to come home. To do them justice, I believethey were almost out of their minds, thinking she must have tumbledinto the river.''Oh, indeed,' said Alda. 'That's your account of it.''Yes,' said Cherry eagerly, 'all that pretending not to care, and thatit was a trick of Stella's, was nothing but reaction. And then, youknow, Clem, you did improve the occasion.''There!' exclaimed Alda,' you see how it is, Wilmet; nothing butvindication of those two intolerable children! Now, just come, Wilmet,and see if they are to be backed up in this.'But as Wilmet, perfectly bewildered, and feeling no hope ofcomprehension among so many, followed Alda from the room and up thestairs, Stella came plunging after, with a cry, 'Alda, Alda, don't hurtthem!' just as from a housemaid's closet half way up, Alda was bringingto light a basin containing a dozen tadpoles twirling their shadowytails.'Now, Wilmet,' she solemnly said, 'do you approve of all those horridbrutes swimming in my bath?''They aren't in the well, I hope,' said Wilmet.'How can you be so absurd, Wilmet? That's the way those children showedtheir sorrow that Clement talks about. I'll never believe but he helpedthem.''To weep them?' said a voice above; and Angela's face was seen lookingout of her bush of hair over the balusters of the top storey. 'Theyare just like black heraldic tears.''You don't mean that they put them in?' asked Wilmet.'What else should I mean?''And didn't she squall?' shouted Bernard; and then came a duet--'Dame, dame, what makes your ducks to squall,Duck to squall, duck to squall, duck to squall?Meeting o' pollywogs! Meeting wi' pollywogs!''Hush, children, this is shocking,' said Wilmet, in the low impressivevoice by which she could always still a tumult. 'How could you takeadvantage of my absence to do this?''Because Alda deserved it,' cried Angela, bouncing downstairs. 'There,Alda! I said I should tell of you if you told of us.''Angela, that is not the way to speak to your elder sister.''She isn't like an elder sister!' exclaimed Angel. 'Stella would beashamed to do like her, eating up the strawberries Mr. Froggatt broughtfor poor Cherry when she was ill.''I'm sure you had your share!' retorted Alda.'You would have them in for dessert, and you helped us; only SisterConstance and Clem left all theirs for Cherry, and then you went byyourself and ate them all up.'The very fact of shouting out such a charge showed a state ofinsubordination such as might make Wilmet's hair stand on end, and shesimply disbelieved so childish an accusation against her own equal inage. 'You should not say such things, Angela,' she answered, in her lowtone of reproof; 'there must be a mistake.''I am afraid it is quite true,' said Clement's quiet voice, as he stoodarrested on his way by the block upon the landing-place.'The children make such an uproar,' said the exasperated Alda. 'I'msure I thought Geraldine's had been taken long before, and in thisparching weather fruit is quite a necessity to me.'Wilmet was too much aghast at the admission to speak. It was a strangetangle: Clement standing straight and still on the landing-place;Wilmet, with Theodore humming to himself, as innocent of the fray asthe tadpoles that Stella was cherishing in the cupboard door-way; Alda,flushed and angry; and on the upper flight, Angela and Bernard dancingand roaming in vehement excitement between anger and alarm. 'Well thatLance was not in this hubbub!' thought deafened and amazed Wilmet.'What has this to do with the tadpoles?' she asked, in an endeavour tocomprehend.'We said she should be served out,' sung Bernard, 'with apolly--polly--polly-wog bath.''But, Bernard, hush!--Angel! don't you see it was no business of yoursif Alda did forget?'She was unprepared for the outbreak this brought on her. 'You, too,Wilmet! Every one backs up those children in their behaviour to me!Lady Herbert Somerville, and Clement, and all! If only Ferdinand sawit!''Just step up, Wilmet,' said Clement gently, 'and see whether thechildren are in league with me.'He followed Wilmet up to the door of the barrack, an attic that heshared with Lance and Bernard, and showed the long beam that crossed itpasted with a series of little figures cut out in paper, representinga procession in elaborate vestments; and at the end a long-backedindividual kneeling before the chair of a confessor, who bore a painfulresemblance to the Vicar of St. Matthew's.'We only wanted to make Tina feel at home,' giggled Angela.'It would be no matter,' pursued Clement, 'if it were merely quizzingmyself. I am used to that; but this is trenching on sacred ground.''Bless me, your old white beam!' exclaimed Angela, with an affectedstart.'It is exceedingly improper and irreverent,' said Wilmet. 'I am ashamedthat such a thing should have been done in this house.''Really,' said Alda, 'it seems to me very droll and clever, with noharm in it at all; only people like Clement never can take a joke.''You can't mean to justify such a one as this,' said Wilmet; but, toher still greater astonishment, Alda broke out,'There! You are turning against me! You are taking Clement's part,though you didn't care what they did to me--not if it had been snakesand adders!'This, decidedly in Mrs. Thomas Underwood's style, elicited a peal oflaughter from the two naughty children, and the corners of Clement'smouth relaxed, bringing Alda to a gush of tears. 'You never used to belike this to me, Wilmet.''I never saw you like this, dear Alda,' said Wilmet, low and gently,but in decided repression. 'Come into our room, and let me try tounderstand.'So began a morning of mutual complaints, as if everybody were againsteverybody, agreeing in nothing but in appealing to the elder sister.First, there was Alda's story. Never had there been such a miserabletime--with Geraldine interfering, fussy, fretful, fault-finding;Clement intolerable in primness and conceit, only making the childrenworse when he pretended to keep them in order, and making such afuss about Geraldine, when nothing ailed her but change of weather;incurring the expense of the Dearport doctor, and bringing down theSister upon them; so awkward to have her in the drawing-room in thatdress, but Sisters always thrust themselves into families. She hopedshe had shown my Lady that she was not to be overawed by a title--suchaffectation, not using it! No consideration for her; the servantsregularly spoilt, both of them; Martha a vulgar insolent creature, andSibby disgustingly familiar and slovenly, no good at all, not evento keep Theodore out of the way. At which Theodore, knowing no morethan his own name and Alda's displeasure, set up a dismal howl; and asWilmet chose to coax and fondle him into silence instead of scoldingand turning him out, Alda went off in a huff, muttering about asylumsand proper places; and Wilmet descended to the kitchen, the little weakhand clasped tight into hers.A sore sight awaited her below; the bills of this month for luxuriesof sinful extravagance in her economical eyes! Chicken and asparagus,ducks and peas, even in the height of their season, were enormitiesto such housekeeping as hers, and had raised the sum total to fourtimes the amount that her foreboding soul had dreaded. It exceeded herpresent supplies, and was a grave addition to the expenses of the twoillnesses, that were serious enough already.Martha was eloquent, not to say defiant, in self-defence. 'You see,Miss Underwood, if I'd been let alone, or Miss Cherry had been theone to take my orders from, which we could have made it out to yoursatisfaction; but with Miss Halder, which expects everything to bejust like what it was in the fammerly up in London, which it stands toreason as it can't; which she hasn't got no more notion than a baby ofprices, nor seasons, nor nothink; which is very determined, too, whichwon't suffer a word from nobody; which if you hadn't been coming home,Miss Underwood, I'd have given warning, which have always given yousatisfaction.'Wilmet's satisfaction was not increased when she encountered Sibby.'Ah, my darling Missie dear, ye're the jewel that's been longed for!The whole house has been mad entirely, and lost widout you; thechildren rampaging and playing pranks, and Miss Cherry dwining andpining to a skeleton, so that but for Master Clem and that holy woman,the Sisther, 'tis scarce alive ye'd have found her. Miss Alda, she'sthe very wonder of the worruld for jealousy and unfeelingness. I up andtold her at last there was well-nigh as much differ between you andshe, as between Stella and this blessed lamb that she spites; for ifyou have not carried off all the wit and understanding, sure 'tis youthat has got all the heart, and the head, and the hands.''And the partial old nursey, Sibby! You see I had no time nor thoughtbut for poor Lance, and Alda was so new to it.''Ah, Missie dear, you were always the one to vindicate her, but 'tisno use! Newness! 'Twasn't newness that makes her turn the back of herhand to this darling innocent, till he cries if he's left a moment withher.--Ay, my precious, what would have become of you and me but forMasther Clem?--I tell you, Miss Wilmet, I never thought that long boythe aquil of his brothers till I saw him in time of need. Yer fatherhimself--Heaven be his bed!--couldn't have been tenderer with Theodorenor Miss Cherry, by night or by day, an' never a cross word when he wasbothered past his life with Miss Alda's ugliness an' the children'sboldness.''Oh, those children! What is come to them, Sibby?''Only funning and merriment, Missie dear. They'd never have had to befaulted if Miss Alda had let Miss Cherry deal with them; but she couldneither rule them herself, nor bear to see them ruled; and though shewas like a mad cow if they played their pranks on her, she backs themup if Miss Cherry, or Master Clem, or even the Sisther, do but say aword to them, so 'tis no wonder if the poor dears have been a bit offtheir heads, but they'll be as quiet as doves now ye're back again. Oh,Missie dear, my own child, but it's you that are the light of my eyes,looking the blooming beauty that you are.'The foster-mother's genuine compliment could not lighten the load thathad grown every moment heavier, and more compunctious for the deaf earshe had turned to Clement. Wilmet said a word or two of apology tohim when she met him on the stairs, loaded with books to study in thegarden.'Never mind,' he magnanimously answered, 'it is all right now you arecome, and it was impossible before. Only, please do say something warmto Sister Constance, for Alda is barely civil to her.''I am very sorry; I did not think Alda had that sort of prejudice,'said Wilmet, whose instinct of defence of Alda had wonderfullydiminished.'The chief prejudice came of my sending for her,' said Clement.'Besides, Sister Constance spoke out very sharply about thestrawberries; and when we had a couple of chickens, and Alda scoldedme for helping her to a leg instead of a wing, Sister Constance said,"Oh, I supposed you had them on Geraldine's account;" and she gives thechildren leave to do anything Sister Constance objects to. These thingsare hardly their fault. But, I say, Mettie, now you are come, and itis all right, do you think I might go to St. Matthew's? The Vicar andMr. Sterling are alone, while the other curates are holiday-making, andthey say I could really be of some use to them, and they would give mesome help with this reading for my examination. Somers is there too,and I have not seen him since Christmas.''Indeed,' said Wilmet, 'no one has deserved a holiday more than you,Clement! You have done your best.'This--almost the first home praise or thanks that had fallen to hislot--elicited that real grace of humility for which poor self-consciousClement really strove. 'I have tried, Mettie,' he said, with tears inhis eyes; 'but it was not as if it had been one of the others. Theremust be something very wrong about me, to make me so disagreeable.''You have gained two hearts,' said Wilmet, 'Sibby's and this littlefellow's.'For Theodore had attached himself limpet fashion to Clement, who withdifficulty piled his books so as to leave a hand free for him.'He had better come with me,' said Wilmet; 'your reading must have beendreadfully interrupted.''It has, rather,' said Clement, whose examination was in alarmingproximity; 'but I don't mind him, I can work to his tunes as well asFelix can; and all is right now you are come.'That was the burthen of every one's song. It came next from Cherry,whom she found in her own room; 'There was so much bustle in thesitting-room,' she said.'My dear, you have gone through a great deal!''"There's nae luck about the house when our gude man's awa',"' saidCherry. 'Clem played and whistled that so often, that Alda begged neverto hear it again; but unluckily Tedo had caught it, and I don't thinkshe quite believes he doesn't hum it on purpose! But now, how deliciousit is to have got at least our gude woman! And, oh dear! Wilmet, I begyour pardon; but you do look so lovely, I can't help telling you so! oris it the pleasure of seeing you?''My poor Cherry! I did not think half enough about you.''That would have done no good. Most of this rose out of my owncrossness and horridness. If I could only be anxious without beingpeevish!''Now, Cherry, don't waste time in telling me it was your own fault; Iknow all about that! I really want to understand how it has all beenwith Alda and Clement. I am afraid Alda has not been behaving nicely.'To hear Wilmet allow Alda to be other than impeccable so amazed Cherry,that she could scarcely answer. 'O Mettie, I never knew what you andFelix must be. I have so often thought of a house divided againstitself, one against two, and two against three. We have been all towrongs, and Clem and I have said we would not be a party; and yet wecould not help it, for we always had to stand up together! Then Angeland Bear were against every one, and Alda set them against Clem, andfancied he did against her, which was not true. I should have mindednothing if Alda had not been so angry at Clement's sending for SisterConstance. You did give him leave, though?''Yes, and I should have done so much more decidedly if I had known.'At that moment Sister Constance knocked at the door, with her work inher hand, and Wilmet inferred that this was the refuge from Alda andthe drawing-room. To Cherry's surprise, Wilmet, instead of ignoringeverything unsatisfactory, began at once, 'Please come in, SisterConstance; I wanted to thank you, and tell you how sorry and ashamed Iam! I am afraid you have not been treated as--''Don't say any more, my dear,' as the tears were in her eyes; 'don'tthink about it.''I ought to think!' said Wilmet. 'I have been trying to understandthings ever since I came home; but everybody except Cherry and Clemblames everybody, and they only blame themselves! I can't understandthe rights of anything!''My dear,' said Sister Constance, 'I think it would be impossible togo into the details of all that has happened. Shall I tell you how itseemed to me?''Pray do!''I thought that the authority of an elder reared in so different aschool necessarily was producing a few collisions. There was someignorance, and a good deal of dislike of interference, and the youngerones would not have been human not to take advantage of it; but itis over now you are come home, and I strongly recommend an act ofoblivion.''Oh! I don't want to punish the poor children,' said Wilmet.'Oblivion, I said, not only amnesty;' and as she did not see perfectcomprehension in Wilmet's face, she added, 'I mean, not only thatthe children should be forgiven, but that their elders should not gohunting for causes, and thinking how this or that could have beenprevented.''I suppose not,' said Wilmet. 'It is all plain enough;' and the sighthat followed quite amazed Cherry, who smiled up in her face, saying,'Plain enough that we can't do without you.''No,' said Wilmet, kissing Cherry's uplifted face ere leaving the room;but it was with such an effort at a responding smile, that Cherryexclaimed, 'Oh dear! how dreadfully we have vexed her!' And SisterConstance thought the more.Yet again Wilmet had to hear another testimony to the anarchy in herabsence. Those formidable bills had obliged her to apply to Alda for anadvance of the sum she had offered for Lance's journey; and this, aftersome petulance and faltering, elicited that some old forgotten Londonbills had come down and swamped this Midsummer quarter's allowance, sothat the promise must stand over till--till Michaelmas; or it mightbe that Ferdinand's matters were arranged, and then what would sucha paltry sum be? Wilmet turned away in shame and disgust at havingtrusted for a moment to such offers. She could only do what she hadnever done before--apply to Mr. Froggatt for an advance on Felix'saccount: and she detained him after dinner for the purpose.He was as kind as possible, assuring her that he should have been hurtif she had not come to him. And then, in his blandest way, he thoughtit right to hint that 'Young people were sometimes a little unguarded.'She was prepared for the story of the loss of Stella, but she was notprepared to hear of a gossipping intercourse over the newly arrivedPunches, &c., carried on in the early morning with Redstone, not onlyby Bernard but Angela. She was but eleven years old, so it was no worsethan the taste of childish underhand coquetry and giggling; there wasno fear of its continuance after Felix's return, and, indeed, good oldMr. Froggatt had kept guard by coming in two hours earlier ever sincethe discovery; but the propensity dismayed Wilmet more than all thathad yet happened, and on this head she thought it right to reproveAngela seriously.'Dear me, Wilmet, you are always telling us not to think ourselvesabove our station. Mr. Redstone is just as fit to speak to as Felix wasbefore he was a partner.''Should you like Felix to have found you gossipping in thereading-room?''Well,' said audacious Angela, 'half the fun in things is the chance ofbeing caught.''My dear, you don't know what you are saying,' replied Wilmetdejectedly, as if exhausted beyond the power of working out herreproof! and Angela had to fight hard against any softening, tellingBernard that W. W. was a tremendous old maid, who had no notion of alark.Robina, who stood in the peculiar position of neither accusing norbeing accused, would not add her voice to the chorus of welcome, anddid not wonder that every hour wore off something from the radianceof the beautiful bloom brought from the Bailey. Indeed, the unusualgravity and reserve of the younger sister struck Cherry's observanteyes, and made her think at first that she had been much pained byhaving to part with Lance in his weak half-recovered state; but when attea-time the whole history of the illness was inquired into in detailby the assembled family, the downcast eyes and cheeks with which Robinencountered every mention of Captain Harewood's good offices led to theinference that she had in her excitement forgotten the bounds where thebrook and river meet, and was in an anguish of shame; Wilmet meantimelooking flushed with the fag of her vexatious day, and speakingplentifully of this same Captain, proving to herself all the while thatshe was doing so with ordinary gratitude and composure.Robina was quartered upon Geraldine in the holiday crowding of thehouse; and somewhere about four o'clock on the summer morning, Cherry,wakening as usual, and reaching for her book, heard a voice from thecorner asking if she wanted anything. 'No, thank you, Bobbie. Go tosleep again.''I can't; I've been thinking about it all night. I think he's comingto-day.''Who?''Captain Harewood. He promised to come and tell us how Lance and Felixare.''I am very glad; but Wilmet never said so.''No, but--O Cherry, I wish we could contrive some nice quiet place, butnothing is ever quiet in this house.''No,' said Geraldine, who was but too well aware of the fact, 'though Ican't imagine that any Harewood can be distressed on that score.''Oh, but--' said Robina, to whom the communication began to feel somomentous, that she could not help toying round it before comingto the point--'I know; at least, I am sure he will want to see herparticularly.''You Robin, what have you got into your head?' said Cherry, trying tomisunderstand, but feeling a foreboding throb of consternation.'It is not my head. Willie told me.' And as she detected a sigh ofrelief, 'And it is no nonsense of his either. He did it on Sundayevening by the river-side.''He did it?' repeated Geraldine, willing to take a moment's refuge inthe confusion of antecedents, though too well aware what must be coming.'You know what I mean. He--Jack--John--Captain Harewood, had it outwith her when we were all walking together.''My dear, impossible!''I mean, we were out of hearing, but we saw them at it, and walked upand down till Lance got tired out, and Willie and I stayed to make itproper.'Geraldine relieved herself by a little laugh, and said, in a superiortone of elderly wisdom, 'But, my dear, there might be a walk evenwithout what you call doing it.''Yes,' reiterated Robina; 'but I know, for the Captain shut himself upwith Mr. Harewood when we came in, and Bill heard his father tellinghis mother about it at night through the wall.''For shame, Robin!''Oh! he told them long ago that he could hear, and they don't care;besides, Mrs. Harewood told him himself when he went in to wish hergood morning, and she kissed me and Lance too about it, and said theyhadn't their equals. And poor Mettie thinks no one knows of it buttheir two selves, and maybe Mr. Harewood!''But, Robin, I don't know how to understand it. I think she would havetold Alda, at least.''Perhaps she has to-night,' said Robina; 'but, you see, she didn'taccept him.''Oh! then it doesn't signify.''Not out and out, I mean; and it is only because of us. At least, weare sure she likes him.''We! You and Willie!''And Lance. He saw it all the time he was getting well. Besides, theCaptain told his father that she wouldn't listen to him, and would havehindered his going to Felix if Lance had been fit to travel alone.''Then it is not an engagement now?''No, she won't let it be.''And he is coming to-day?''Yes, after he has seen Felix. O Cherry! he is so nice, kind andbright, like all the Harewoods, and not ridiculous; and Lance does likehim so!''Does Wilmet?''We are almost sure. As Lance says, she has never looked so bright, orso sweet, or so pretty. Do you think it is love, Cherry?''We shall see,' said Cherry. 'If she tells us nothing, we can judge;and if--if--'Her voice died away into contemplation; and after waiting in vain formore, Robina somewhat resentfully decided that 'she had fallen asleepin her very face.'No more was said till dressing-time, when there were a few speculationswhether Alda knew; and Cherry could not help auguring that somethinghad opened Wilmet's eyes to her twin's possible deficiencies. SisterConstance came, and seeing her patient's paleness, accused the sistersof untimely bedroom colloquies; and as they pleaded guilty, Robin wasstruck by the air of fixed resolution on Cherry's thin white face.There was no sign of any confidence having been made to Alda. Wilmetplunged into her long-deferred holiday task of inspecting the familylinen; and when she came back with a deep basket, an announcement thatevery one must mend and adapt, and portions of darning and piecingfor Geraldine and Robina, they began to feel as if the morning'sconversation was a dream.But just as dinner was near its close, there were steps on the stairs;the drawing-room door was opened and shut, and Sibby, unnecessarilycoming through the folding leaves, announced over the head of Clement,'Captain Harewood.''Come to tell about Lance!' cried Angela, leaping up, and followedby Bernard, Alda, and even Mr. Froggatt; indeed, in the existingconnection of chairs, tables, and doors, a clearance of that side ofthe table was needful before any one else could stir. Wilmet movedafter them, and Clement was heard exclaiming, 'You are pinning me down,Bobbie!''I know! Oh, shut the door! There are more than enough there already.''True,' said Sister Constance, signing to Clement to obey. 'I meant togo to my room, but Cherry wants to hear of her brothers.''No, she doesn't!' cried Robina. 'At least-- Oh! will nobody get theothers out, and leave them to themselves!''Why, Bobbie, what nonsense is this?' said Clement. 'One would thinkyou took them for Ferdinand and Alda.''It is all the same!--Stella, you run out to the garden--by that door,you child!' And then it all came out to the two fresh auditors, wholistened with conviction. 'And now,' concluded Robina, 'there is nota place where he can so much as speak to her! What shall we do to getthem away?''You do not know yet that she wishes it,' said Sister Constance, whohad been a wife before she was a Sister, and saw that it was matronlytact and tenderness that the crisis needed; 'but I'll tell you what youcan safely and naturally do. Go in and fetch Cherry's folding chair,and call the children to carry her appurtenances down to the garden.That will make a break, and Wilmet can take advantage of it if she seesfit.''Alda is worse than ten children,' said Clement; 'she has an inordinateappetite for captains in the absence of her own.''It can't be helped. Better do too little than too much.'And finding Robina shy and giggling, and Clement shy and irresolute,Sister Constance herself made the diversion by opening the door, whenWilmet's nervous look and manner was confirmation strong. 'Lady HerbertSomerville--Captain Harewood,' was Alda's formal introduction in herbad taste; while the Sister, after shaking hands, bade Bernard takeGeraldine's chair to the lawn.'Oh, are we to go out?' said Alda. 'A good move. Of all things I detestin summer, a town house is the worst. I'll just fetch a hat, I wantto show my pet view.--Our brothers are always fighting about theirchurches, Captain Harewood.'The thing was done; Mr. Froggatt was already gone, and as Alda'strappings were never quickly adjusted, it needed very littlecontrivance to leave a not unwilling pair on one side of the doors, andcut off the rest. Robina, too much excited to stand still, flew aboutthe stairs till Alda appeared in a tiny hat fluttering with velvettails.'Are they gone out?''Yes;' for quite enough to constitute a 'they' were gone; and when Aldareached them, they sedulously set themselves to detain her, and therebybetrayed the reason.'Nonsense! How absurd! That horrid little fright of a red-haired man!No doubt poor dear Wilmet only wants me to go and put an end to it.'Strictly speaking, this was self-assertion. She had not the assuranceto intrude, and she contented herself with keeping Cherry on thornsby threatening to go in, and declaring that the whole must be untrue,since Wilmet had not told her.Time went on very slowly; and at last Wilmet, about four o'clock, wasseen advancing, with Theodore in one hand and her great basket ofmending in the other. And before Alda had time to rise from her chair,Robina darted across the grass, with flaming cheeks and low, hurried,frightened confession--'Wilmet, please, it is honest to tell you;Willie Harewood knows, and told me, and I couldn't help it; I told themto keep away.''It always happens so,' said Wilmet, less discomposed than Robinaexpected, though she had evidently been shedding tears. 'Not that thereis anything to tell.''Nothing!' cried Robina, looking blank.'Of course not. He came to bring me a note from Felix. I hope no oneknows but those three.''And Sister Constance.''Then take care no one does.''But, O Wilmet, please! You have not put an end to it all?''No,' said Wilmet. 'They will not let me, though I think it would havebeen wiser. I do not know how it is to be, except that it is utterlyimpossible for the present.'With this much from the fountain-head, Robina was forced to contentherself; and she had tact enough not to join the trio under the tree,but to betake herself to Clement, who had gone off with his books.'So,' said Alda lightly, 'you have cheated us of another view of yourconquest, Mettie.''He wanted to catch the 3.45 train,' said Wilmet gravely.'You must have been very unmerciful to despatch him so soon. I thoughtyou must want me to come to your rescue, but those romantic childrenwouldn't let me.''Thank you,' said Wilmet.'My dear! You don't mean that you are smitten? Well! I can't flatteryou as to his beauty. And yet, after all, situated as you are, it isa catch--that is, if he has anything but his pay; but of course hehasn't.''Yes,' said Wilmet abstractedly, 'his father told me he had--what didhe call it?--"a fair independent competence of his own." Oh! they areso kind!''Then, O Wilmet, is it really so?' asked Geraldine, with eager eyes,clasped hands, and quivering frame, infinitely fuller of visibleemotion than either of the handsome twins.'I--don't know.''My dear Wilmet,' cried Alda, excited, 'you can't surely have anythingbetter in view!''No,' said Wilmet, even now keeping herself blind to the offensivenessof Alda's suggestion; 'but as it is utterly impossible for me to thinkof--leaving home, I did think it would have been wiser to put a stop toit while there wa--is time,' and the tears began to gather again.'And have you?'They won't let me.''Who?''He--and his father, and Felix,' said Wilmet, speaking steadily, butthe tears rolling down her cheeks.'Felix! Oh, what does he say?''You may see;' and she held out a letter, which Alda and Cherry readtogether, while she rested her elbow on her knee, her brow on her hand,and let fall the tears, which with her were always soft, free, andhealthy outlets of emotion, not disabling, but rather relieving.Mrs. Pettigrew's Lodgings, North Beach, East Ewmouth, 20thJuly, 10 P.M.MY DEAREST WILMET,What I have heard to-day is a great satisfaction. I had hardlyhoped that you could have been brought within the reach ofany one so worthy of you. My only fear is that you are tooscrupulous and self-sacrificing to contemplate fairly, andwithout prejudice, what is best for us all. You will imagineyourself blinded by inclination, and not attend to commonsense. Harewood tells me he trusts you have no objection onpersonal grounds. (I hope this does not sound as if he werepresuming; if so, it is my fault. Remember, I am more usedto writing 'summaries for the week' than letters on delicatesubjects.) But at any rate, my Mettie, I see there is muchworth and weight in his affection, and that you could notmanage to snub him as entirely as you wanted to do. (Didn'tyou?) Now, it seems to me, that if you two are really drawn toone another, both being such as you are, it is the call of aVoice that you have no right to reject or stifle. I do not meanby this that anything immediate need take place; but grantingyour preference, I think it would be wrong not to avow it, orto refuse, because you scruple to keep him waiting while youmay be necessary at home. If you imagine that by such rejectionyou would be doing better for the children and me, I beg leaveto tell you it is a generous blunder. Remember that, as thingshave turned out, I am quite as much the only dependence for theothers as I was seven years ago. I felt this painfully in thespring, when I was doubtful what turn my health would take; andthe comfort of knowing you would all have such a man to lookto would be unspeakable--indeed, he has already lightened meof much care and anxiety. Do not take this as pressing you.Between this and the end of his leave, there will be time forconsideration. Nothing need be done in haste, least of all thecrushing your liking under the delusion of serving us. So donot forbid him the house; and unless your objection be on anyother score, do not make up your mind till you have seen me. Ishould of course have been with you instead of writing, if itwere not for Lance. Till I saw the dear little fellow, I hadno notion how very ill he has been. The five hours' journeyhad quite knocked him up, and he was fit for nothing but hisbed when he came; but he revived in the evening. I only hopeI shall take as good care of him as the first-rate nurses hedescribes so enthusiastically. That month must have been worthyears of common acquaintance. I wish I knew what more to say toshow you how glad I am of this day's work, and to persuade youto see matters as I do.Ever your loving brother,F. C. UNDERWOOD.P.S.--Lance is quite himself this morning, and was up to watchus bathing before six o'clock.'Oh! what did Captain Harewood say of Felix?' was Cherry's cry, almostwith shame and pain at not having asked before.'You know, he had never seen him,' said Wilmet; 'but he said he didnot seem to him in the least unwell--and he watched carefully, as Ihad begged him. He said he struck him as naturally delicate-looking;but that those blue veins in his temples do not show, and he has nocough at all, nor any difficulty in swimming, or walking up a steepcliff. He made me laugh, for he said he hardly believed his eyes whenLance tumbled himself out of the train on something so little bigger orolder than himself. He says the way we all talk of "my eldest brother"made him expect something taller than Clement, and more imposing thanthe senior verger; but he understood it all when he saw him and Lancetogether. They have two very nice rooms; and Felix has put Lance intothe bedroom, which is luckily cool, and sleeps on a sofa bed in theparlour; and the landlady will do anything for them.''But how is it to be?' broke in Alda crossly. 'You and Felix seem tobe encouraging him to come dangling here, when we all agreed thatFerdinand must keep away in Felix's absence, though matters are in sucha different state.''So I told him, dear Alda,' gently said Wilmet; 'but he declared hewould bring his sisters, or poor Mrs. Harewood herself, if nothing elsewould satisfy me: and what could I do, after all their kindness?''Umph!' muttered Alda; 'they are a queer set.''Now, Alda,' said Wilmet earnestly, 'you must not talk without knowing.Till I went there, I never understood how much goodness and principlethere could be without my stiffness and particularity. I know I haveoften been very unnecessarily disagreeable and disapproving, and I hopeI am shaken out of it in time.''Dear Mettie, no one is like you,' cried Cherry, with a littleeffusion, stretching out her hand, and laying it on her sister'sshoulder. 'Oh, if we had not all been so vile while you were away!''It would not have made any difference, my dear! It would be impossibleto leave Felix without help. And think of Theodore!'Alda muttered something, that no one would hear, about asylums; andthe tell-tale tears coming again, Wilmet sprang up, and bending downto kiss Cherry, declared in her most authoritative voice that nothingshould be said to the younger children, nor to any one out of thehouse; then picked up the tea-cups, and carried them in.Excitements were, however, not yet over for the day. A telegram was putinto Alda's hands, containing the words--'A.T. is an unmitigated brute. I sail for N.Y. to-night. Allwill be right when I come back.'The mysterious hint restored Alda at once to all the privileges of thereigning heroine!CHAPTER XX.VALE LESTON.'The way to make thy son rich is to fillHis mind with rest before his trunk with riches;For wealth without contentment climbs a hill,To feel those tempests that fly over ditches,But if thy son can make ten pounds his measure,Then all thou addest may be called his treasure.'George Herbert.'I say, Felix, you've not told me about Vale Leston.'The two brothers were established under the lee of an old boat, beneaththe deep shadow of the red earth cliffs, festooned with ivy, wildclematis, everlasting pea, thrift, and samphire. Not far off, nichedbeneath the same cliff, were two or three cottage lodging-houses,two-storied, with rough grey slate roofs, glaring white walls, andgreen shutters to the windows that looked out over the shingly beach tothe lazily rippling summer sea.Ewmouth was a lazy place. Felix had felt half asleep through theearlier days of his stay, and Lance seemed to be lulled into acontinual doze whenever he was unoccupied, and that was almost always.It had grieved his elder brother to see this naturally vivaciousbeing so inert and content with inaction, only strolling about alittle in early morning and late evening, and languid and weary, ifnot actually suffering, during the heat and glare of the day. He wasnow, with his air-pillow and a railway rug, lying on the beach, besideFelix, who with his safety ink-stand planted in the sand, was at workcondensing the parliamentary debates for the Pursuivant, and was gladto perceive that he was so far alive as to be leaning on his elbow,slowly shovelling the sand or smaller pebbles with the frail tenementof a late crab; and it was another good sign to hear his voice in avoluntary inquiry about Vale Leston.'I have not been there yet.''Not there?''No. Old Abednego Tripp comes over here every market day, and he's theonly person I wanted to see.''I thought you came here because you wanted to see the place?''Yes; but I was not up to the walk when I came here; and while you wereill I never durst go out of reach of the telegraph, and latterly Iwaited for you. After all, I have not much mind to it. I don't see thegood of setting oneself a coveting one's neighbour's house.''It wouldn't be my house, any way,' said Lance quaintly. 'How far isit?''Rather more than three miles. We'll get a boat some day and do it.''That will be jolly!' and after shovelling a little longer, Lanceadded, 'How came we to be turned out?''That's just what I can't tell. I was only seven, you know, and myfather never would talk of it. Sibby used to revile the mane nagur,Misther Fulbert, till it was current in the nursery that he was a blackman who expelled us vi et armis. One day, my father found four orfive of us in a row slashing at an old black doll, by way of killingMisther Fulbert, and prohibited such executions. I think, too, that hequashed an attempt to call our own Fulbert by his other name.''I wonder what the nagur did?''By the light of maturer nature, I imagine that he may have succeededas heir-at-law, and that his maneness may have consisted in notgiving the living to my father; but I cannot tell. It always seemed myfather's great desire to put it out of our minds. I remember before weleft the place his catching me in a furious rage with some one who toldme my pony was to be sold. He carried me off, and told me it was alltrue; and we were going away, and he trusted to me to be brave and makeit as little hard to Mamma and the little girls as could be. He saidthe place had belonged to old Uncle Underwood, and that we had no rightto stay there after his death. That was all the explanation he gave me,first or last; and I don't think we thought much about it after theneck of the change was broken.''You remember it, though.''I believe I know every step of the house and garden. I have neverceased to dream of them; and I am as much afraid of disturbing oldimpressions as of reviving wishes.''Holloa! what's up?' exclaimed Lance, as the landlady was seen comingin quest of them. 'I thought I saw a tidy little tiger going in therejust now.''A note from Mr. Staples, if you please, Sir, and they wait for ananswer.''I didn't know you had any acquaintance here.''Mr. Staples is the solicitor who did the business about AdmiralChester's legacy. He is retired now, and only holds some county office.He found me out last week, I believe, from some letters of mine goingwool-gathering to the other F. Underwood. He called and said he knew myfather, and was very civil and friendly. He sent to inquire after youthe day you came. This is what he says:--MY DEAR MR. FELIX UNDERWOOD,Your relative at Vale Leston wishes me to dine with himto-morrow evening. If you and your brother would like toaccompany me on the drive, meet me at six o'clock on the top ofthe cliff. If you would prefer to return earlier than I do, Ican direct you to a boatman to take you down by the river.Believe me, yours truly,C. STAPLES.'Hurrah! that's not half a bad fellow for an attorney,' cried Lance.'Shall not you be tired? Will it not be too hot for you?''Not a bit of it. He,' indicating the sun, 'can only get at me asquintby that time, and I'm a match for him with my blue umbrella. Come, fireaway, you tardy Norseman. Say we are good for it. Fancy boating back!'And Lance whistled a few bars of 'The Hardy Norseman,' the liveliestthing he had done since his illness.At the appointed hour, the brothers were standing on the top of thecliff, with a broad estuary before them; on the opposite side of whichlay the town of Ewmouth at the foot of the old castle, with freshmodern fortifications towards the sea. The town, with its church towersand gas chimneys, sloped away from it; vessels thronged the harbour;and a long weird-looking thready suspension-bridge spanned the broadtide-river to East Ewmouth, the village fast growing into a suburb.There had not been more than time to point out the details to Lancebefore a waggonet drove up from one of the roads that branched amongpleasant 'villa residences;' and in it appeared a white-haired buthearty-looking gentleman, prepossessing and merry, very unlike Lance'snotion of attorneys, who shook hands with them warmly, and took care toput the boy under the shade of the driving-seat.It was a pretty drive, through rich meadows, shut in by the slopingwooded hills which gradually closed nearer; and by-and-by over theshoulder of one looked a very tall church tower, whereat Felix startedwith a thrill of responsive recognition, and suddenly faltered in thepolitical discussion Mr. Staples had started, but dropped at once,looking at the young man's face with kindly interest.At the same time road and river both made a sudden turn into a muchnarrower and wilder valley, the hills beyond more rough and rocky; butthe river still broad and smooth, and crossed by a handsome high-backedfive-arched bridge, the centre arch grandly high and broad, the othertwo rapidly diminishing on either side. Over this the carriage turned;and from the crown Lance beheld an almost collegiate-looking mass ofgrey building, enclosing sunny lawns and flower-beds, and surroundedby park-like grounds and trees, all sloping towards the river, andbacked by steep hills of wood and moorland, whence a little brookdanced with much impetus down to the calm steady main stream of Ewe.The church and remnants of the old priory occupied the forefront of asort of peninsula, the sweep of the Ewe on the south and east, and thelittle lively Leston on the north. There was slope enough to raise thebuildings beyond damp, and display the flower-beds beautifully as theylay falling away from the house. The churchyard lay furthest north,skirted by the two rivers, and the east end with the lovely floriatedwindow of the Lady Chapel rising some thirty yards from the bank ofthe Ewe, the outline a little broken by an immense willow tree thatwept its fountain-like foliage into the river. The south transept wascloistered, and joined to the building beyond, a long low grey housewith one row of windows above the sloping roof of the cloister, andthis again connected with a big family mansion, built of the same greystone with the rest, but in the style of the seventeenth century, and agood deal modernized upon that. A great plate-glass window looked outon the river in the east front, which projected nearly as far as didthe Lady Chapel, the space between being, as before said, laid out in aformal parterre, with stone steps leading down to the river.'Oh, what a place! what a place!' shouted Lance, starting up in thecarriage. 'It's like the minster, and the jolly old river besides! Twoof them! Oh! what fishing there must be!''I did not know it was really so beautiful,' said Felix in a low voice.'You remember it?' said Mr. Staples.--'I suppose you can't?' to Lance.'Oh no! I wasn't born! More's the pity! Do the salmon come up here,Sir?''Yes, since the fisheries have been protected; but young Mr. Underwoodis a great fisherman, and I fear it is not easy to get a card.''Oh, I wasn't thinking about leave, Sir, thank you. I've got no tacklenor anything; but I am glad we have salmon,' said Lance, as thoughhe had acquired an accession of dignity.Descending from the bridge, they were in a road skirting the river,and on which presently opened the lodge gates of the Rectory. Here Mr.Staples got out, telling his servant to drive the young gentlemen roundto the village.'I say, Felix,' said Lance, as they were whirled on along the lanewhich swept round the long wall overhung by trees, 'that old party mustknow all about it.''Most likely,' said Felix; 'but if there had been any good in myhearing, my father could have told me himself. How well I remember hisgiving me my first ride along this lane! Do you smell the bean field? Idon't believe I have thought of the scent since.'Felix seemed absorbed in the pleasures of recognition; and Lance,amazed at the beauty and what seemed to him the splendour of theplace, looked up at his brother with a kind of romantic feeling for adisinherited knight, as he contrasted the scene with the counter andprinting-office.The lane led to the village street, a very pretty one sloping upwards,and lying on each side of the Leston, which rippled along as clear ascrystal, crossed every here and there by foot-bridges, some wooden,some a single stone; while the cottages on the opposite side wereperched on a high shelf or terrace, and were approached by charmingirregular flights of stairs with low walls or balustrades. Over therail of one, smoking a pipe in summer evening enjoyment, was seenAbednego Tripp, with long nose, brown parchment cheeks, and lank hairnot yet grey--one of the genuine almost extinct species of parishclerk. As the carriage stopped, he began to descend, keys in hand, forthe church was a lion, and many carriages did stop there; but it wasnot till Felix jumped out and hailed him that he knew who were hisvisitors.'Bless me, if it is not Master Felix after all! I did think you wasnever coming, Sir. And this is the young gentleman as has been so ill.You're kindly welcome, Sir. I think he'd favour poor Master Eddard ifhe didn't look so nesh.''I shall get well here,' said Lance. 'If it is not my native air, itought to be.''Will you come and rest a bit, Sir? or would you like to go to thechurch?''The church,' they said. Felix first explained what he knew would givepleasure--that they had come depending on him for a cup of tea, anda cast in his boat which was wont to convey the marketables of ValeLeston twice a week to Ewmouth.Abednego sped up his stairs like a lamp-lighter, to cause hisgrand-daughter to make preparations, and was speedily down again,delighted to hear Felix prove his memory by inquiries after theinhabitants of the old dwellings.'Ha! the Miss Hepburns!' said Felix, looking at a tall narrow housecompletely embowered in trailing roses, and with the rails of thebridge of entrance wreathed with clematis. 'Are they there still?''Oh yes, Sir, all the four on 'em; and a sight of good they does to thepoor!''I wonder whether I ought to call?' said Felix; 'they used to be verykind to me.''What, is that Rob's godmother, that never gave her anything but thatqueer name?' asked Lance.'I shouldn't think they were rich,' said Felix. 'I fancy they usedto be very fond of my mother, and made her promise that the nextgirl should be named for one of them. There was Miss Bridget, andMiss Martha, and something else as bad, and Robina was the leastobjectionable of the lot. I think they used to write to my mother; butit is late in the day for calling.''Here comes Miss Bridget,' said the clerk, as there appeared in sighta tall, rigid, angular figure, with a big brown hat and long straightcloak, and a decidedly charity-looking basket in her hand.Felix stepped forward with his hand to his hat. 'Miss Hepburn, Ibelieve. I must introduce myself--Felix Underwood.'The lady's first move had been a startled shy drawing herself up andinto herself, at being addressed by a stranger. Then she looked up withan amazed 'Felix Underwood! Little Felix!' and as he smiled and bowed,she fumbled and put out a hesitating hand.'Yes. Tripp did tell us something--something of your being at Ewmouth,but we were not sure.''We had not been able to come over before,' said Felix, thinking shemeant to imply that he ought to have called. 'We came for health andhave not been equal to the walk.''Oh, indeed. Nothing infectious, I hope?''Oh no,' he said, explaining in a few words the total want ofconnection between his case and Lance's.'I am glad. I'll--I'll tell my sisters. I'm glad to have seen you.'There was something faltering and ill-assured in her manner, and in amoment she turned back with 'Mr. Underwood, where are you stopping?'He answered; and with 'I'll tell my sisters,' she parted with themagain.'That's Miss Bridget,' commented old Tripp. 'She's the one as allyssays, "I'll tell my sisters." They do say as Miss Isabella, she be themaster on 'em all.'Felix and Lance smiled to one another the assurance that every familyhad its Wilmet; but while the younger brother shrugged his shoulders,the elder felt a certain chill in the contrast with those days of old,when the sugar-plums and picture-books of the whole sisterhood were allat his service, and bethought him that times were changed.They entered the churchyard by a little side-gate. The church was agrand pile of every style of architecture that had prevailed since theCistercians had settled in Vale Leston, and of every defacement thatthe alternate neglect and good-will of the Underwoods could perpetrate.The grand tower at the west end was, however, past their power tospoil, and they had not done much damage to the exterior, except in awindow or buttress here and there. But within! The brothers, used tothe heavy correctness of the St. Oswald's restoration, stood aghastwhen Abednego admitted them by the door of excommunication, straightinto the chancel, magnificently deep, but with the meanest of rails,a reredos where Moses and Aaron kept guard over the Commandments inblack and gold, and walls bristling with genii and angels of alldescriptions, weeping over Underwoods of different generations. Lancestood open-mouthed before a namesake of his own, whose huge monumentalslab was upborne by the exertions of a kind of Tartarean cherub, solelyconsisting of a skull and a pair of bats' wings!'My stars! where did that brute come from?' muttered Lance under hisbreath. 'He's got no trifle of a piece of work!'However, Felix had taken in that the chancel had respectablepoppy-headed benches, though the lower part of the church wascompletely 'emparoked in pues,' such as surprised Lance out of allbounds when he withdrew his eyes from the white marble death's head.'My stars!' again he said, 'this is what I've heard of, but never saw.''Ay, Sir,' said Mr. Tripp, 'every one that come here do be crying outupon the pews; and to be sure, I see the folk sleepin' in them as isshameful!'Well he might, for his place was the lowest in a lofty three-decker,against one pier of the chancel arch, surmounted by a golden angelblowing a trumpet, and with lettering round the sounding-board,recording it to have been the gift of the Reverend Lancelot Underwood,Rector and Vicar of this parish--the owner of the mural slab beforementioned. That angel recalled to Felix that the sight of it had beenhis great pleasure in going to church, only marred by the fact that hewas out of sight of it in the chancel.'Why, you weren't in the choir then?' said Lance.'Choir! no, Sir,' said the clerk. 'They sits in the gallery. Thechancel is for Mr. Underwood's family--the Rector, Sir. They seats wasjust put up instead of the red baize pew before old Mr. Underwood aswas then died, and your poor papa went away. And that there font wasput, as 'tis there, just when the twin young ladies was christened.''Where was I christened, then?''In the bowl as we used to have on the Communion, Sir.'It was plain how far Edward Underwood had dared to work at renovation,and that nothing had since been done. The Lady-chapel, with a wonderfulceiling of Tudor fans and pendants, was full of benches and raggedleaves of books for such Sunday schooling as took place there, thenational school having been built half a mile off, that the childrenmight not be obnoxious to the Rectory. The church was a good way behindthe ordinary churches of 1861, and struck the two brothers the morefrom the system in which they had been brought up.'What a state Clem would be in!' uttered Lance, as they came out.'It is of no use to think about it,' said Felix. 'Let us enjoy thebeautiful exterior.''Ay, Sir,' said old Tripp, 'parties do be saying as how it is a mortialpity to see such a church go to wrack; and I do believe the Squirewouldn't be so hard to move if it warn't for the Passon--that's youngMr. Fulbert, the vicar.''I don't understand all these rectors and vicars,' said Lance. 'Ithought they never hung out together.''Why, you see, Master Lancelot, as how this is what they calls a layrectory, as goes like a landed estate from father to son, without therebeing any call for 'em to be clergy; and the Vicar, he is just put into do Passon's work, only he gets his situation for life, like I do,not like them curates.''I see,' said Felix; 'and the rectors have generally taken Holy Orders,and presented themselves to the vicarage.''Yes, Sir, that's how it ought to be; only this here Squire--not beingno Passon, though Rector he be--he puts in a gentleman to keep it warmtill his son, young Mr. Fulbert, our Vicar as is, was growed up, andhard work they say it was to get him to bend his mind to 't; nor he'dnot have done it at last, but for his father's paying of his bills,and giving consent to his marrying Miss Shaw. And since that, blessyou, Sir, the curates have done nothing but change, change, change,till 'tis enough to ruin a good clerk. You knows what that is, MasterFelix, you that be one of the cloth.' (For Felix allowed himself nounprofessional coats.)'It is only the cloth, Mr. Tripp; don't you see I sport a blue tie? Iam a bookseller.''A bookseller!' The old man recoiled. 'You'll not be passing your jokeson me, Sir. A book-writer--I understands.''No, a bookseller in earnest. I have a share in a very good business atBexley; I've been at it ever since I was sixteen.'The old clerk was quite overcome; he leant upon a headstone and staredat Felix without speaking, and then it was a sort of soliloquy. 'Tothink of poor dear Master Eddard's son being come to that! and helooking a dozen times more like a clergyman and a gentleman than everthis young Mr. Fulbert will!''Never mind, Mr. Tripp,' said Felix; 'there's one of us on the way tobe a clergyman--Edward Clement, you know, that I wrote to you about;and maybe this fellow too. Don't look so angry with me. I was obligedto do the best I could to bring in something for the thirteen of us.''And we're as proud of him as can be!' added Lance, affectionately andindignantly.'Ah, well,' said the old aristocrat, 'that may be, for you neverknew them he came of. There was my old Lady Geraldine, as was hisgreat-grandmother, who gave a new coat or new gown to every poor bodyin the parish at Christmas, and as much roast beef as they could eat;and wore a shawl as come from the Injies and cost two hundred pounds!She was a lady! Bless me, what would she have said to see the day--''That she was glad to have a great-grandson good for something,'stoutly answered Lance. 'I declare, Mr. Tripp, you'd have liked himbetter if he had come a begging!''So I do,' said Felix; 'and what's more, Mr. Tripp is going to refuseme because he is too fine to sit down to tea with a tradesman!''No, no, sir,' said old Tripp, with tears in his eyes. 'You'll not gofor to say that. If it was the last morsel I had, I'd be proud to shareit with one of Master Eddard's sons; but I can't but think as how werung the bells and drunk your health when you was born, just as we didfor the Prince of Wales, and how proud poor Master Eddard looked. Nodoubt he was spared the knowing of it.''No,' said Felix, 'it was settled with his full consent.'Abednego seemed more distressed than ever. 'Poor Master Eddard! he musthave been brought very low. Such a gentleman as he was! Never spoke aproud or rude word, Sir, but used to hold up his head like the firstlord in the land, and fire and colour up and start like one of youngMr. Fulbert's thoroughbreds if any one said an impudent word.''That no one ever ventured,' said Felix. 'He was as much respected atBexley--yes, and is still--as ever he could be here. I wish you couldsee my brother Edgar, he is more like him than either of us. Ah, here'sthe old garden gate, I wish we could go into the shrubbery.'Tripp was rather for trying it. He said the gardeners would be gonehome, and the elder master at dinner--the younger, with his wife,was absent; but Felix could not bear the sense of spying, though hedid not withhold Lance from a rush into the garden paths, where hedid not discover much. Then they looked into the eddy at the meetingof the waters; and turning back to Tripp's neatest of kitchens, werethere regaled upon shrimps, rashers hissing from the fire, and thepeculiar native species of hot-buttered cake, which Felix recollectedas viewed in the nursery as the ne plus ultra of excellence, probablybecause it was an almost prohibited dainty. Lance was in his element,delighting himself and Miss Kerenhappuch Tripp by assisting her totoast, to butter, and even to wash up, calling Felix to witness that healways helped Cherry in the holidays; when just as they were rising toseek the boat, Mr. Staples came climbing up the steps.'I thought I should find you here,' he said. 'Mr. Underwood very muchwishes you would come and spend the rest of the evening with him.''The old humbug!' burst out Lance. 'You won't go, will you, Felix?'Felix thought a moment, then walked with Mr. Staples to the cornerof the narrow ledge in front of the cottage. 'Mr. Staples,' he said,'I know nothing about it. I trust to you to tell me whether this mantreated my father so that I ought not to accept attention from him.''Hm? ha? I should not say so. He treated him unkindly, ungenerously,but he hardly knew how much so, and he had the letter of the law on hisside. I verily believe he regrets it, and that your father, being whathe was, would be the last to wish you to hold aloof.''Most likely,' said Felix. 'I am sure he forgave whatever there was toforgive.''It is not my doing, I assure you. He spoke of your letters that hadgone astray, and that led to more, till when he found you were in thevillage, he said he should like to see you. He is breaking up; his sonhas given him a good deal of trouble, and I believe he is altogetherconcerned for what has passed.''And he will not suppose we want anything from him?' said Felix, withsomething of the almost unavoidable pride of independent poverty.'Certainly not. I have guarded against that.''Then I suppose we must.--That is, how is your head? are you too muchtired, Lance?''No,' said Lance, almost sulkily; for he was much inclined to makefatigue a plea for escaping the 'mane nagur' and enjoying the boat, andwas rather unreasonably disposed to think it all a plot on the part ofMr. Staples for spoiling the evening. Felix might have been equallyglad of the excuse, but he believed his father would have thoughtthis act of conciliation a duty, and followed Mr. Staples acrossthe churchyard, where all the little boys in the place seemed to beplaying marbles on the flagged paths. Its neglected state was a painfulcontrast to the exquisitely laid-out shrubbery, as trim as gardenerscould make it, and improved and altered beyond Felix's recognition.Entering the house, Mr. Staples led the way to the dining-room,where there was a large empty table in the middle of the room, andin the deep bay of the window a smaller one, laid out with wine anddessert, where sat 'old Fulbert.' Having always heard him so called,the brothers were surprised to find him no more than elderly. He musthave been originally a thorough florid handsome Underwood, and had theremains of military bearing, though with an air of feebleness and wantof health, and a good deal of asthmatic oppression on his breath. Hedid not rise, but held out his hand, saying, 'Good evening. Thank youfor coming to see a sick man.''I am sorry to see you so unwell, Sir.''Thank you, I'm on the mend. Sit down. Take a glass of wine--claret?'Felix accepted, wondering if his father would regard it as an act ofpardon.'And you?''No thank you, Sir.''No wine? You are the one that has been so ill? No objection to melon,eh?'And Lancelot, whose illness had left a strong hankering for fruit, wasconsiderably appeased by the first cut into the cool buff flesh.'Is he the next brother to you?''Oh no. There are three brothers and three sisters between us.''And what are they doing? There were one or two with Tom Underwood.Didn't the young fellow offend him and turn out idle?''Not that, Sir,' said Felix, his colour rising: 'but he had no turnfor a clerkship, and a good deal for art. He is studying at the RoyalAcademy; but there never was any quarrel; he is often at ThomasUnderwood's.''And the rest?''One has the Ewshire Scholarship at St. Cadoc's; and there's one inAustralia.''And this lad--what's his name?''Lancelot. He is in the choir school at Minsterham Cathedral, and hopesto get a scholarship.''Is that all of you?''Two more boys, quite little, and the six girls.''Any of them able to do anything for themselves?''The eldest is a teacher in a school at Bexley,' said Felix, notdelighted with the cross-examination; 'and Alda, the one that livedwith the Tom Underwoods, is engaged to a man of good fortune. Then twoof the younger ones are at schools, where an allowance is made for poorclergymen's daughters.''How long has your mother been dead?''Four years and a half.''And you have managed all single-handed?''With my eldest sister's help, Sir.''Taken to the press, have you?' (Mr. Staples must have made the best ofhis vocation.) 'What's your paper?''The Bexley Pursuivant. Most likely you never heard of it. It is onlya little county paper;' and then feeling that to stop there was asubterfuge, he added, 'Our main business is the retail trade.'Mr. Underwood was chiefly intent on the next question, the politics ofthe paper, though he said he need hardly ask. 'All you young stuck-upfellows run in one team--all destructives.''No, no, Sir,' broke in Mr. Staples eagerly. 'Mr. Felix is staunch tothe back-bone.'Felix was never more tempted to deny his principles than when he foundthem brought forward as a recommendation; but he could only explainthat the Pursuivant was an old established county gentleman's styleof paper, in the agricultural interest. Whereupon the Squire mountedhis political hobby in such sort and with such abusive violence,especially as to the local representatives of the adverse party, thatFelix could not help feeling that if such were indeed the opinions ofhis own side, he should certainly be on the other. One good effect wasthe sparing him any more personal catechizing. Mr. Underwood shoutedhimself weary, without requiring any reply save what Mr. Staple's localknowledge supplied; and when the carriage was announced, the guestswere dismissed with a hearty shake of the hands, and invitation to callagain--'It was a comfort to talk of public matters to a young man ofsense;' and Lance found a sovereign in his hand. He was not sure thathe was obliged.'Well,' said Mr. Staples, rubbing his hands with satisfaction as theydrove off, 'what do you think of the Squire?''He talks very loud,' said Felix, who had for some time been watchingthe increase of Lance's head-ache, and now was trying to give him arest on shoulder and arm.Mr. Staples gave what help he could towards making the tired boycomfortable, and then returned to the subject in all their minds. 'Soyour father never told you those particulars?''No; I think it was his great object not to dwell on them, nor let uslook back with regret or anger.''Just like him. I never saw such a case, never! I'll show you aremarkable letter of his. But, first, you ought to understand the waythe matter stood. To begin with the relationship.''I know nothing about them, only that my father and mother weresecond cousins; but I don't even know to which of them my great-uncleUnderwood was really uncle.''To your mother. He had very strong feelings as to the duty of the headof a family, and made his house a home for all that needed it. WhenMiss Mary was sent home an orphan from India--James's, his favouritebrother's, child--he asked his cousin's widow, Mrs. Edward Underwood,to bring her boy, superintend the house, and look after the littlegirl; and she was glad enough, for the captain had died of his woundsat Waterloo, and she had little but her widow's pension.''I know,' said Felix. 'Then whose son is the Squire?''The son of Lancelot, who was the second brother, between the ReverendFulbert (your great-uncle) and James, your mother's father. So he washeir-at-law, but he was a wildish sort of lad, unfit to take HolyOrders; and there came to be an understanding that if his uncle wouldbuy his commission and purchase his steps, he would not look for theRectory and the estate. On that understanding your father took Ordersand married; but on old Mr. Underwood's death there was only a draughtof a will, which he had not been in a state to execute, leaving ahandsome legacy to Fulbert, but the whole property to your father andmother. It seemed a matter of course that, as the only compensation,Fulbert should have presented his cousin Edward to the vicarage--400 ayear; but as ill-luck would have it, he took offence at some sermon--aLent one about self-indulgence, I believe it was--swore he wouldn'thave a Puseyite parson preaching at him, and went into such a rage,that it is thought to be partly by way of getting off giving him theliving, and getting it held for his son.''I see,' said Felix.'It was a dirty trick; and I was a younger man at the time, and itstruck me that if your father chose to try the case, the testator'sintentions being clear, and instructions in his own hand extant, it wasten to one it might be given in his favour. I even took a counsel'sopinion, thinking that at any rate an intimation that the case was tobe tried before possession was given up, might bring Fulbert to termswith regard to the living.''And he would not?''No. I should like to show you his letter. Would you do me the honourof dining with me to-morrow?'Felix was obliged to mutter something about ladies and no dress-coats;but this was silenced, and he made a promise contingent on Lance'sfitness. He was puzzled by the relations in which Mr. Staples seemed tostand with the lay-rector; but he found that they were not of business,only that elections, and county affairs, brought them together, andthat Mr. Underwood was regarded with a sort of compassion by the menof his own standing, who used to go and visit him whenever they couldbe secure of not encountering the cold welcome and ill-breeding of hisdaughter-in-law--the grievance of his life.'Did you see any one you remembered?' further asked Mr. Staples.'One of the Miss Hepburns, who did not seem very well to know whetherto acknowledge me or not.''Ha, ha!' chuckled Mr. Staples. 'Queer old girls they are. Very high.Very good to the poor. All the good that is done in Vale Leston is bythem; but anything between a swell and a pauper don't exist for them.They're as poor as Job, and their pride is all they have, so they makethe most of it.'So, after all, the day had not been quite without mortification, andFelix felt it a little more than he thought it was worth.Lance was a good deal excited by the sight of his ancestral home. Hehad an eye for scenery, and longed to bask in it again; boating seemeddelightful; and he was amazed, not to say elated, by the grandeurof the house, which exceeded any--save Centry Park--in his limitedexperience. His mind was set on explorations there, and on the wholehistory; while Felix, to whom all was less new and more sorrowful, wasinclined to hang back from any unwise awakening of unsettling regrets;but there was no declining Mr. Staples' kindness, and he had muchdesire to see the letter. So the two youths put on their Sunday coats,assisted one another's ties, and looked each other well over beforeencountering the formidable mass of ladies Felix had seen in church,and about whom he was far more shy than Lance, who had seen a good dealmore of the species at Minsterham.It turned out very pleasant; the frank good-natured mother anddaughters made themselves very agreeable; and though no one was aspretty as Alice Knevett, they were all so far superior to her in mannerand cultivation that the mixing with them could not fail to softenany sting of disappointment that might remain. Lance was made much ofas an invalid, and very much liked the privileges that did not hinderan evening game of croquet, since Mr. Staples evidently intended hisconference with Felix to be tte--tte.It took place in a pleasant little study, fitted with green morocco andwalnut, that spoke well for the solicitor's taste and prosperity, andlooking out on the pretty lawn, with the long shadows of the trees, thecroquet players flitting about, and the sea glittering in the distance.The letter was ready, folded up lengthwise and docketed, businessfashion; but when opened, the familiar handwriting seemed to bring backthe father, even to the sound of his voice.Vale Leston Rectory,18th January.MY DEAR STAPLES,My wife and I feel greatly obliged to you for your good-willand zeal on our behalf, and have not for a moment justifiedyour dread of being thought officious. In other circumstances,I might be tempted to fight the battle; but it is impossiblefor several reasons. Were we the losers, we should betotally unable to pay the costs, and a load either of debtor obligation would be a burthen we have no right to assume.Moreover, the uncertainty of our position pending the decisionwould be as mischievous to myself as to the parishioners. Itwould destroy any fitness to be their Vicar, whether we gainedor not. The holding the Rectory is in itself an abuse; andnow that the grapes are sour, I am glad not to encounter thequestion of conscience, and so shall not adopt any means--tomy mind doubtful--for bringing it on myself. This being thecase, you will see that the idea of alarming Fulbert Underwoodfalls to the ground. Supposing he were coerced into thecompromise, what a pleasing pair--squire and parson--wouldbe the result! No, my kind friend, be content to see thingsremain as they are. We carry with us the certainty of our gooduncle's kindness, and the non-fulfilment of his intentionsis clearly providential. I have heard of a promising curacy,where I shall get the training I need after feeling my wilfulway as I have done here. My wife, being the expectant heiressand lay-rectoress, shall write to satisfy you that she is notsuffering from my coercion.Yours, most sincerely obliged,E. F. UNDERWOOD.And on another sheet followed:--DEAR MR. STAPLES,I think my husband is quite right, and that to go to law wouldonly make things much worse. It is very kind in you, but Ireally do not care about anything so long as I have my husbandand children, and can feel that my dear uncle meant all thatwas kind. Indeed, I really think my husband enjoys the prospectof a new and more active kind of work. He is sure to be happyanywhere, and as long as that is the case, all will be right;and he says that it will be much better for the children not togrow up in luxury.With many warm thanks,Yours very truly,M. W. UNDERWOOD.'May I copy them?' asked Felix, looking up with his eyes fuller oftears than suited his reserved disposition.His father's letter, full of his constant brave cheerfulness inself-abnegation, had not overcome him like the few words that broughtback the lovely young mamma he now remembered at Vale Leston, butwhom he had too soon known only as the patient, over-tasked, drudgingmother, and latterly in the faded helpless invalid. How little she hadguessed the life that was before her!Mr. Staples readily supplied him with the materials, adding, 'I willtake care you have the letters by-and-by. I value them too much to partwith them in my lifetime.' And presently he interrupted Felix's writingby saying, 'I much wished to have seen Mr. and Mrs. Edward Underwoodagain, but it seemed to me that they were unwilling to keep up acorrespondence.''They were so busy,' said Felix.'No doubt; and I thought they might feel a visit an intrusion.Otherwise, I often thought of running down from Town.''My father would have been very glad.''I did wish to have seen him again--and your mother, almost a child asshe was even at that time, with her flock of pretty children. I shallnever forget her--the beauty and darling of all the neighbourhood, asshe used to be. All we young men used to rave about her long beforeshe was out.' Mr. Staples smiled at some recollection, and added, 'Inever spoke to her four times in my life; but I was as bad as any ofthem--presumptuous as you may think it.''I am glad you did not see her again,' burst from Felix, the tearsstarting forth as he copied her hopeful words. 'She altered sadly.''Ah! indeed.'The concerned tone forced Felix to add, 'It came so much more heavilyon her than on any of us, care and work and years of seeing my father'shealth failing; and in the last week of his life she had a fall, thatbrought on softening of the brain.'Somehow, the whole had never struck him as so piteous before as in thecontrast with her youthful brightness, and when he saw Mr. Staplesgreatly affected. He could only write on through a mist of tears,while the solicitor walked about the room, blowing his nose violently,and muttering sentences never developed; till at last he came behindFelix's chair, and laying his hand on his shoulder, said, 'After all,it will come round. You are next heir.''Heir? There's Fulbert Underwood!' exclaimed Felix.'True; but he's been some years married, and there's no sign of afamily. Depend upon it, we shall see Vale Leston come back yet.''It would make no difference now,' muttered Felix, as he traced hismother's fearless lines; nay, if he had a personal thought, it was ofwhat he might have ventured towards Alice Knevett.'Not to them,' said Mr. Staples, 'but a good deal to you, my youngfriend.''Now, Mr. Staples,' said Felix, smiling, 'aren't you doing our best tounsettle a young man in business?''Well, well, you are too reasonable. A contingency--only a contingency.But I should like to show you.' And he hastily sketched a pedigree thathad at least the advantage of showing Felix his relationships.Rev. Lancelot.|2|                                             ||                                             |Rev. Fulbert.                                  Lancelot.|                                             ||               2            3                |               2Rev. Fulbert.Lancelot.James U.          Lancelot.Thomas.d. 1843.            |            |                |               ||            |                |               |Fulbert.    Mary Wilmet.      Thomas.       Rev. Edward.|       m. Edward U.    m. Mary Kedge.  m. Mary Wilmet|            |                |            Underwood.ev. Fulbert.     |                |Felix, &c.       Mary AldaUnderwood.'There! Through your mother you stand next in the line--areheir-at-law, you see. May I live to see that day! That's all.'The thought did not affect Felix much at the moment. He was too full ofwhat might have been, and the 'contingency' was such a remote one! Soafter answering to the best of his ability whether any of his sisterswere like his mother, he was glad to get out, and forget it all incroquet. His musical capacities were discovered too; but the attemptto profit by them proved quite too much for Lance, to whose brain thenotes of the piano were absolute and severe pain.A formal little note came on the ensuing morning, in which 'the MissesHepburn'--in the third person--requested the favour of the company ofMr. Felix Underwood and his brother at luncheon. Felix felt a littlestung. He could recollect warm passages between the ladies and hismother, and had been their pet long enough to wonder at this coldreception, and question whether it were not more dignified to rejectadvances made in such a manner; but his heart yearned towards thosewho had been kind to him in his youth, and he believed that his motherwould have wished him to renew the intercourse, and therefore decidedupon going; but it was too hot and sunny a day for Lance to walk, andFelix so entirely expected the visit to be wearisome and disagreeable,if not mortifying, that he could only resolve on it as a duty, andwould not expose his brother to it.So he plodded off alone, and a curious visit he had. It was not easyfor him to guess at the sacredness of those traditions of gentility andsuperiority that the 'Misses Hepburn' held--not so much for their ownsakes as in faithful loyalty to the parents many years dead, and tothe family duty that imposed a certain careful exclusiveness on themin deference to the noble lineage they could reckon, and the head ofthe house, whom none of them had ever seen. He could not have guessedthe warm feeling towards 'dear Mary' that had struggled so hard withthe sense of duty, and had gained the victory over the soreness at thedropping of correspondence, and the idea that it was a dereliction tobend to one 'who had lowered himself,' as Mrs. Fulbert Underwood saidhe had.What he saw was a tiny drawing-room, full of flowers and gimcracks, andfuller of four tall angular women, in dark dresses in the rear of thefashion, and sandy hair. They had decided in council, or rather MissIsabella had decided for them, that since he was to be received, theywould remember only his gentle blood; and therefore they shook handswith him, and the difference of the clasp alone could have shown thedifference of character--the patronising, the nervous, the tenderlyagitated, the hearty.He found them better informed than the Squire had been as to thecondition of the family--at least, so he presumed from the text oftheir inquiries. Not a word did they say of his own employment--itwas to be treated as a thing not to be spoken of; but the welfare ofthe others was inquired after, and especially of Robina--who was thename-child of the eldest sister, the gentlest of the set, and the mostin the background, quiet and tearful--pleased to hear that her godchildwas at school, and as Felix emphatically said 'a very good girl,'anxious that he should take charge of 'a little token' for her.The little token turned out to be 'Ministering Children'; and this gaveFelix a further hint, which prepared him for the tone in which some ofhis information was received, when he had only mentioned Geraldine asgone for health's sake to the St. Faith's Sisterhood.The ladies looked at one another, Miss Isabella cleared her throat, andhe knew a warning was coming; so he quickly said, 'One of the ladies,a clergyman's widow, was very kind to my father in his illness, and isreally the best friend we have left in England.''Your dear father was too much inclined to those specious doctrinesthat are only too fascinating to youth. I hope you do not outrun him.''I hope not,' said Felix, very sincerely; and he then succeeded ininteresting his monitor by speaking of Fulbert, and using him as abridge to lead to an account of Mr. Audley's Australian doings.It was altogether a stiff uncomfortable visit; the very politenessof the good ladies made Felix feel that they viewed his position asaltered, and he could not but feel a strong hope that he should neveragain have to make this offering at the shrine of ancient friendship.On coming home in the evening, Felix found a note on the table.'Croquet to wit?' asked Lance, as Felix tried to read it by the almostvanished twilight.'What's this?''We hope you and your brother will join us in a pic-nic atKitt's Head on Saturday.'Having discharged my ladies' commission, I proceed to thatwhich I have authority from your relation for intimatingto you--namely, that failing heirs of his own son, he hasentailed the Vale Leston property upon you, thus rendering itsalienation by the Reverend Fulbert impossible. I believe thearrangement was made within the last week. Congratulationswould hardly be suitable, but I cannot refuse myself thepleasure of saying how sincerely I rejoice.''What--what?' cried Lance, jumping up. 'You to have that splendiferousriver, and the salmons, and all. Won't you get a magnificent organ forthat church?''My dear Lance, don't you see that all this means is, that if youngFulbert has no children, I shall come after him.''Oh, he won't! I'm sure he won't. Things always do come right. Oh, whata coup d'tat mine was after all! Things always do come right. You,that were born to it! Didn't old Tripp say how they had had the bellsrung for you? I should like to set them going this minute!''They should be on your own cap, then!' said Felix, laughing and yetsharing in a castle or two--how Cherry should have a pony-carriage! howClement should be turned loose upon the Church! how Lance should pursuethe salmon at home and the humanities at the University! how Bernardshould have a real good gentleman's education!--but Felix soon broughthimself back again. 'Remember, Lance, not a word of this at home oranywhere else.''Not tell any one?' cried the boy, crest-fallen.'Don't you see, Lance, besides the impropriety of talking of whatinvolves two deaths, it would be the most senseless thing in the worldto let this make the least difference. Old Fulbert may change his mind,or young Fulbert have a son; at any rate, he is not five-and-thirty,and just as likely as not to outlive me.''Fee! Fee! you are quite well, you wretched Norseman!''Oh! I didn't mean that; but anybody may outlive anybody for thatmatter. Anyway, there's no chance of any of these schemes coming topass while we are young enough to care, even if they ever do; and ifthey unsettle us now, it would be unmitigated damage.''I see that,' said Lance; 'but as, by good luck, I'm No. 8, it can't dome much harm to think about it, and I don't see why the others shouldnot.''Do you think some of them would be content to go on as we are doing,with this in their heads? And if any one in the town knew it, whateverI might do, people would think I was getting above my business. I doubtwhether even Froggy himself would have the same reliance on me.''Then shan't you even tell Wilmet and Cherry?''I hope not. I don't think Wilmet could keep it from Alda, or Cherryfrom Edgar; and just imagine what it would be to have it come roundthrough Kensington Palace Gardens that we were reckoning on it!Besides, it will make no earthly difference to anybody, unless, maybe,to Edgar's son.'The mention of such a being brought Felix somehow to a sudden silence;and in the meantime supper and a candle were brought in, revealing athick letter from Geraldine, which had at first escaped notice. Therewere two enclosures; but as Felix read her writing, he broke out withan exclamation of consternation that startled Lance.'Hollo! What is it?' And as he received no answer--'Wilmet's notgiven up Jack? Eh? Nor Cherry fallen in love next? Clem hasn't turnedbare-footed friar?' crowding together the wildest suggestions he couldthink of to force answer.'Hush! That dear child--''She doesn't want to be a sister? You'll tell her you'd see her atJericho first!''No. It is about her foot.''Not worse?''No; but, dear little thing, she wants to have it taken off, becauseshe fancies if she was more effective, it might be one difficulty outof Wilmet's way!''She's a blessed little brick! But would it be so?''Well, I remember in the time of the measles, the last time I ever letthat fellow Rugg come near her, he thought proper to tell somebody inher hearing that if she was in a fit state of health, it would be theonly remedy. She wasn't, and it was quite uncalled for; and it put thepoor little thing in such an agony, that at last Sibby came and wrappedme up in a blanket to sit by her, and talk very big about nobody beingable to do it without my leave, and my not intending to consent to anysuch thing. I thought she had forgotten all about it, but it seems thatshe has not; and she imagines that, as she says, "with a cork foot thatI could stand upon, instead of always keeping this one up in fear ofhurting it, I could get about the house with only a stick, and be ofsome use, and then dear Mettie's happiness might not be so far off."''And what does Mettie say?''She knows nothing; Cherry implores me not to tell her, for she saysthat it would be impossible for Mettie to come and nurse her, and shewould rather have Sister Constance than any one.''Than Mettie! Deluded child!' cried Lance.'Her great wish is to have it done now at St. Faith's. She told Clementbefore she left home, because she thought they would insist on someone at home knowing; but "Don't think me very sly," she says; "I wouldnot tell Sister Constance what was in my head till I came here, forfear she should think it her duty to speak to Wilmet; and now, theywill not hear of it without your knowing. I did wish to have surprisedyou all! About the cost I have thought. You know Dr. Lee attends mefor nothing while I am here, and I told you that Sister Constance hassent up all my book of illustrations of Queen Isabel, and some of thewater-coloured drawings, to her sister, Lady Liddesdale, and how muchshe has been getting for them--quite enough to set me up with a footthat will not be half such a nuisance as this old dead-alive one, whichhas never let me have any peace these twelve years. I am trying to begood; but indeed I feel as if it might be wrong to try to be rid of mycross. So I abide by your decision, dear Felix. You are my king, and Iput myself in your hands; only you must not be anxious. You should haveknown nothing if I could have helped it."''Go on,' grunted Lance, with his face hidden, as Felix paused.'That's all; but here are notes from Sister Constance and Dr. Lee.'The Sister's explanation was, that it had been entirely Geraldine's ownthought, and that her willingness and eagerness made a great differencein such a nature as hers. She told Felix not to think of coming--thefewer the better; and he could come in a few hours in case of need.It was advisable that the decision should be made quickly, since tonervous sensitiveness like Cherry's the very effort to bear suspensereacted on the bodily frame. 'If you know what I mean,' concludedSister Constance, 'heroism is likely to carry the little creaturethrough what would be far more trying if this were proposed to her forher own sake.'And Dr. Lee's letter gave the medical view, decidedly inclining to theopinion that the probabilities were in favour of the operation, andthat the conditions were never likely to be more promising than atpresent.'Dear child! I wish I were there!''Can't we go?''What, you? Think of the train.'Lance shook his head. 'Couldn't I stay by myself, and you run up?''I don't think I can help it.'But the excitement of the evening broke Lance's sleep, and the next dayhe was quite ill; while Felix not only saw that he must not be left,but perceived after the first that Sister Constance's warning ought tobe respected, and that an arrival would only agitate Cherry's nerves.So he wrote his sanction with a very heavy heart, betraying as littleemotion as was consistent with the tenderness so essential to supportbrave but fragile little Geraldine.The anxiety seemed to have swallowed up the recollection of Mr.Staples' message; indeed, it was not willingly that Felix answered hisnote, and made a half engagement to the pic-nic.Felix was struck by seeing how much, under the circumstances, Lancemissed the daily service to which he had been used all his life.'I didn't mind it at first,' said the chorister, 'it seemed a part ofthe holiday; but somehow the day seems all stupid and astray withoutit.'But there was no church with it to be heard of; and indeed one attempton Sunday at East Ewmouth resulted in Lance's collapsing into someof his most distressing symptoms, caused, as he declared, by theoverpowering might and untuneableness of the singing, but quite badenough to make Felix resolve against permitting further experiments,and thus walk off by himself on the next Wednesday forenoon when heheard the bell.There was a long lecture that he had not bargained for; and when hecame out with a slightly impatient impulse, the first thing he saw wasa blue umbrella, a white hat, and a hand waving a paper. In silenceFelix read--'Constance Somerville to Felix Underwood.--11.30. Favourablyover. No cause for anxiety.'They were rather grave and awe-struck, and scarcely spoke all the wayhome--indeed, Felix was chiefly thinking how to get Lance home outof the sun without hurrying or over-heating him; but after dinnercame a reaction; the boy went frantic with admiration of a beautifulyacht that was standing into the bay; and Felix, with his letter toSister Constance to write, one to Australia to finish, and his leadingarticles to draw up, was forced to command peace in something of theold rough-and-ready style; and even when Lance vanished, he was to beheard singing scraps of comic songs in the distance.By-and-by he came in carrying a board taller than himself. 'Please yourMajesty, I'll be as mute as a mole; but I must do this here, for Mrs.Pettigrew is baking.''What in the name of wonder have you got there?' asked Felix, asLance proceeded to lay his board on the sofa (his day--and Felix'snight--bed) and place on it a white and soppy mass.'A little dab out, as Sibby calls it,' said Lance. 'It's my puggery.Ever since it fell overboard it has been a disgrace to human nature, soI have been washing it, and now I've got an iron heating.''What a mess you will make of it!' observed Felix, with a grimace ofdisgust, as Lance returned again from the kitchen, holding the ironscientifically near his cheek.'That's all you know about it! Why, I've ironed dozens ofpocket-handkerchiefs--at least, not dozens, but my own, dozens oftimes--in the Harewood tubs.''I thought the Chapter washed you?''So it does, in reason; but last spring there was a doom on mypocket-handkerchiefs. The Harewood puppy ate up one; one dropped intothe canal; I tied up a fellow that had got a cut with one, and thebeggar never returned it; and two or three more went I don't know how.I knew W. W. would be in a dreadful state if I asked for a fresh lot,so I used to wash out the last two by turns, till I got some tip andbought some fresh ones--such jolly ones, all over acrobats and Britishflags; and after all, didn't I catch it? Wilmet was no end of disgustedto miss her little stupid speckotty ones, vowed these weren't decentfor the Cathedral, and boned them all for Theodore! Now, hush! or Ishall come to grief!'Felix held his pen suspended to watch the dexterity that reduced thecrude mass to smooth muslin, which in its expanded state looked asimpracticable as before.'Now, do you mean to get Mrs. Pettigrew to put it on in those elegantfestoons?''You just mind your leader, Blunderbore! A man who has had women to dofor him all his life is a pitiable being!'And Lance, according to instructions obtained from John Harewood,wreathed his hat triumphantly in the white drapery, and completedFelix's surprise and amusement by producing a needle and thread, andsetting to work on various needful repairs of his own buttons and hisbrother's, over which he shook his head in amusement as he chuckled atthe decay which had befallen the garments of so neat a personage asFelix, and which had been very distressing to himself.'Ah! thank you. I never knew what Robinson Crusoe felt like before!'said Felix, as Lance came on a wrist-band minus button.'Robinson Crusoe! You'd soon have been like Man Friday before he caughthim.''But doesn't the matron mend for you?''She pretends; but I should like to see her face if one brought hera chance thing to do. My eyes! if that isn't old Staples! I mustabsquattilate.'Which after all he had no time to effect, with all his works, beforetheir friend came to ask whether they were relieved about their sister,and was amused at the handy little schoolboy's ingenious preparations.'After all, I find it is to be more of an affair than I expected; Ithought it was to be only ourselves and the Brandons, but they are thekind of people who always pick up every one.''Does that yacht belong here?' eagerly asked Lance.'That! It is the Kittiwake--Captain Audley's.''Ha! That's what Fulbert went to Alexandria in! What fun!''He is the son of Sir Robert Audley. Do you know him?''His brother was my father's fellow-curate,' said Felix, 'and is ourguardian and kindest friend. I have seen this one in London. Will he beat this pic-nic?''Not likely. He is shy and uncertain, very hearty and friendly whenyou do meet him, but reluctant to go into society, and often takingno notice one day, when he has seemed like one's best friend the daybefore. They say he has never got over the loss of his wife; but Idon't like such manners.''Does he live here, then?''He rents the little Tudor cottage under the cliff year by year, forthe sake of his yachting--for he won't go near the regular stations.He's got his boy at school at Stoneborough, and stays here all thewinter.'When the brothers were walking part of the way back with their visitor,they met the gentleman in question, with three boys after him, andhe was evidently in a cordial mood; for after shaking hands with Mr.Staples, he exclaimed, 'I am sure I ought to know you!''Felix Underwood,' said the owner of that name.'Indeed! Not staying with your worthy relations?''No, I am down here with my brother, who has been laid up by asun-stroke, and wanted sea air.''I wish I had been at home' said the Captain, who had taken a greatfancy to Felix when they had been together in London two yearsbefore; 'but I've been giving my boy and his cousins, the two youngSomervilles, a trip to the Hebrides; and now, just as I am come home, Ifall upon Mrs. Brandon, hounding me out to an abominable pic-nic, andmy youngsters are wild to go. Are you in for it? I believe we shall goround to the cove in the yacht. Can I take you two?'Felix gladly accepted, aware that their transport was a difficultyto the Stapleses, and that the Kittiwake would be felicity to Lance,who had fraternized with the boys, and went off with them to see thevessel. He returned brimful of delight and fatigue, only just in timeto tumble into bed as fast as possible, and Felix was thus able to gethis work off his mind by midnight.The morning's letters set them quite at rest. Sister Constance andClement both wrote: Geraldine had been calm and resolute from thetime Felix's consent arrived, and doubt was over; and Clement, thoughtender, and striving hard to be firm, had been chiefly useful incalling out her words of encouragement. He had spent the time of theoperation in the oratory, and there had been so entirely overcome bythe tidings that all was safely over, that he was hardly fit to go toCherry when he was sent for; and that was not soon, for the effect ofchloroform on her had indeed been to annihilate pain, but only halfto make her unconscious, for she went on talking to Felix about theexpedience all the time, ever repeating the old motto, 'Under Wode,Under Rode;' and the trance had lasted for a good while, though whenonce over, she remembered nothing of it, and was only so rejoiced andthankful, that it was difficult to keep her calm enough. She sent herbrothers her love, and entreated them not to say a word at home. LadyLiddesdale had contrived the sale of the book of illustrations--a workthat had been Cherry's delight of many years; so that she could feelthat she herself had earned what would cover the expense incurred, allbut the medical attendance, freely given to an inmate of St. Faith's.'Tell Felix I am as happy as a queen,' was the final message; 'tell himto give thanks for me.'Felix's voice trembled, shook, and gave way, as he read; and at last hesprang up, and walked about the room, saying that no one ever had suchbrothers and sisters as himself. There was something almost oppressivein the relief from so much anxiety, and it was some time before heroused his ordinary senses to say, 'Well! we must finish breakfast, orwe shan't be ready for the Captain. How round the world is! Those boysmust be Sister Constance's nephews--Lady Liddesdale's sons.''Those boys,' said Lance. 'What, Sum and Frank? Well, I did think itqueer that the sailors on board the Kittiwake called every one My Lord.''Sum, I imagine, must mean Lord Somerville. What did you think of them?''Nicish chaps of eleven and twelve. Nothing like such swells as TomBruce! The little one wanted to know where I was at school, and hissenior snubbed him; so I supposed he saw by the looks of me that Iwasn't upper-crust public school; and when I said I was a choir-boy,the other--Charlie Audley--said, "Oh, then you're one of the awful lotmy father always jaws about when he's out of sorts!" I told him I wasvery sorry, and it wasn't my fault, but yours; and then we got on likea house on fire.'CHAPTER XXI.A KETTLE OF FISH.'Our Pursuivant at arms will showBoth why we came and when we go.'Scott.The place of the pic-nic was a good way off, being the point of thepromontory that shut in the mouth of the river, a great crag, witha long reef of rocks running out into the sea, playfully called theKitten's Tail; though the antiquarians always deposed that the headhad nothing to do with cats or kits, but with the disposition to erectchapels to St. Christopher on the points of land where they might firstgreet the mariners' eyes. Beneath this crag, sheltered by the firstand larger joints of the Kitten's Tail, was a delightful sandy nook,where appeared a multitude of smart hats, male and female, a great manystrangers even to Captain Audley, who would fain have recognised noneof them. In a strong access of his almost morbid silence, he devotedhimself to Felix, and kept aloof from almost every one. Even at thedinner, spread on a very sloping bit of beach, pic-nic exigenciesenabled him to be nearly tte--tte with Felix, who found himselfalmost back to back to a lady in a brilliant foreign pheasant's plume,with glass dew-drops at the points.In a pause of their own conversation, they heard the inquiry, 'Do youknow who that boy is--that fair delicate-looking lad just opposite,with the white muslin round his hat?''Oh--that!' answered the pheasant lady; 'that is young Lord Somerville,son to the Marquess of Liddesdale. He and his brother, Lord Francis,have been out yachting with Captain Audley.'The Captain smiled as he looked at the boys. 'Ay,' he observed, with aflash of his bright dark eyes,' he has the advantage over Sum.'For Lance had resumed his lark-like air, and it was perhaps the morestriking from the fragility and transparency that remained about hislooks; and he was full of animation, as he, with a reinforcement ofboys, clustered round a merry sunny-faced girl, full of joyous drollery.'Very queer and eccentric--quite a bear,' was the next thing theyheard; whereat Captain Audley nodded and smiled to Felix. After thegeneral turmoil caused by the change of courses had subsided, thatpenetrating voice was heard again. 'Yes, we came home sooner than wehad intended. The fact was, we found that old Mr. Underwood was beingbeset by some of those relations. You remember? Oh, yes; they have sunkvery low--got into trade, absolutely got into trade! One of them a merecommon singing-boy. Mr. Underwood is getting aged--quite past--and wedid not know what advantage might be taken of him.''Your turn now,' murmured Captain Audley, with a look of diversioncalculated to allay the wounded flush on his neighbour's cheek.'Do you mean Mr. Edward Underwood's sons?' said a voice on the otherside. 'I always understood them to be very respectable and wellconducted.''Oh, very likely! Only I do happen to know that one of them has beena great trouble and vexation to Tom Underwood; and we didn't want thesame over again with the poor old Squire.''Did I understand you that any of them were here?' added the othervoice; 'for I had just been struck by the likeness of that boyopposite, talking to my sister, to poor Mr. Edward Underwood, as Iremember him.''Oh no, Mrs. Rivers; I assure you that's young Lord Somerville!'Captain Audley made an effort, rather difficult in his Turkishposition, to crane his head beyond the interposing figures, recognisedand bowed to the speaker, who greeted him by name, and thus diminishedthe flow of Mrs. Fulbert Underwood's conversation by her awe of thehigh and mighty bear whom she scarcely knew by sight. He had no tastefor scenes, and did not put either her or Felix to pain by mentioninghis name; but when the last act of the meal was over, and people beganto move, he made his way in the direction of the inquiring voice. 'Mrs.Rivers, let me introduce Mr. Felix Underwood.''I am very happy--' and there was a cordial smile and a hand held out.'Are you here for long? My father would be so much pleased to see you.'It was a rather worn pale face; but the ease and sweetness of manner,and the perfect fitness of the dress, made a whole that gave Felix asense of the most perfect lady he had met with, except his mother andSister Constance.'I am at Ewmouth, with one of my brothers who has been ill.''Lord Somerville?' and all three burst out laughing. 'My sister hasfound him out, I see. She and your little boy are old friends, CaptainAudley.''Yes, you have been very kind to him. But I am as much surprised to seeyou here as you can be to see my friend. Are you from home?''We go back this evening. We slept at the Crewes' last night. Myhusband had business there; and when they asked us to this pic-nic,it was a good opportunity for Gertrude to learn the beauties of hercounty.''Which she seems to be doing under full escort,' laughed CaptainAudley, as the young lady and the young boy flock were seen descendingto the rocks.'She has a strong taste for little boys,' said the elder sister. 'Youhave the Somerville boys here, haven't you, though?''Yes; there had been scarlatina or something or other in their school,and their mother was afraid of them among their sisters, till I hadpurified them by a sea voyage.'Probably Mrs. Fulbert never found out her mistake; for Lord Somervillereported that he had never been so pitched into in his life as by anold girl in a 'stunning tile,' who found him washing out an emptypie-dish for the benefit of some maritime monsters that he wanted tocarry home to his sisters; but that when Lance came up, she was as meekas a mouse. Certainly, the two boys were little sturdy fellows, burntlobster-like up to the roots of their bleached and rough hair; andtheir costumes were more adapted to the deck of the Kittiwake in allweathers, than to genteel society. Their sisters were in an aquariumfever, and their sport all through their expedition had been researchesfor what they had learnt in Scotland to call 'beasts;' and now thecollection was to be completed from the mouth of the Ewe, and thescrambling and tumbling it involved were enchanting.Kate Staples, who usually considered Lance her charge, was not sorryto see a croquet player disposed of among his own congeners; for thegame seemed such a necessary of life, that it was actually prepared foron the sands, to the extreme contempt of the anemone hunters. 'Play atcroquet, forsooth, when rocks aren't to be had to scramble on everyday!' And scramble ecstatically they did, up and over slippery stoneand rock festooned with olive weed, peeping into pools of crystalclearness, and admiring rosy fans of weed, and jewel-like actiniasembellished by the magic beauty of intense clear brightness. The boystook off shoes and stockings, turned up trousers, and scrambled andpaddled like creatures to the manner born.'O dear! I wish I might!' sighed the young lady.'Why don't you?' said Charlie Audley. 'Kate and Em and Annie alwaysdo--don't they, Frank?''Of course they do, or how would they ever get on!''Come along then, Miss Gertrude,' said Charlie. 'You can't think howjolly it is!'And soon another pair of little white feet were dancing on the rocks.'Oh dear! what a blunder of civilisation it is to wear shoes at all!How delicious a hold one gets!''I can't think why people do wear them! They never are anything but abother,' said Lance.'To play at foot-ball with,' suggested Somerville from the top of arock.'But women don't,' said Gertrude.'I think women do it, and make us, that they may have something toworrit about,' said Frank. 'Damp stockings are the bother of creationtill one goes to school; and then, isn't it jolly!''Except the chilblains,' called out Charlie.'I believe,' said Lance, 'chilblains come of shoes.''No, they can't,' argued Charlie, 'for one has them on one's hands.''Well,' said Gertrude, 'let's form ourselves into a society for thesuppression of shoes and stockings!''Hurrah!' cried Lance. 'I know one person at least that it would be ablessing to.'The question was, how the five bold reformers were to begin. Franksuggested drowning all the present stock, and pretended to be about tobegin, but was of course prevented by a scream.'Public opinion must be prepared first,' said Lance.'And that,' said Gertrude, 'we'd better do by a great example! Here,we'll show what can be done. Why shouldn't we get out to the end of theKitten's Tail?''One can't to the end,' said Charlie; 'there's a place big enough for agig to go through, half way out.''And about the tide?' said Lance.'Tide,' said Charlie, looking at his watch--'tide wouldn't think ofplaying us such a dirty trick as turning for an hour and a half.''And the jolliest beasts of all always live in places like that,' addedSomerville. 'Come on, President of the Society for the Suppression ofShoeses--to the front!'On moved the august Society, now scrambling to a dry flat, nowthreading a mauvais pas, clinging to festoons of sea-weed; the threelittle boys climbed like monkeys or sailors; but Lance, agile as hewas, had not had the same amount of training, and felt besides that itwas requisite to be ready to give a helping hand to Miss Gertrude. Shegot on very well, being full of lightness and springiness, only she wasa little inclined to be adventurous, and to chatter at critical moments.'We must have got out a quarter of a mile.''Oh no, not that!''No? I'm sure it is! How small they look on the beach! I wonder if theycan see us! Hark! they're singing--''"Drink to me only with thine eyes;" that's Felix's crack glee,' saidLance; 'what fun for him!''This is much better fun!' cried the general voice. 'They'll never seeus if we wave now!''No, no; don't let's wave now! Wait till we get to the farthest point.''And there we'll plant our ensign!''What shall we do for a flag? We haven't got the Britisher here!''No; it must be the flag of the SSSS's.''That ought to be a bit of bare skin.''No, no--a pair of feet--motto, "Off, vile lendings!"''I say, I don't think you can get any farther,' interposed Somerville.'I've been on four rocks farther, and I'm sure you will never get backagain if you go on.''Oh, that's base! I'm sure this one isn't so hard.'She was creeping along a ledge, holding the sea-weed with one hand andLance by the other.'I really don't think it passable,' he said; 'there's scarcely thewidth of one's foot beyond.''Hurrah!' shouted Frank. 'Here's the father of all the Daisianas!''Oh! oh! he's my cousin. I must see him!' cried Gertrude, with ascramble and a laugh, which ended in a sudden slip--luckily, not intothe open sea, but into a very steep-sided bath-like pool; and Lance,whom of course she gripped hard, was pulled after her, both over headand ears; and though they scrambled on their feet in a moment, therethey stood up to their shoulders in water.'Get the Daisiana now you are there!' shouted Frank.'How are we ever to get out?' said Gertrude, looking up the walls, sixfeet at least on the lowest side.'If we had a rope,' said Charlie.'Make signals--call,' said Somerville, all suiting the action to theword. 'No, they don't hear! they are all singing away. You, Franky,you're too little to be any good, make the best of your way to callsomebody.''The tide will come in!' said Frank. 'Mamma and Aunt Emmie were onceshut in by the tide, and Uncle Edwin. And there was a fellow who wasquite drowned--dead--and that was why I was named Francis.''That's what you may call a cheering reminiscence at a happy moment,'said Lance, recollecting that he was far more nearly a man than any onepresent, and instinctively feeling the need of brightening all intocheerful activity, for the girl looked thoroughly frightened. 'Yes,Lord Frank, the best thing you can do is to go for somebody; but we'llbe out long first. Can't we make a rope? Have you a sash or anything,Miss Gertrude? Don't fear, we'll soon be out.'Happily she had both a sash and a broad ribbon round her hat; and Lancetore off his puggery.'I can do it best,' called Charlie. 'I know all the sailors' knots.''It will never bear,' said Gertrude.'Oh yes, it will. You'll not trust your whole weight to it. Is it done?''Besides, how can they draw me up?''We'd best get behind that rock, Sum,' suggested Charlie, 'then shewon't pull us in.'Charlie's sailor experience was very useful; and he shouted advice toLance, who was tying the extemporary rope round Gertrude, not veryeasily, owing to the material, and to its being done under water.'Now, then, you do your best at climbing--here,' he said. 'They'll pullyou; and look! There, first my knee--yes--now my shoulder--now--' Andstanding for a moment on his shoulder, Gertrude was really able with adesperate grapple to surmount the wall of her prison, and scramble outbeside the two cousins, whose pulls had been very helpful.Lance's clambering was a harder matter, for he did not venture to trustmuch to the rope, though the girl's strength was added to that of thetwo boys; and it was a severe climb up the scarcely indented, slippery,moist, slimy rock, where his hands and feet could hardly find any hold;and when at length he reached the top, he was so panting and dizzy,that Somerville at first held him to hinder his slipping backward intothe sea. No one could get at King or Queen Daisiana, so it was leftin its glory; while the young people struggled back over rocks thatseemed much steeper, and pools far deeper, than in their advance; Lancestill trying to be helpful, but with a mazed sense of the same sort ofdesperate effort with which he had run back with Bill's verses; for notonly had his small strength been overtaxed, but the immersion in waterwas affecting his head.Lord Francis had made much quicker progress; and boy as he was,showed his breeding by not rushing open-mouthed on the party with hisintelligence, but seeking the Captain, who was smoking the pipe ofsolitude upon a rock apart. He at once sent Frank to the servants, whowere enjoying the relics of the feast, to fetch some wine, and tellthe boat's crew to make ready at once, and then went off himself toseek Mrs. Rivers. Felix, who had spied the little messenger speedingup to the Captain, was already on his way to the rocks, and reachedthe party in good time; for draggled, drenched, and with clinginggarments, they were so slow in getting on, that it was no delusionthat the water was higher, and the rocks lower; and even Gertrude hadneither breath nor spirits to gabble when that grave anxious face mether, and a strong careful hand lifted and helped, first her, thenLance, up and down every difficulty; and when she perceived how thenew-comer avoided point-blank looking at the bare ankles that hadsometimes to make long stretches, a burning red came up into her face,half of shame, half of indignation at being made ashamed. And afterall, when the place where her hose and shoon had been left was reached,the niched shelf in the rock turned out to have been surrounded by thetide, so that they were quite unattainable either by herself or thelittle boys; and Felix, putting the arm by which Lance had held byhim over Somerville's shoulder told them to go on before, and himselfmade two long strides and a scramble before he could reach the bootsand stockings, and give them to the young lady, unable to help lookingnearly as grave and vexed as if it had been Angela herself; indeed, hewas vexed, for he had an ideal of the young ladyhood of his mother'sold native region, and did not like it to be disturbed. He moved awayfar enough for her to think he had left her to her fate, till she wason her feet and coming on, and then there he was again, in a momentthe attentive squire. Revived by her short rest, and on less perilousground, she glanced at his face in readiness to disperse her discomfortwith something saucy, but somehow it would not do; and she was tamelyconducted to terra firma, where her sister saluted her with 'O Daisy!what a child you are to have charge of!'That restored her enough to answer, 'I'm quite delighted somethingshould have happened under your keeping! No harm done. Salt water nevergives cold.''I don't mind it for you,' said the elder sister; 'you have not beenill.--But indeed, Mr. Underwood, I am very sorry,' she added. 'Whatwill be best for your brother?''Here!' said Captain Audley, taking from Frank a flask of sherry, andover-ruling the objection made by the brothers that stimulants wereforbidden. He further insisted on taking Lance at once to his own berthon board the yacht while Mrs. Rivers meant to conduct her sister to thepreventive house.'So,' said Lance, rather ruefully, as he shook hands, 'there ends theSSSS.''Not at all! Its use is proved. We should have been cooked by this timein the Daisiana cauldron, if we had had great cumbrous boots on.'It was a valiant effort, and she cast a glance out of the corner ofher eye at the elder brother, but it had not relaxed a muscle of hisgrave anxious face, which was in truth chiefly bent on watching Lance'sinvoluntary shiverings; and she again turned crimson, perhaps from hershare of the chill, and was dragged off, muttering, 'What intolerablefolks guardian brothers are! Henry Ward was a mild specimen compared tothis one!'About noon on the following day, Mrs. Pettigrew's little girl abruptlyopened the parlour door, and with 'Please, ye're wanted,' turned in atall, thin, grey-haired, spectacled gentleman, who, as Lance started upfrom the sofa, exclaimed, 'Don't disturb yourself; I came to thank you,and inquire after you after the adventure my mad-cap daughter led youinto.''I hope she is all right,' said Lance, solicitously.'As right as Daisiana himself; more so than I fear you are. Let me seeyou comfortable. Lie down again, pray.''Oh, I don't care about lying down, thank you, Sir; I only sleep forwant of something to do;' but though he did not put his feet up, he wasfeeling far too languid not to relax his bolt-upright attitude, andlean back on his pillows.'That will do. Bad head-ache?''It is nearly gone off now, thank you, Sir; it was bad all night, butit is much better since I have been asleep.''Let me see,' laying his left hand on the wrist that hung over the edgeof the sofa. 'Ay, I hope that wicked little siren has done no greatdamage. Pulled you below, true mermaid fashion--eh?''I meant to have pulled her out.''Instead of which she made a lad into a ladder to climb out on.' Whichbad pun served the purpose of making the boy laugh enough to be athis ease. 'She is much indebted, and so am I. I like to meet an oldfriend's son. Are you alone?''My brother is only gone to the post-office. He will be in before long;but it saves a post to take the letters before twelve, and he ought tobe out as much as he can.''Is he here on his own account, or yours?''He came down first, before I was ill. It was bother and overwork anda cough. Everything always does come to worry him, whenever he oughtto have rest or pleasure.' And Lance, who was thoroughly weary anddispirited, was nearly ready to cry.'Even when he goes out for a pic-nic, young ladies must needs drownthemselves!'This made Lance smile; but he added, with a quivering lip, 'He wouldnot go to bed till I could go to sleep last night, and that was nottill past two, and he looks quite done up this morning.''Is any one attending you?''Dr. Manby did at Minsterham--nobody here.''What's been amiss with you--fever?''Plenty of fever, but it was from sun-stroke.''Ah! you boys have thinner skulls than we used to have! How long ago?''Seven weeks yesterday,' said Lance, wearily.'And you are sadly weary of weakness?''I don't mind that so much;' and the kindness of face, voice, andgesture, made the poor boy's eyes overflow; 'but I'm no good, and Ican't tell whether I ever shall be again!''It is a great deal too soon to trouble yourself about that.''That's what they all tell me!' cried Lance, impatiently, and the tearsrushed forth again. 'Manby only laughs, and tells me I shall be a Solonyet if I don't vex myself; and how can I tell whether he means it?''Well, dear boy, have it all out; I promise to mean whatever I say.''You are a doctor then, Sir?''What! the boy doesn't know me, as sure as my name's Dick May!''Oh!' cried Lance, 'that was what I heard Felix saying to CaptainAudley--that he did so wish Dr. May could look at me!''That's all right, then. Come, then, what is weighing on you--weakness?''Just not weakness,' said Lance. 'I didn't care so much when I couldscarcely get about; but now I can walk any distance, and still I havenot a bit more sense!''Is your memory gone?''I don't think so; only, if I fix my mind to recollect, and it doesn'tcome by chance, I'm all abroad, and perfectly senseless and idiotic!''And it brings on pain?''Yes, if I try five minutes together.''You don't try to read or write?''I can't--and--' then came the tears again--'music is just like red-hothammers to me.' There was a great fight with sobs, rather puzzling toone who did not know what music was to the chorister. 'And what is tobe the end of it?''That rest and patience will make you as well as ever.''Do you really think so? But, Sir, I have a little brother seven and ahalf years old, with no understanding at all--not able to speak; and ifthere were two of us on Felix's hands like that! If I could only beput away somewhere, so that Felix should not have the burthen of me!''My poor little fellow! Is this what is preying on you all this time?''Not always--only when I am doing nothing, and that is most times,' hesaid, dejectedly; but the Doctor smiled.'Then you may take the very anxiety as a proof that your brain isrecovering. You cannot expect to shake off the effects quickly; but ifyou are only patient with yourself, you will do perfectly well. Are youa son of the clergy?''No, I am a chorister at Minsterham. I have another year there, when Ican go back, if ever--''Don't say if ever! You will, if you only will keep from fretting andhurrying, and will accept that beautiful motto of the Underwoods.'Lance smiled responsively, and said more cheerfully, 'You are quitesure, Sir?''As sure as any man can be, that there is no reason to anticipate whatyou dread. It is quite possible that you may be more or less liableto bad head-aches, and find it needful to avoid exposure to summersunshine; but I should think you as likely to do your work in the worldas any one I ever saw.'The light on Lance's face did not wholly spring from this reply. With'There's Felix!' he had bounded out of the room the next moment, andhis incautious voice could be heard through the window--'Fee, Fee,here's her father! that brick of a Miss Gertrude's, I mean. He'sas jolly as he ought to be, and knew all our people. But just--Isay--how's Cherry?''All well; here's a note from the dear little thing herself,' saidFelix; and in another moment, with his bag strapped over his shoulder,he had brought the bright sedateness of his face into the littleparlour. 'Dr. May! how very kind in you!''Not kindness, but common propriety, to come and see how much mischiefmy naughty child had done.''I don't think there's any real mischief,' said the elder brother,looking at the much-refreshed face.'I think not, and so am free to be glad of the catastrophe that hasbrought me in the way of an old friend. Yes, I may say so, for I musthave known you!''Yes,' said Felix, 'we used to watch for you when you came to my uncle.You always had some fun with us.''I remember a pair of twins, who were an irresistible attraction. Ihope they have grown up accordingly. You look as if you ought to havepretty sisters.'Felix laughed, and said the twins were reckoned as very pretty.'How many of you are there--was it not thirteen? Did not those boys getthe clergy-orphan?''One did, thank you. He is on a farm in Australia now, and I amthinking whether to try for little Bernard; but I am afraid his casewould be a stale one, being of seven years' standing.''If you want it done, my daughter, Mrs. Rivers, is a dragon ofdiplomacy in canvassing; but why not send him to Stoneborough? Cheviottakes a selection of cleric's sons at 30, and we would have an eye tohim.''Thank you, if we can only manage it; but I must see what my sistersays--our financier.''One of those little apple-blossom twins? Let me look at you. Do youmean to tell me that this fellow has been the whole stand-by of thatlong family these seven years?' he added, turning to Lance.'To be sure he has!' cried Lance, eagerly.'Lance!' said Felix, rather indignantly. 'You forget Wilmet. And ThomasUnderwood entirely educated two of us.''And,' said the Doctor, looking oddly but searchingly from one to theother, 'you've been the bundle of sticks in the fable. Never gonetogether by the ears? Ah!' as both brothers burst out laughing at thequestion, 'I'd not have asked if I had not seen how you could answer.I've seen what makes me so afraid of brothers in authority that it doesme good to look at you two.'Felix looked up. The Stoneborough murder case was about two years old,and of course he had to study and condense the details, and had come onthe names of Dr. May and his son in the evidence.The further words met his sudden conjecture. 'Ay, boys, you little knowwhat you may be spared by home peace and confidence! Well, and what mayyou be doing, Felix? Your bag looks as if you had turned postman to thedistrict.''There's my chief business, Sir, coupled with bookselling andstationery,' said Felix, as he pushed across a copy of the Pursuivantthat lay on the table. 'I have been well paid from the first, and am inpartnership now, so we have got along very well.''Ay, ay! Very good trade, I should think? You must send me your paper,Felix; I want one I can trust to lie about the house.''You will find it very stupid and local, Sir.'It was curious how what from Mr. Staples was answered with an effort,seemed from Dr. May to draw out confidence. One point was, that Mr.Staples never seemed sure how to treat him, and often betrayed a fearof hurting his feelings; while with Dr. May he was himself and nothingelse. The Doctor stayed to share their dinner, such as it was inconsideration of their being lodgers as didn't give trouble--i.e.some plain boiled fish, fresh indeed, but of queer name and quality,and without sauce, and some steak not distantly related to an old shoe;but both seemed to think so little about it, that the Doctor, who wasalways mourning over the daintiness of the present day, approved themall the more.Just as they had finished, Captain Audley came in with his boys, ontheir way to start off the Somervilles by the train, and it was agreedthat when he took his son back to school at Stoneborough, Felix andLance should come with him and spend the day.And a pleasant day it was, as pleasant as the unsettled wanderings ofa long day in a strange place could be, and memorable for one curiousfact--namely, that for the first time in her life Gertrude May was shy!Not with Lance. She had a good deal of pastime with him in the coolgarden, while Felix was being walked over the school-yards in thesun; and they were excellent friends, though Ethel certainly had acertain repugnance to the discovery of how big a boy it was with whomGertrude had danced bare-footed on the rocks. Of course Ethel was thekindly mistress of the house as usual, but she was worn and strainedin spirits just then, and disinclined to exert herself beyond theneedful welcome to her father's guests. So she let them all go out,and went on with her own occupations, thinking that it was well thatDaisy should take her part in entertaining guests, since 'that boy' wasevidently a thorough little gentleman; and then shrinking a little asshe heard their voices over Aubrey's museum, including the Coombe Holecuriosities.No, it was not towards Lance that Daisy was shy; but when all satround the dinner-table, she was unusually silent, and listened tothe conversation far more than was her wont, though it was chieflypolitical. When Felix spoke to her, she absolutely coloured rosy redand faltered, unable to conquer the shamefacedness that their encounterhad left her; and when the party had taken leave, and she was standingin the twilight, Ethel, to her great surprise, found the child quietlycrying.'Nothing!' she said, angry at being detected.'It can't be nothing.''Yes, it is. Only I do so hate--hate myself for being a tom-boy!''One often does go on with that a little too long; and then comes thehorrible feel.''And that it should have happened with him of all people in the world!''Ah, Daisy, I wish I had come out with you!''Fudge, Ethel! Not to-day. Do you think I care about that boy? I shouldthink not! But--but--I wanted to think him a nasty prig, but I can't!''Who?''Why, that eldest brother. When he found me scrambling about withmy stockings off, he didn't speak, but he looked, as Richard might,surprised and sorry. I thought it was impertinent--at least I wantedto, but-- And now he'll always think me--nasty!''My dear, if one must have a lesson of that kind, it is as well itshould be from some one that one is never likely to see or hear ofagain.''Oh! but not from the very best and noblest of people one ever willhear of. Yes, Ethel, I'm not gone mad! That boy has been telling meall about his brother; and indeed I never did hear or know about anyone who was a real hero in a quiet way! No; whenever I hear of a hero,I shall think of Mr. Underwood. And, oh dear, that I should have madesuch a goose of myself!'It was quite unaffected--a spark of real reverence had lighted at laston Gertrude's mind. 'To turn tradesman for the sake of one's brothersand sisters, that I do call heroic!' she said; and maintained hiscause, even to putting down F.U. as her 'favourite hero' in lists oflikes and dislikes.But there was no great chance of Gertrude again encountering her hero;for the morning after their day at Stoneborough, Lance was beginningto experiment on his powers by skimming newspapers, especially thePursuivant, because he knew it before, all but the last local items,that could only be added at the moment of going to press. Suddenly hebroke out, 'Holloa! you never told me this! Mowbray Smith has put hisfoot in it this time.''What?' said Felix, pausing in the act of opening an envelope from Mr.Froggatt.'Pocketing the coal and school money--ay, and the alms.''Eh? Impossible! Let me look.''There. A letter signed "Scrutator." There's a great deal more thanI can read, all about under-paid curates and sycophants. My Lady iscatching it, I should say! It must be true, or Froggy would not haveput it in.''He never admitted that!' said Felix, tearing open his letter. 'He isin utter dismay, asks whether I could have seen the thing, tells me totelegraph yes or no, that he may know whether to speak to Redstone.What's this about tribute to my father?''Here! "Once it was deemed well that the ecclesiastical staff should beby birth and character, if not by pecuniary fortune, above suspicion;but the universal application of the general screw system has warnedoff all who had a predilection for an unfettered tongue, and we allknow what hands accompany one in chains."''Libellous!' cried Felix, running his eye over the article. 'It looksas if it had strayed out of the Dearport Hermes. I'd not have had thishappen for ten thousand pounds! Clap-trap about fat rectors and starvedcurates! Jackman's writing, I'd lay any wager!''You don't think he did it?''Smith? Muddled his accounts! Nothing more likely; charges like thisare not got up without some grounds of some sort; but as to intentionalfraud, that's utter nonsense. Well, I'm off to the station, and I hopein half an hour's time Master Redstone will be quaking.'Ten days of the holiday still remained; and Captain Audley, with boatand yacht, greatly added to its pleasures, which both brothers wereable thoroughly to enjoy, living almost entirely out of doors, andvaluing each hour as they became fewer.This matter, however, made Felix very uneasy. He wrote to the curate,offering all the amends in his power, and undertaking that if Mr. Smithwould send him an explanatory letter, he would back it up with a strongleading-article; and he waited anxiously for further intelligence.Mr. Froggatt's letter came first. Redstone, fond of dabbling ineditorship, had taken reproof in great dudgeon, affecting greatsurprise at being blamed for inserting a letter from a respectablegentleman without submitting it to Mr. Froggatt, who had entirelydropped the editorship, or delaying it to another issue by sendingit to Ewmouth. The respectable gentleman was young Jackman, who wasno doubt delighted to have such a firebrand to cast. It was a greatgrief and annoyance to Mr. Froggatt, who had always steered clear ofpersonalities, and been inoffensive if sometimes dull; and both assaultand defence were distressing to him--i.e. if defence were possible,for he seemed doubtful whether silence would not lead to the leastscandal. Even Wilmet wrote: 'Every one seems to think Mr. Smith is toblame; and he is so huffy, that it looks only too much as if he wereafraid of inquiry.'This was too true a character of his replies. That intended for thepaper had not a line of real defence, but was a mere tirade on thedignity of his office, and the impudence of the charges. Felix dashedit away, enraged at its useless folly; nor was the private one moresatisfactory. It was but a half acceptance of Felix's total disclaimer;and the resentful wording made it difficult to discern whether theimputation were bon fide, regarded as not worth refuting, or whetherindignation were made an excuse for denial instead of proof. A separatesheet seemed to have been added. 'The whole is to be subjected tothe scrutiny of a parish meeting on Tuesday, when, though the minuteaccuracy of a professional accountant is not to be expected of onewhose province is not to serve tables, it will be evident that onlymalignity to the Church could have devised the attack to which yourpaper has given currency.''Well,' broke out Lance, as Felix with a voice of ineffable disgustread the final sentence, 'if that is not being a knave, it is very likea long-eared animal!''I'll tell you what, Lance, they'll take him between their teeth, andworry him till there's not an inch left whole of him. Jackman and hispack will tear him down; and even Bruce and Jones, and our own good oldFroggy, will give him up when they see his books won't balance.''Serve him right!' cried Lance. 'What fun to see his airs taken down,when he's served with the sauce he's so fond of for other people! Ionly wish they'd got my Lady too!''I must go home, that's all,' said Felix. 'If I got there on Wednesday,I might see if I could not get his accounts into presentable order.''What?''If I don't, I am afraid no one else will.''He will not let you.''I think I can make him.''But such a cur as he has always been to you!''I don't think he will object now. I know he can't do the thinghimself; and if little Bisset could, depend upon it his mother wouldnot let him stir a finger for fear of being implicated. Now I do knowthe ways of those accounts. I've done them with my father and with Mr.Audley. Any way, I must be at home for the meeting. Imagine Redstonereporting it! But you can stay out the week, and come home in theyacht.'For Captain Audley had promised to take the brothers round to Dearport;but Lance could not bear to be left behind; and it ended in theirwalking up to the Tudor cottage to make their excuses, when thegood-natured captain declared that he could put to sea that very nightand land them at Dearport in good time.So after a hurried grateful farewell to the Staples family, the holidayclosed with a voyage that both were able to enjoy to the utmost beforethey sailed into the harbour at Dearport, and walked up to St. Faith's.Captain Audley, who had not seen Sister Constance since her husband'sdeath, had an access of shyness and would not encounter the 'LadyAbbess,' as he called her; but his last words to Felix were a promisethat if Bernard went to Stoneborough, he would have him out now andthen for a holiday with his own boy.There had been time to send notice to Geraldine, and her brothers hadhoped to have taken her home with them; but though she looked clear andbright, she was not out of the doctor's hands, and was under orders tostay another week. The sight of her brothers made her very homesick,in spite of being the spoilt child of the Sisterhood, in the pleasantmatted room, with its sea view, its prints, and photographs; but thenshe wanted to have her way prepared with Wilmet. Her vision had beento walk in imposingly, and take them all by surprise; but that notionhad vanished as the time drew nearer, and she found that her new artrequired practice, while the dread of making a sensation grew upon her.She was ashamed of having even thought of compensating for Wilmet'sabsence, and entreated Felix to communicate the fact, without a word ofthe presumption that had nerved her courage.The three looked over one another, as if each had undergone much sincethe last meeting; but the sight of Felix greatly relieved Cherry. Hewas sunburnt and vigorous, and his voice had resumed its depth of quietcontent, instead of having that unconsciously weary sound of patienceand exertion that had often gone to her heart. Lance, whom she had notseen since Easter, had assumed a look of rapid growth; his features hadlost their childish form, and were disproportionate; and his complexionstill had the fitful colouring of convalescence; but his eyes weredancing, and his talk ecstatic as to Vale Leston and the Kittiwake,where he was ready, at that moment, to become a cabin-boy.'O Cherry! Cherry! you never dreamt of anything so delicious as thatnight's fishing!''That, I will answer for, she never did,' said Felix. 'When I saw theexquisite delight it afforded, not only to this Lance but to CaptainAudley, to fill the boat with slimy, flapping, uncomfortable, dyingfishes, I felt that I was never made for a gentleman.''Do you mean that you didn't like it?' exclaimed Lance, turning roundaghast.'I should have been much happier balancing the books.''And he wasn't even sick!' said Lance, holding up his hands.'He hadn't that excuse,' laughed Cherry. 'However, midnight fishing isnot indispensable! I should like to have seen how he looked at ValeLeston.'Lance was in great hopes that Felix would betray the possibilities, andmayhap but for his presence, prudence might have evaporated beneath thewarm breath of Cherry's sympathy; but the answer was only a discreetlaugh and reply, 'Like a man who wanted his sister! I wish I could justfill your eyes with the loveliness of it, Cherry;' and in the midst ofhis description, in came Sister Constance, bringing with her SisterEmmeline (sister in blood as well as religion,) wanting to hear aboutthe nephews, and the Kitten's Tail adventure, and amused to find Lancea little shy about it--certainly not disposed to dwell on it with hisusual unceremonious drollery of narrative. They would not let Felixgo without an inspection by Dr. Lee, which was perfectly satisfactoryas to the rally of the constitution from the depression that hadthreatened disease, though it was impressed both on him and on Cherrythat he must be careful next winter, and never neglect a cold; and withthis promise the brothers took the train, and in half an hour wereat home--rather an empty home, for the schools were all in operationagain, and Wilmet was not at liberty for some little time after theirarrival.When she did come in, she was disappointed not to find Geraldine, andthat Felix had become so absorbed in the business that had broughthim home, that he only sent in word that he was obliged to go intothe town, and tea must not wait for him. Lance remained, but theburthen of two secrets rendered him uncommunicative, when Wilmet triedto understand the cause of Cherry's delay at St. Faith's; and Aldawas curious about Vale Leston and Mrs. Fulbert, whom she had seen atKensington Palace Gardens. It did not take much acumen to exclaim,'Still no children! Then there must be a chance for us!''That is not likely,' said Wilmet: 'it must be all in their own power;and the Vicar must be quite a young man. Is he not, Lance?''How should I know?''Didn't you see him?''I saw his wife, and that was enough.''About five-and-thirty,' said Alda. 'Of course it will all go to UncleTom. Money always goes to money.''How flushed you are, Lance!' said Wilmet. 'Are you tired?''Rather. I am going out into the garden.'There, however, he was pursued by Bernard with a war-whoop, and byTheodore with his concertina; and Stella presently reported that he wasgone up to bed.'And I am afraid his room is very hot and noisy,' sighed Wilmet.'He is only tired and cross after his two nights at sea,' said Alda.'Lance cross!''My dear Wilmet, it is very bad taste in families always to maintaineach other's impeccability!'Alda was still the only person capable of defeating Wilmet, and shemanaged to render her very uncomfortable before the end of the evening,when hours passed and still Felix did not come in; and Alda suggested,in the intervals of yawning, that Wilmet would soon learn how green itwas to sit up, now that Felix had got out of leading-strings, and setup bachelor habits.At first, Wilmet was highly indignant; but when Alda persisted thatshe was rather glad to see Felix like other young men, and that Wilmetwould know better when she was married, and then yawned herself off tobed, there was a sense of great discomfort to accompany the solitaryvigil, which not only involved fancies of possible accidents, but washarassed by this assault on faith in the virtue and sincerity of man.Could it really be the part of a wise woman to wink at being deceivedas an inferior creature, with impossible expectations of truth andpurity? Yet Alda knew the world!How much heart-sickness was darned into Lance's impossible heel beforethe clock chimed two! A step, and not a policeman's, came along thepavement and paused at the door, as, while the bell was cautiouslypulled, down she flew!'My dear Mettie, I am so sorry, so ashamed, of not having sent hometo tell you; but if I had made the least move, it might have upseteverything!''What have you been about?''Going over Mowbray Smith's accounts.''Oh!''I am very sorry! How tired you must be! I was vexed not to be able togive you notice, but you know what poor Smith is.''I don't know why you had to do it all, and at this time of night,'said Wilmet, still a little hurt.'It is the only chance for him to-morrow at the meeting to have hisaccounts clear; so I called under the plea of seeing about the letterin Pur, and with much ado got him to realise a little more of hisposition, and let me look at the books. That was at five.''And you have been at it ever since? O Felix!' as he stretched his armsand gave a vast yawn.'Ay! If I had shown any consciousness of the time, he would have shutup at once; and he would not let me take them home to do to-morrowmorning.''It is to-morrow morning!''So it is! I must make haste, for I must try to see Mr. Ryder and Jonesbefore the meeting. Good-night, dear old W. W. I meant to have hadother talk.''But oh! you must have some supper!''I've had it--sumptuous! Stilton cheese!'So Wilmet's faith in masculine nature rebounded as high as Alda hadstriven to sink it!Patience was a good deal needed the next day; for Felix had to rushaway from breakfast, and never appeared at all at dinner. He had tobe present at the very stormy meeting, though only to take notes, andthus had the annoyance of seeing Mr. Smith destroying his own causeby his incapacity to understand the statement so carefully drawn up,until Mr. Ryder (on whom the enemy had reckoned as a champion) tookthe papers out of the helpless hand, comprehended Felix's figures at aglance, and set them lucidly forth, such as they were; but even thenthere were blots which there were plenty of persons ready to hit. Thetruth was, that between Lady Price's economies, and the unwillingnessto call vestry-meetings, moneys intended for one purpose had been usedfor another, and articles not within the denomination of charities hadbeen charged on funds raised for that exclusive object.The assembly comprised the usual variety: the malicious foes ofreligion, headed by Jackman; the more numerous enemies, not of whatthey supposed religion, but of the Church; the adversaries, not ofthe Church, but of the Curate; and the few loyally unwilling tocondemn a clergyman, but disgusted at the affair, and staggered by hismanagement. Perhaps the rabid and ribald violence of the hostile partydid Mr. Smith good with the respectable; and there were many, too,whose dictum was--'Felix Underwood says it is all right!' At any rate,though the Bishop was memorialized, it was in a much better spirit thanhad been likely at first; and it was not to be done without notice tothe Rector. And when this was over, every one, as usual, went to theirrendezvous at 'Froggatt's,' either to discuss or inquire; and therelease of both partners on that summer evening was later than ever ithad been before.But then what a welcome upstairs! what a clamour of happy tongues!what an ecstatic humming of The Hardy Norseman! what a clinging toand climbing on him! If he had the cares, he had much of the joys, ofthe goodman of the house! But presently he missed the voice usuallyblithest of all, and asked for Lance.'He was here a little while ago,' said Wilmet, 'drinking his tea. Hemust have gone up to bed.''No,' said Bernard; 'I've just been up to the barrack, and he isn'tthere.''You've not let him sleep in the attic!' exclaimed Felix. 'Why, underthe leads it is like an oven!''I am very sorry,' said Wilmet, 'but I could not see how to help it.Your room is worse, with the glare of the setting sun; and so isCherry's at this time of the evening.''Then he must have Mr. Froggatt's.''I thought,' said Alda, 'that you never took liberties with Mr.Froggatt?''Nonsense!' said Felix. 'There are only two bedrooms in this house fitfor that boy in his present state--yours and Mr. Froggatt's. Whichshall we have, Wilmet?''Mr. Froggatt's,' she answered at once. 'If you will not have anothercup, I'll get it ready for him at once.''I've just done. I'll come and help you. But where can the boy be? Inthe garden?''No,' said Wilmet, taking a survey from the window.'I have hardly seen him all day,' added Alda. 'I suppose he haspursuits of his own.''Pursuits!' said Felix, looking really anxious; 'poor little chap, hecan't do without constant care and quiet!'Wilmet made no answer, but rose and left the room; Alda mutteredsomething about his looking quite well, which Felix did not stay tohear, following his sister out with a word about looking for him. Atthe same moment a little soft hand was thrust into his, and Stella, assoon as the door was shut, said, 'Please, I know where Lance is, butit's a secret.''Not from me, I hope?' said Felix, catching her up in his arms.'I think not,' said Stella meditatively. 'He only told me not to letBear and Tedo know, because they make a row. He is only up over theback warehouse, where he used to play the fiddle to us last Easter.''The only cool quiet place he could find!' said Felix, with more of alook of reproach than he had ever given Wilmet.It went to her heart. 'I did not know what to do,' she said meekly. 'Iwanted very much to go into the barrack ourselves, but Alda said itwould kill her; and you know it has always been a sore subject that wewould not let her have Mr. Froggatt's room. I ought not to have givenway.''Alda's selfishness is a great power,' muttered Felix; and Wilmet wastoo much ashamed to contradict him, except by 'She is vexed because shehas not heard from Ferdinand,' as they hastily made their way to thewarehouse, which, being on the north side of higher buildings, neverdid get scorched through.Felix went up a step-ladder, Wilmet following; and there, sure enough,was Lance, lying in a nest of paper shavings, with head on hisair-pillow. 'Oh, you've unearthed me, have you? I wish you'd let mestay here all night!' he said, with some weary fretfulness; but thenext moment burst into a peal of laughter, as Wilmet's head appearedabove the floor. 'Pallas Athene ascends! Oh! what a place it would beto act a play--only then all the fry would find it out! I hope theyhaven't! I told the Star not to tell!''My poor dear Lance, is this the only quiet place you could find? andyou let us all neglect you, and never complained!' exclaimed Wilmet,kissing his hot forehead.'Why, it's only my stupidity,' said Lance, wearily but gratefully; 'andyou can't make places quiet or cool! If you would just let me sleephere!''No; but you shall have Mr. Froggatt's room. He will not want it now.Come along, Lance, we'll bring your things down. The barrack is a greatdeal too hot for you to go into!'He did not make any resistance; but as they landed from the ladder,threw his arm round Wilmet, and leant against her with a sort oflazy mischievous tenderness, as he said, 'Isn't the Froggery wantedfor--somebody else?' and tried to look up in her face.'Ferdinand always goes to the Fortinbras Arms,' answered Wilmet, withadmirable composure.'Oh! that's a precedent,' said Lance, ostentatiously winking at Felix,who was very glad the ice was broken. 'When is he coming, Mettie?''I think Alda hoped he might have run down to-night, on hearing of yourreturn.'There they paused while entering the house and going upstairs; but nosooner were they in the barrack, which was certainly insufferably hot,than Lance returned to the charge.'But when is he coming? Not Fernan--he's an old story!''Yes,' said Felix, walking up to Wilmet to fold together the cornersof the sheets they were stripping from Lance's bed, and looking intoher eyes so archly as to bring up an incarnadine blush, 'I wantparticularly to improve my acquaintance, if you don't.--What shall wedo, Lance?''Advertise in Pur,' suggested Lance. 'The editor returned. Young menmay apply!''Don't, boys!' exclaimed Wilmet, in tones belonging to bygone days,when neither she nor Felix had been too serious to tease or be teased.'He is much better than you,' she added, with a pretty confusedpetulance, when Felix put on a pleading inquisitive face. 'When hefound we didn't like it, he went away to visit his uncle.''Better than we! There, Lance!' said Felix, in a gratified provokingtone of discovery.'In one sense,' said Wilmet, walking down before him.'I am very glad you have found it out,' added Felix, as they enteredMr. Froggatt's cool well-blinded bedroom, the only well-furnished onein the house.'It is no laughing matter,' said Wilmet seriously.'That's well,' was the dry answer.But there Felix perceived that she was on the verge of tears, and hekindly and quietly helped her to despatch her arrangements for Lancebefore any more was said; only as they turned to bid the tired boygood-night, he said, 'Where does the uncle live? I shall telegraphto-morrow, you cruel person!''Hush! silly boy--good-night,' said Wilmet, with a quivering voice;then, as she shut the door, 'Please don't go on this way, Felix--Iwouldn't have had it happen for any consideration.''I suppose not,' said Felix, as they returned to the twilight garden;'but as it has--Why, my Mettie, dear!' as she pressed close to him, andhid her face on his shoulder, with a strong craving for the help andsympathy from which the motherless girl had hitherto been debarred.'O Felix! I wish he would not be so good and kind! I wish you would nottry to make me give in!''My dear girl!' said Felix, with his arm round her. 'You know I wouldnot if I did not see that you had given in!''No, I haven't!' she cried. 'Why should you want to persuade me? Isn'tit very cruel and hard to let him give all himself to one that can'tcome to him? He will have to go out and live all dreary and lonelyfor years and years, and come home to find nothing but a stupid oldworn-out drudge, with all these pretty looks gone off! Felix, bereasonable, please! Can't you see that I ought not to let things gothat way?''Do you mean,' said Felix, 'that you would be quite content to put anend to all this--let Harewood go away believing you indifferent, andnever see him again?''Felix, why do you--?' with tears in her eyes.'Because I am quite sure that the consideration you want to show himwould be no kindness. The pain of having his affection thrown over'(he spoke with a spasm in the throat) 'would be greater than you wouldlike to inflict, if you were forced by truth to own you did not carefor him; and if he be what I think, the carrying away security of yourfeeling for him will be gladness enough. And as for the looks, I havea better opinion of yours than to think they won't wear! Any way,dearest, it seems to me that you have won the heart of a good man,and that if you like him, it is your duty to give him the comfort ofknowing it without thinking about to-morrows.''But I know so much more would come if I did just allow that much! AndI might get to wish to leave you all,' she said in an appalled voice.'And there seems to me not the slightest chance. You see Alda andCherry never will get on together; and Cherry seems glad of an excuseto stay from home. I thought she would have cared to come back when youdid.''Poor Cherry!' said Felix, hesitating, with a little of her own nervousawe of broaching the subject.'You don't mean that there is anything seriously amiss?' she cried,startled.'Wilmet, do you remember what Rugg said would be the very best thingfor that poor child?'She stood still, dismayed and angered. 'They aren't tormenting the poorlittle thing about that?''It is not their doing.''It can't have become necessary! Sister Constance would have told me!Felix say she is not worse!''No, much better. But, Wilmet, what we could not bear to think of, shethought of for herself, and begged to have it done.''Then I must go to her.''There is no occasion. She knew you could not be spared. It was doneon the 10th, and she will soon walk better than she has done all theseyears.''Done! without our knowledge?''She wished to spare us all, but that was not allowed. I was writtento, and told that her strong desire was such a favourable condition,that I had better consent, so as not to protract the strain of spirits.She made a point of no one else knowing except Clement.''Ah!' Wilmet spoke as if under a weight, 'that was the day Clement wentdown to Dearport, and came home so late! How could Sister Constanceconsent not to tell me?''You must forgive her, for it was the little one's desire. Of course weshould have been fetched if anything had gone wrong; but she has doneperfectly well; and there she is, very happy, and so full of fun, thatthe Sisters say she keeps them all alive.''Done? I cannot fancy it!' said Wilmet. 'Do you know, I believe it hasbeen my bugbear for years past to think I might have to persuade her tothis?''To tell you the truth, so it has to me.''Little nervous timid thing, I can't even understand her thinking ofit!''She wanted me not to tell you, but I would not promise. She could notrest without trying not to be an obstacle to--'Wilmet interrupted with a cry of pain.'Isn't it a noble little thing?''But it is so silly!' broke out Wilmet, not choosing her words amid hertears.'So she thinks now, poor child: she is quite ashamed of thepresumptuous notion that did brace and carry her through.''I don't like her to be disappointed,' said Wilmet; 'but it is quiteridiculous.''Only comfort her a little, Mettie dear, for she is very much afraidyou will think she has taken a great liberty with your property.''I only wish I could kiss her this moment!''Well, run down by the train to-morrow. They would all be delighted.''No, no, Felix, impossible. Think of the cost!''Half a crown! Sinful waste!' said Felix, in a tone of alarming levity.'Felix, if you only knew what the housekeeping mounted up in thatunhappy month that I was away! I did not like to tell you before, but--''Well!' at the dreadful pause.'I had to get fifteen pounds from Mr. Froggatt's; and Alda finds, afterall, that she cannot advance the money for Lance's journey.''So you are pinching it out by pence, my poor W. W.!''Nothing extra must be done till this is made up.''Yet it seems needful that Bernard should go to school. I wrote about--''No,' she resolutely interrupted. 'Bernard must wait over this year.Thirty pounds. Utterly out of the question!'Her tone gave Felix an unusual sense of chill penury, and brought ValeLeston before his eyes. He laughed rather bitterly, saying, 'Perhapssome day neither thirty pence nor thirty pounds may have so direful asound!''I never mean to learn to waste.''You may have to learn to spend.''That's enough to set me against it!' she exclaimed, with a good dealof pain; and he found how nearly he had broken his resolution, and howher application of his words to herself had saved him. He followed thelead.'Nay; you were glad of Alda's prosperity?''Oh yes; but poor Alda has been hindered from being like one of us,'she said. 'We have fought it out together. And I should not mind somuch if he were poor, like us, and had to wait on his own account.''I appreciate that,' said Felix; 'but at least you will let the poorfellow come and judge for himself?''If--if only, Felix, you will promise not to try to tempt me intodeserting you all, when I know it would be wrong.''If I will promise you not to cut my own throat, eh? Come, W. W., putout of your head "what it may lead to," confess that you are afraid ofgetting connected with such a mad harum-scarum set!''It isn't,' broke out Wilmet. 'I never saw any one so thoughtful andconsiderate. They are all so kind and warm-hearted, that I grew quiteashamed of my own fidgetiness; and he--he always knew the right thingat the right time. You can't think how his look seemed to hold me up,when poor Lance was moaning and talking nonsense!'Having thus let herself out as she had never dared, nor indeed beentempted to do, since the first dawn of the courtship, Wilmet at lastrelieved herself of some of the vast sense of emotion that she had beenforcing back for the last month. Hitherto the mistress of the househad seemed older than the master; but now the elder brother took theplace of both parents--ay, and of sister--as, all her fencing over,she poured out her heart, and let him sympathize, cheer, soothe, andencourage, more by kind tones than actual words. The harvest-moonshone over the house-tops, as a month before she had shone by theriver-side; and the Pillars of the House walked up and down till Aldagrew desperate, and sallied out to tell them that it was past eleven.It was only such snatches of time that Felix could give to homeaffairs, for his hands were full of arrears of business, and theexcitement respecting Mr. Smith necessarily occupied him. Pending thearrival of letters from the Rector, every tongue was in commotion, andthe reading-room was a focus of debate and centre of intelligence.So many letters, either in assault or defence, were addressed to theeditor of the Pursuivant, that only a supplement as big as the Timescould have contained them. Every poor person who had not had everydemand supplied from the charities was running about, adding to thegrievance at every encounter with tender-hearted lady or justice-lovinggentleman, whose blood boiled over into a letter for the Pursuivant,which, when sifted and refused, was transferred to the Dearport Hermes,or Erms, as most of its supporters termed it.CHAPTER XXII.THE REAL THING AND NO MISTAKE.'With asses all his time he spent,Their club's perpetual president,He caught their manners, looks, and airs--An ass in everything but ears.'Gay.The master of the house was unable to contribute much more than hisname to the propriety of the arrival of the suitors, and this madeWilmet the more determined that Geraldine should precede them. Nor,since the half-crown must be disbursed on an escort for her, did thehousewifely conscience object to the expedition; for Wilmet could notbut long to thank the Superior and Sister Constance, and to obtainDr. Lee's advice as to future management. Her coming was great joyto Cherry, who had dreaded the meeting almost with a sense of guilt,though still hoping Felix had been silent on her motive; and Wilmet didnot betray him, but only treated her sister with a mixture of almostshy tenderness and reverence. Nor did Cherry dare to ask a questionas to Wilmet's own affairs, nor even about Ferdinand Travis, lest sheshould seem to be leading in that direction. However, Wilmet, in apersuasive tone, communicated that Ferdinand had been long withoutwriting, and though Cherry tried to be sorry for Alda, her spiritquailed at the state of temper her sister evidently meant to prepareher for.But fate was more kind than she expected. That very Saturday broughtboth gentlemen, and by the same train. They made each other out as theywere leaving their bags at the Fortinbras Arms, and arrived togetherin marked contrast--the tall, dark, regular-featured, soft-eyedLife-guardsman, and the little sandy freckled sun-dried engineer;and thus two courtships had to be carried on in the two rooms, onlysupplemented by the narrow parallelogram of a garden! For FerdinandTravis was back again, rather amused at the family astonishment at therapidity of his journey to America, which to his Transatlantic notionsof travel was as nothing, and indeed had been chiefly performed in abig steamer, where he could smoke to his heart's content.For the first few days there was a good deal of restraint: Wilmet wasmore shy than in the unconscious days of Bexley; while John Harewoodwas devoid of his family's assurance and bonhomie, and so thoroughlymodest and diffident as to risk nothing by precipitation in beggingfor a decision. Felix, inexperienced, and strongly sensible of hisoffice as guardian of his sister's dignity, would not hint at theresult of his investigations into Wilmet's sentiments; and it was toGeraldine that Captain Harewood's attentions were chiefly paid. KnowingAlda's resolute monopoly of her Cacique, Cherry at first held back,and restrained her keen enjoyment of real conversation; but she foundWilmet thankful to have the talk done for her, and content to sit atwork, listening almost in silence, but proud that her Captain shouldbe interested in her sister, and pleased to see Cherry's expressiveface flash and sparkle all over for him. While Wilmet was at MissPearson's, Cherry was his chief resource; they read, drew, and talked,and in that half-hour's out-of-door exercise, which Dr. Lee had sostrongly enjoined, his arm was at her service. They were soon on theborders of confidence, though never quite plunging over them. Perhapsthe broad open-mouthed raillery at his home made the gentle reticenceof the Underwoods the more agreeable to him; at any rate, he did nottry to break through it, nor to presume beyond the step he had gained.Alda, who could best perhaps have acted as helper, had her own affairsto attend to; and they were evidently unsatisfactory, for Ferdinandwas more than ever the silent melancholy Don, and she was to domesticeyes visibly cross, and her half-year at home had rendered her muchless capable of concealing ill-humour. Something was owing to wear andsuspense, together with the effects of the summer heat and confinedmonotonous life without change or luxury; but much was chargeable onthe manifestations of temper to which she had given way in the homecircle. She told Wilmet the trouble, which Ferdinand wished to havekept from open discussion till he had received a final statement of hismeans to lay before Felix. He had received no remittances since thespring, and on demanding his own share of the capital and investments,had found it, instead of the lion's, a ridiculously small portion. Thewhole fortunes of the house of Travis had been built on his mother'sinheritance; but the accounts laid before him represented all theunprosperous speculations undertaken by his father, William, while thesmall ventures of his Uncle Alfred had, alongside of them, swelled intothe huge wealth of which Ferdinand had been bred to believe himselfthe heir! So palpably outrageous was this representation, that hehad persuaded himself that personal investigation on the spot wouldclear it up, or perhaps more truly, his blood was up, and he could notbear to be inactive. He had rushed over to New York, and of course hehad been baffled. Exposure was of no use where sympathy was for thelucky rather than the duped and luckless, and where the AnglicisedLife-guardsman could expect it least of all--at a time, too, when allbusiness affairs were convulsed by the uncertainties of civil war. Aldacould not believe at first that he had done his utmost, and seemed tohave reproached him with weakness and mismanagement; but by her ownaccount she had roused the innate lion. He would not tell her whathad passed in the interview with his uncle, but he had shuddered overthe remembrance; and when she upbraided him with not having gone farenough, he terrified her by the fierceness with which he had turnedupon her, bidding her never recur to what she knew nothing about, andmuttering to himself, 'Far enough--thank God I went no further, orI should not be here now!' and then falling into deep gloom. He hadcertainly made Alda afraid of him, and she burst into tears as she toldWilmet, declaring herself the most miserable girl in the world.'No, that you can't be, Alda, while he is so good and true.''But he says he must sell out! Think of that! Never was anybody sotaken in as I have been!''Don't talk so, Alda. It is just as if you had engaged yourself to aLife-guardsman and nothing else.''I wonder how you would like to be buried in some horrid wild place inAmerica, where you would never see anybody!''One would not want to see anybody but him.''That's your nonsense! How tired of it one would be!''There would be no time. It would be so nice to do everything for himoneself!''In some horrid uncivilized place, with no servants! I'm not goingto be a drudge. It is all very well for you, who like it, and haveno notion of society, but for me--! And there he is furious to takeme out. Men grow so wild and rough too in such places. You never sawanything blaze like his eyes!''I don't understand you. Could not you trust yourself anywhere withhim?''You have no right to say such things,' pouted Alda, 'only because Ihave a little common prudence. Some one must have it!'There was no denying that life in the far west would be a foolish thingeither for or with Alda; and Felix thought so when Ferdinand came tohim for consultation over the letters that made it finally clear thatAlfred Travis had appropriated everything available but half a blockof unreclaimed land on the wrong side of America, and a few thousandsinvested in Peter Brown's firm; and what was worse, the sudden failureof the supplies had occasioned serious debts. Ferdinand's own plan wasto clear these off with the price of his commission, and take Alda outwith him to rule in American luxury over the unbounded resources of themagnificent land, the very name and scent of which had awakened in himhis old prairie-land instincts, and her absolute refusal and even alarmat his enjoyment had greatly mortified him. 'She should not even haveto rough it,' he said. 'I could make her like a queen out there, if shewould only believe it.'Felix could not but think Alda might be wise, though it was not prettywisdom. Go out alone and make the fortune? Ferdinand did not seem tothink the separation possible. He said he would rather go to work inPeter Brown's office, where he had already a hold; and his familiaritywith Spanish would secure him usefulness and promotion, and five or sixyears would bring him into a position to marry. He did not look fit fordesk-work in London, but his mind was made up to any privation, so thathe could be in reach of Alda, and hope to give her what he had oncethought easily within his grasp.Hearing this, Felix propounded an old longing of his--namely, tomake the Pursuivant a daily paper, and use means for promptitudeof intelligence, such as might neutralize the unpopularity it wasincurring on behalf of Mr. Smith. Rumours of a rival paper were afloat;but if Ferdinand would throw in his capital, and undertake the jointeditorship and proprietorship, the hold that the Pursuivant alreadyhad warranted quite success enough to permit an immediate marriage.There would be no need to be concerned with the shop; they might take acottage in the country, and he need not ride in so often as every day.In fact, it was his capital rather than his personal assistance thatwas wanted. He caught at the notion. He was too Transatlantic to haveany dignities to stand upon, and he said almost with tears in his eyesthat he could never be so happy as in working with Felix; and he wentoff to the Fortinbras Arms, only lamenting that it was too late to tellAlda; while Felix, on his side, could not help knocking at Geraldine'sdoor. Within he found another auditor, Wilmet, who still alwayshelped Cherry to bed. 'It will be the making of the Pursuivant,' hesaid. How often I have sighed, "If I had but capital, or Mr. Froggattenterprise!"''Ah, Felicissimo mio, that Pursuivant is as dear to you as any brotheror sister of us all!''So it ought to be, for it has been the making of us.--Come Cherry,confess that you had rather see Pur triumph, than--''Than you at Vale Leston,' said Cherry, not knowing what a bolt sheshot. 'It would be grand to steal a march on the enemy!''And safe?' asked Wilmet.Felix demonstrated to the comprehending ears of his sisters thecirculation that he could securely reckon upon.'There would be an immense deal more to do,' said Cherry; but at thathe smiled, full of vigour.'True; but we should have a larger staff. There would be Fernan--''For the racing articles,' said Cherry dryly.'And a good deal besides, which only needs application; and that hehas.''He has great resolution,' said Cherry, 'but he always seems to me asort of Christian panther of the wilderness; and you seem to be gettinghim into a cage.''Not such a cage as Peter Brown's office; and besides it is only whenhe is lashed up that the panther leaps about his den. Generally he isa quiet determined animal, with the practical Yankee element strong inhim. It may be true, as Edgar says, that he does not see an inch oneither side of his nose, but that only makes him go right away in theline he does see. I know he will work well.''If Alda--' said Cherry.'Oh, she will be willing. A cottage in the country! Besides, it is theonly reasonable possibility.''I should think it would satisfy her,' said Wilmet.'And then--'Everybody understood that 'And then.' It was Alda's pretension to beat the head of the family that was the chief obstacle to Wilmet'sabdicating that post. Without her, Geraldine, stronger and less lame,might undertake the charge of the comparatively few permanently athome. Might indeed hardly expressed the amount of uncertainty as toher capability; and yet but for that 'And then,' Wilmet would hardlyhave yielded as she did the next day.Stella had a blackberry fever. Possibly Wilmet's frugal regimenengendered a hankering for fruit, or it might have been the mere loveof enterprise that rendered her eagerly desirous of an expedition to alane where splendid blackberries were reported to grow. Since the dayshe had been lost, she had never been allowed to go out with Bernard;but in Lance she had acquired a much more complaisant play-fellow,who not only promised his escort to the lane, but the purchase of thesugar, and aid in the concoction of the jam; but he durst not venturetill late in the day, and thereupon John Harewood suggested, 'Would notyour sister be at liberty by that time?''Lance can take care of me,' said Stella; but in her eyes the wholeromance of the expedition was destroyed by his acquiescence. 'We'llcatch her as she comes out, and make her go with us.''Among all the girls?' laughed Cherry; and Captain Harewood coloured,shook his head, and shuddered.'The girls won't hurt me,' said Lance, 'not if there were twentyhundred. I'll bring her from the very teeth of them. Jack may waitround the corner if he likes.'The party waited, till their patience was worn to a thread, for theopening of the tall olive door, until Lance valiantly resolved on asingle-handed assault, and had just mounted the steps, when it suddenlyopened, and he found himself obstructing the path of a swarm of littlegirls and big, who all stared, most giggled, and some greeted him. Tothe least of these he confided that he wanted his sister, when sheinnocently piloted him to the school-room, where Wilmet, with her haton, was keeping guard over three victims detained by unfinished tasks.Every one gazed at him as if he had been a sort of Acton; but nothingdaunted, he answered his sister's anxious exclamation. 'Nothing is thematter; but we are going for a walk, and want you.--Miss Maria,' hecried, as the sound of the unfeminine step and voice brought in one ofthe heads, 'please do let off these impositions, we do so want her!''What, you here! This is an invasion!' she added good-humouredly. 'Am Ito take it as a convalescent's privilege?''Thank you, Ma'am,' said Lance, bowing with his audacious sweetness;'and please let me have Wilmet. I'd do the impositions myself, only Idon't know French.'The victims tittered uncontrollably, and Miss Maria laughed, as onewho, like her neighbours, descried why Wilmet was in request. 'I willattend to these exercises, Miss Underwood,' she said. 'You must notlose this fine evening for the idleness of these young ladies.''Indeed, Ma'am!' began Wilmet, in a blaze of colour. 'I never thoughtof such a thing.''I daresay not, my dear,' said Miss Maria; 'but now you had better doit. I wish you a pleasant walk.''Lance, how could you?' broke out Wilmet, as they descended the steps.'I never was so ashamed in my life.''Never mind. We are going to get blackberries at Mile End Lane, and Ishall lose Stella to a dead certainty if you don't come and look afterher.''My dear Lance, I can't go all that way without their knowing it athome.''Oh! that's all settled with Cherry.''And where's Alda?''Off somewhere with her Don. Come, W. W., or who knows whether Stel andI shall ever come home?'By this time they had reached the corner where Captain Harewood andStella were lying perdu, and Wilmet made no more resistance, onlykeeping the little girl's not altogether willing hand till they came tothe stile leading to the field and woodland, and then Stella's duranceended, and her adventures with Lance became as free as though no grave'sister' had been near.Perhaps, since Wilmet had perceived that surrender was her fate, shewas willing that the summons should be over and a mutual understandingreached, so as to waste no more of the time already so short. Howeverthat might be, though the talk began with Lance's health and Cherry'stalents, there was a tendency towards topics closer still; nor did shestart aside, but rather listened pensively as to a strain that touchedher quiet soul more deeply than she showed in word or gesture.The blackberry lane was deep and hollow, the brambles outstretchingtheir arching wreaths, laden with heavy clusters of shining fruit,glossy black, scarlet or green, sometimes with a lingering pearlyflower. A step-ladder stile led down into it from the field, and on thetopmost step, her back against the rail, sat Wilmet. On the lowest,turned at right angles to the first, was John Harewood, looking up toher; while scrambling on the bank, contending with the brambles, werethe younger ones; Lance, unable to help now and then sending a furtiveglance through the tangle.It was a pretty sight. Sitting aloft, Wilmet was framed by an archwayof meeting branches, with nothing but the pale opal of the eveningsky behind the beautifully shaped head and shoulders, and the clearcut features, drooping just enough to enhance her own peculiar modestdignity, and give it a soft graciousness that had once been wanting.Her dress was the same in which Captain Harewood had first seen her--aplain black hat, a pale fawn-coloured skirt, and a loose open jacketover a white cambric vest and sleeves, only that now there had beena budding forth of dainty fresh knots of rose-coloured ribbon at thethroat and down the front, as though a slight sensibility to thevanities as well as the cares of life had begun to dawn on the graveyoung house-mother.Leaning back against the rough rail to assist the hand of the climber,John Harewood looked up with as much worship in his countenance as evergood man feels for the being he loves in all her maiden glory. Thusthey had been for some moments, only broken by the children's distantcalls, till the fervent words broke from him, 'May I not speak now?'No word of reply sounded, but the delicate lips quivered and parted;the eyes were cast down, and seemed to swim in a soft mist ofbrightness; the queenly head bent, and the roseate tint on the cheekdeepened and spread, while something came over the face that caused thelow glad exclamation, 'You sweetest, I do believe you can love me!'A tremulous smile, a glitter of tears on the eye-lashes--a whisper,'You won't let me be able to help it!'Then the hands were clasped, and no words but 'Thank you' would come tothe young man's lips; and then, and the sound reminded him, he bowedhis head, adding, 'Thank God!''Thank God!' echoed Wilmet softly. 'For indeed,' she added, as she lether eyes fully meet his ardent gaze, 'I know you will help me to dowhatever may be His Will.''He helping me,' said John Harewood; and there was a reverent silenceof untold peace and bliss, first interrupted by his long sigh ofinfinite relief and joy; and then, as he looked and looked with allhis soul in his eyes, an exclamation, almost in spite of himself, 'Youbeautiful creature, you are mine indeed!'Her colour deepened, but her lips moved into an odd little smile, outof which came the words, 'Isn't that rather foolish?''I couldn't help it--I beg your pardon,' said he, reddening. 'You dolook so lovely! but indeed it is not the externals only, but what looksthrough.''And that is what makes me afraid,' said Wilmet, as the dew gathered onher eye-lashes. 'I don't think I'm so nice as you take me for.''Probably you don't,' he said, smiling.'But just hear me,' she said, laying her hand on his, as if to silencehim. 'You ought to know what all the others would tell you if theywere not too kind. I know they all feel me strict, and managing, anddomineering! Yes, it makes you laugh, but I really am. I don't thinkyou would have liked me at all if you had not seen me out of my usuallife, with only Lance--' and as all she said only made him press herhand the closer--'You see, I've always had to do things. Ever since Iwas a little girl I have had to keep order, great boys and all, and Iknow it has made me disagreeable;' then, in answer to some sound moreincredulously negative than words, 'Yes indeed! Felix and all go toCherry with whatever comes very near them. She hasn't been hardened andsharpened and dried up like me, and wasn't stupid to begin with.''Cherry is very clever, but she is--not--''Now don't. I know how it is. I know I'm horribly pretty, and I've beena wonder always for keeping the house going, and doing for them all,and so you fancy me everything charming; but I do so wish you couldreally know, as my brothers do, how it takes out of one all that isnice and sweet, and that people like.''People?' said John, smiling; but seeing that a mirthful even thougha loving answer was not what she wanted, he gravely said, 'I dounderstand, dearest, that you have had to be too much of an authorityto be altogether the companion and confidante that Geraldine is free tobe, but perhaps I feel that this renders you more wholly and altogethermy own.''Oh!'--a strange half sob--'do you know, I had just begun to know howsolitary I was when Lance was so happy to get Robina, when you--''And if I told you all, you would know that I was feeling a certainloneliness at home, and that if you had asked my sisters, they wouldhave said that Jack was not the harmonious element he appeared.There--there's a pleasing prospect!''But you'll not let me be masterful?' said Wilmet earnestly.'Just as much as is good for me--for us,' he said, smiling. Then aftera moment's silence, he took out of his pocket a little box, and makinga table of her lap, took out a ring of twined ruby and diamonds, suchas could not but startle the instincts of Wilmet's soul.'Oh, it is a great deal too beautiful! Please, I couldn't--''You must. It was my mother's.''Then she cannot like to part with it.''Did you not know that she died when I was five years old? Look!' andhe showed where within the lid of the box was written, 'For my LittleJohnny's Wife. August 1839. L. H.''Ought you not to keep it till--' faltered Wilmet, growing crimson asshe found what she was saying.'No,' he said decidedly, 'not after this. When I spoke to my fatherthat Sunday evening, he unlocked his desk and gave me this, which I hadnot seen since I remember playing with it on my mother's bed. You willwear it, dearest. You will let me have the pleasure of knowing you haveit on.'The answer was the drawing off of her glove; and he fitted it on, butit was rather loose. 'I am afraid it will want a guard,' he said.'I'll ask Felix whether I may take one of Mamma's,' she said. For theshapely notable fingers had never worn a ring before this almost sacredpledge; and the few jewels either too valuable or not valuable enoughfor the parents to have parted with in times of need had never beentouched.'Do,' he said; 'I shall like that. The year 1839. Was not that the yeara certain little girl was born?''The month. Our birth-day is on the 19th.' And the coincidence gave allthe foolish delight such facts do under the circumstances.'Was this long before she died?' asked Wilmet.'The last day of that August. You never saw her brass in the cloister?''No; I never guessed that you were not Mrs. Harewood's son, though Iwondered at your being so unlike the rest.''She has been kindness itself,' he warmly said. 'My father did wellboth for himself and me in marrying.''Tell me of your own mother,' said Wilmet, looking from the sparklingstones to the initials. 'L.-- What was her name?''Lucy. Lucy Oglandby. My father was tutor at Oglandby Hall. There wasa long attachment, through much opposition; and even when he was madepriest-vicar after waiting six years, her father could not consent.After six years more, when her health was failing, he gave a sort ofsanction on his death-bed. The rest of the family contrived to get herfortune so tied up that after her death it was of no use to any onetill I came of age. She only lived seven years after her marriage, andthen the Oglandbys wanted to take possession of me, and I fancy thatdrove my father into marrying.''Was it with them you went to stay?''Yes, my father makes a point of it; and they have a turn forpatronizing me, if I would turn my back on home.''Now I understand better,' said Wilmet.'You understand how much you were wanting to me,' he said, rightlyinterpreting the words. 'After five years' absence, while my sisterswere growing up, you can perceive that dear, fond, and hearty asour house is, it did not fulfil all that perhaps I had been ratherunreasonable in expecting. O Wilmet, this time of leave would have beenvery different if you had not come to the precincts!'And so they fell back on the exquisite time present, which neitherwished to disturb by looking beyond; and perhaps John felt as thoughhis bird had scarcely perched, and any endeavours to hold it might makeit flutter loose, while she was too glad of the calm and repose torenew the struggle between conflicting claims.At last, with basket laden with dark fruit, and lips vying with thebabes in the wood, Stella was launched on them by Lance, when hissense of time overpowered his half shy, half diverted respect fortheir bliss. He was very curious, but had to be satisfied with CaptainHarewood's manner of tossing Stella over the stile, and bright look athimself.They did not get into the town till the chimes of half-past seven werepealing. Captain Harewood hurried into the hotel, to prepare for theevening; and Wilmet was mounting the stairs, still under the spell ofher newly-found joy, when she was startled by Alda's voice in a key ofquerulous anger.'Exactly like you, always laying out for attention.''What's this?' said Wilmet, as she saw Alda in her habit, standingwith her back to the open door, and Geraldine leaning on the table,trembling and tearful, crimson and burning even to passion in herpanting reply, 'I don't know--except that he helped me in from thegarden.''That's what I say,' retorted Alda. 'She is always putting herselfforward, to be interesting, and get waited on. All affectation. I don'tknow such a flirt anywhere.''Hush, Alda! you are insulting Cherry,' said Wilmet, in her tone ofcommand.'Take care of yourself, Wilmet,' cried Alda; 'it is the way she goes onall day with Captain Harewood--reading poetry, and drawing, and all.''Captain Harewood knows,' said Wilmet, coming to the support of thequivering Geraldine, 'that the kinder he is to Cherry the better I likeit.''Oh, if you do, it is your own concern. I only spoke for your sake.'And Alda marched off, while Wilmet's strong tender arms helpedCherry into her own room, and tended her through one of those gusts,part repentant, part hysterical, which had belonged to her earliergirlhood, though the present was now enhanced by the tumult of insultedmaidenliness. Formerly, Wilmet had not treated these attacks on thesoft system, but now all her bracing severity was gone. Greatlyincensed with Alda, she gave her whole self to sympathy with thevictim, showing herself so ineffably sweet and loving, that Cherry felta thrill of delicious surprise; and as her eye lit on the glitteringring, a little ecstatic cry, still slightly hysterical, welcomed thetoken.'O Wilmet, oh! You have! You have--''To be sure I have,' answered Wilmet, not in the least heeding what shesaid, in her anxiety to calm her sister. 'It is all right, if only youwill not go and be silly about it.'The woman was so much more than her words, that their odd simplicity,coming from the grand-looking figure bending over her in tendersolicitude, touched Cherry the more, and she threw her arms round hersister's neck, whispering, 'Oh! I am so glad!'Poor Wilmet! At that moment all her gladness had gone into a weightlike lead on her heart, though it only made her more gentle. 'DearCherry,' she softly said, 'don't talk of anything to upset you. Willyou be good and lie quite still while I take off my things, and thenI'll come and dress you? You must not be knocked up to-night.''Oh! I had much rather stay here!''No indeed! John would be so disappointed. He does like you so much,and I always depend on you to make it pleasant for him. You can't sendword that Alda has been scolding you.''Oh dear! why can't I behave decently to her the moment we are alonetogether?''Don't begin on that, for pity's sake, or you'll get crying again,'broke out Wilmet, in her natural voice. ''Tis she can't behave properlyto anybody--that's all; so don't think any more about anything, like agood child, but lie still till I come back.'So up went Wilmet, not rejoicing in her room-mate, whom she found, asusual, all injured innocence and self-justification.'You have been petting Cherry all this time! She is quite spoilt amongyou! It is quite true what I said, though she didn't like it. Insociety, I never saw a more arrant flirt, with her pathetic ill-usedairs. Why, Ferdinand actually found fault to-day with my manner to her!'Save for the effects, Wilmet was glad to hear it. 'Well, Alda, it isnot always kind.''I only don't fuss and coax her; I see through her better than you do.She is the sharp one. As I told Ferdinand, it is I who have reason tocomplain of his manner to her, only I know it is not his fault. Ifthere were no other objection to this preposterous scheme of Felix's,she would be a reason against it.''For shame, Alda! You don't consider what you are saying of yoursister.''I do!' said Alda. 'I have been more in the world than you, Wilmet,and I know what comes of sticking oneself down close to one's family,especially when there is that sort of spoilt invalid, backed up in allkinds of unreasonable expectations. I advise you to take care, Wilmet;you don't know what goes on in your absence. I should not wonder if itnever came to an engagement after all.'At that moment Felix's step and knock were at the door. Wilmet went toit, and both her hands were clasped in her brother's. 'My Wilmet, mydear, this is well!'Then Alda turned from her glass and understood. 'What? He has spoken? OWilmet, and you never told me!''I had not time.''And what a splendid ring! but it is not a proper engaged-ring. Youcan't wear it.''I must! He wishes it. It was his mother's.--Felix, may I have one ofMamma's for a guard?''May you!' said Felix, smiling.'I should like you to give it to me. Come in.'He came to inspect the unlocking of the ponderous old inlaiddressing-case, with velvet-lined compartments mostly empty, or onlywith little labelled papers of first curls, down as far as 'EdwardClement, 1842,' after which stern reality had absorbed sentiment--asad declension from the blue enamel shrine with a pearl cypher, whereFelix's downy flax reposed.To do Alda justice, there was no greed in her nature, and she evenoffered Wilmet a turquoise hoop of her own, instead of a littlebattered ring of three plaited strands of gold, which their motherhad worn till her widowhood, and they believed to be the ring of herbetrothal. And when Wilmet suggested that the locket would delightCherry, Alda's ready assent inspired the hope that she felt somecompunction for her jealous unkindness.The locket did prove a soothing charm, coupled with the littleconsultation as to the ribbon, and the capture of a smooth brown lockof the present to add to the original. And as the manly fingers dealtwith the hasp, and the kind smile welcomed her pleasure, Cherry's heartfelt that while she had her Felix, Alda need little comprehend hercraving for attention from any one.Yet her greeting to John Harewood was shy, tame, and frightened,compared with Alda's pretty graceful cordiality, as she told him thatshe was delighted, and envied Lance his powers of diplomacy. In fact,it was Alda who kept up the conversation, and made things pleasant,with the ease of society; while Felix was shy, Wilmet longed forsilence, and Ferdinand looked like a picture of Spanish melancholy,such as had almost infected the whole table.'I believe I must ask you to bestow a little time on me,' he said, assoon as the meal was over; and Alda made it evident that she meant tobe in the conclave, which took place in the back drawing-room. It wasat once made evident that the Pursuivant proposal was abhorrent to her;not that she behaved to Felix, nor indeed did she ever do so to any ofhis sex, as she permitted herself to do to Geraldine, but she showedgreat displeasure at the idea having been started.'Things are unfortunate enough already,' she said, with something likeWilmet's dignity; 'but I should never forgive such hopeless ruin todear Ferdinand's prospects.''Have I not told you that no prospect is anything to me if you can onlybe mine?''We know all that,' said Alda, drawing herself away rather sharply fromthe caressing hand, 'and therefore I must think for you, and I will notbe the means of lowering your position in life.''Alda, dearest!' cried Ferdinand, glancing at Felix in such genuinedistress as made him interfere in pity.'We understand about position, Ferdinand; and you and Alda have beenable to observe how far life is enjoyable in this lowered position.''Felix,' said Alda, who had evidently wound herself up for this crisis,'you know very well that you stand quite out of common rules; but I amsure you can see that however valuable your work may be, it would bewrong to draw Ferdinand to the same level.''As for that,' said Ferdinand moodily, yet with the air of a banishedprince, 'Felix knows what my father was; and if I knew that mygrandfather was an honest man, it would be well. A stray wanderer, castup at your door, has no right to talk of levels.''You are not to talk,' said Alda, more affectionately. 'You are toogenerous to be allowed to think.''In plain English, Alda,' said her brother, 'the objection is yours.''I cannot see him sacrifice himself for my sake,' said Alda.'As though it could be a sacrifice!' exclaimed Ferdinand, 'when itopens the way to make you my own at once, my peerless beauty! If you--''Come, we have had all this over before,' said Alda, shrinking a littlepetulantly as he hovered over her, speaking with the fervour of hisMexican nature, and his eyes glowing with eagerness; 'if you will nothave common sense, I must.''Common sense! It is not common sense I want! It is love!''If you doubt my affection--' said Alda, with dignity, drawing back.'No! no! no! I never was so profane. Only it drives me frantic to hearyou so coolly willing to keep us apart for--''Because my affection is less selfish and narrow than yours,' saidAlda, raising her voice as his became like a roll of distant thunder.'I tell you, I will not be the means of binding you to a pettyprovincial paper, that may give an immediate pittance, but will lead tonothing. Would that be love worth having? I appeal to Felix, his schemethough it was.'Felix was a very uncomfortable third party, especially as Alda's appealimplied a certain accusation of himself. 'I own,' he said, 'thatthis situation is not likely to lead to promotion, but it would becompetence. Ferdinand would be satisfied, but you--''I, who know what he is used to, cannot be satisfied for him.''As if you--' gasped the lover; but Alda would not let him go on.'No,' she said, 'we must be patient. For him to remain in theLife-guards would be madness; but a few years at Mr. Brown's, with theinterest he already has in the business, will open a career to him.''And I can run down every Sunday,' said Ferdinand. 'It is herdetermination; I suppose she is right, Felix, but I wish-- If I couldwish her otherwise, she should be less prudent!''I cannot see that she has any right to ask it of you,' indignantlyexclaimed Felix.But he found this was putting his head into a hornet's nest. Ferdinandwould not have contested her right to send him down among the lions,and would never have given her back her troth, like Knight Des Lorges.No, he hotly contended that Alda had a perfect right to make her ownterms, and still more hotly, though most inconsistently, that to workat Peter Brown's was his own free choice.It was incontestable that a South American merchant's career offeredmore possibilities of rising into opulence and consideration than theproprietorship of a country paper; and though Felix privately doubtedwhether desk-work would suit Ferdinand half as well as the work wherehe himself could have contributed wits, he could say no more. Ferdinandwas greatly disappointed; but there was no sacrifice that he would notmake, and persist in with his silent Spanish perseverance, for Alda'ssake. Indeed, he could not bear not to begin at once. He would returnat once to his regiment, send in his papers, and dispose of his horsesand equipments, making arrangements with Peter Brown to enter hishouse. He seemed to be in a fever till the matter was in train, and wasentirely past remonstrance. And Felix recognised that the lovers mustact for themselves, and could only feel thoroughly vexed with Alda, andequally vexed with himself for the consternation with which he thoughtof having her at home three years longer!It was the next evening; and not only had Alda's own lover departed,but Captain Harewood was missing, and with him Lance, and the onlyexplanation was from Bernard, that they were gone to Minsterham. Nodoubt Wilmet was sensible of a blank when she came home, though shewould not allow it, and stoutly defended her Captain's right of goingwhere and when he pleased without notice. She had to fight his battles,till late in the evening he walked in. 'Here we are! It is later than Iexpected.''Where's Lance?''He came in with me. Gone to his room, then.--Here, Geraldine, thislittle gentleman requests the honour of your leaning on him.''Oh, what a beauty! What a dear little ivory monster! Turbaned head,serpent's tail, and such a fascinating face!''Is the cane the right length? I measured yours.''You don't mean that he is for me? So smooth and so steady! Where doeshe come from?''From Benares--I bought him at the great fair; and from the moment Isaw you, it was plain that in the eternal fitness of things he wasdestined to you.''To make a Pagan of her,' said Felix. 'See her worshipping her littleidol!''Not my idol, but my prop and companion for life.''Your Lord Gerald,' laughed Felix, as she walked triumphantly round theroom, perhaps her first unnecessary promenade since she was seven yearsold.'This is just the time I didn't expect you,' said Wilmet; 'is the seveno'clock train put on again?''We didn't come by the train.' And Felix and Cherry smiled at oneanother as they detected that Wilmet's economical soul was vexed. 'Iwanted Lance to see his doctor again, and the railway seems so bad forhis head, that I drove.''How very kind!' exclaimed Wilmet.'I am afraid I have not managed it well. I would not make anappointment, lest it should be a glaring day; so Manby was out, and wecould only leave a message before going to the precincts. Lance was inwild spirits, and the boys gave him such an uproarious welcome, thatold Canon Burley sent in to know what was the matter, and was told itwas only little Underwood come back. He dined with us, but I am afraidI was off guard, for I never thought of his going and taking a place inthe Cathedral.''I should think not!' said Wilmet, 'except that it is in the nature ofboys to be provoking, even about Church-going. Then it has knocked himup.''He was forced to come out in the Psalms; and Poulter, one of thelay-vicars, got anxious about him, and went after him when the Lessonbegan, found him with his head down on the table in the sacristy, andthought he had fainted, but he was only crying and entirely done up.Manby came just as Poulter brought him in, and gave him a proper goodlecture.''A very good thing,' said Wilmet, 'if one could only get him to believethere is any need of care when his head is not actually painful. Whatdid Mr. Manby think of him?''He says he is as well as could reasonably be hoped--quite recoveredfrom the fever; but the sun-stroke was as severe as any he has seenin England, and coming on the top of all that overwork, both studyand music, it has left an amount of irritability and excitability ofbrain that must not be trifled with. He made poor Lance confess all thelittle experiments he has been trying on himself, and ordered him toleave off whatever he is about at the first threatening of dizziness orpain.''Then there's not much chance of his going back?''Not before Christmas at soonest. One would think the poor littlefellow must have been aware of that; but the verdict cut him up verymuch. I thought he had better be quiet till the heat of the day waspast, so he lay on my bed till six o'clock, and then he said he wasbetter; but he hardly spoke all the way home.'Wilmet went at once to see after him, and found him already in bed; butwhether sleepy, suffering, or sorrowful, she could not make out, forhe hid his eyes from the candle, and only muttered 'No, thank you,' inreply to whatever she offered, till she yielded to his evident longingfor darkness and silence.He was up and about in the morning; but when at noon Bernard rushed infrom school, he was neither in the drawing-room, garden, nor office,and the door of his--or rather Mr. Froggatt's--bed-room was locked.Bernard bounced at it, calling, 'Let me in, I say; I'll not make a row.''There aren't any more of you?' parleyed Lance.'No! Let me in, I say!'--kicking at the panels--'I must speak to you!''I'm coming; hold your din!' And Lance revealed himself without coat orboots.'Holloa--how dark! You were never asleep? I came, because one can nevercatch you without a string of girls and babies after you.''Cut on,' said Lance resignedly, shaking up his horse-hair pillow:while Bernard seated himself on the table, and in the half-light of theshuttered room, began to disentangle some knotted twine.'Did you come here to do that?' said Lance, wanting to finish his nap,and chiefly restrained by the trouble of the thing from kicking theintruder out.'Only, I say, Lance, have you any tin?''Not the valley of a brass farthing!' (The last pence of the ValeLeston sovereign had gone into Stella's jam.)'Wouldn't Felix give you some?''I don't know.' (Very gruffly.)'I wish you'd ask.''You have as many tongues as I.''Well, you see Felix is not half a bad fellow for one's governor, buthe doesn't know what's what; and Sims says he'll go to him if I don'tcome down with something before to-morrow.''Sims! Sims in Smoke-jack Alley? Is that your sort?' demanded Lance, inineffable disgust.'He's been keeping a dog for me,' said Bernard sulkily.'A dog!' Lance sat up in astonishment immeasurable.'Yes. It's the thing, and no mistake,' said Bernard eagerly. 'His nameis Stingo; only we are not quite sure whether he is a bull-terrier or ashort-haired King Charles.'Lance dropped back, wriggling in suppressed convulsions, as hedemanded, 'Where did you steal this unmistakeable animal?''I bought him,' said Bernard, with a certain magnificence intended tobe overawing.'Then where did you steal the money?''Travis,' said Bernard, who considered Christian names unworthy ofmale lips. 'He always used to tip me a sovereign; and Ben Bowyer, thedog-fancier, said Stingo was worth thirty shillings any day, only helet me have him for eight and six, because he wanted to sell off hisstock.''I thought as much. And Sims keeps him for you?''At ninepence a week; but the brute is at me for ever, and says it istwelve weeks.''Pray, how were you to raise ninepence a week? By waiting on Providenceor turning coach-wheels?''I had some then; and Froggy sometimes gives one half-a-crown, but theold beast hasn't lately, just because I wanted it--nor Travis either,bad luck to him!' quoth this grateful young man. 'I put them all off,making sure of him; and now he's cut, and never tipped me at all! It'san abominable sell, and they are all at me.''All! what more? Have it out,' grunted Lance, with a sound of bodilypain in his tone such as would have silenced any one above ten yearsold, and a bored contemptuous manner that would have crushed anyattempt at confidence--if he had been the right person to confess to.Nevertheless, Bernard mumbled, 'Shooting-gallery. And Mother Goldievowed she would lug me up to Wilmet if I don't fork out!''Mother Goldie! You little disgusting ape! You've been tucking in whatyou owed in pies and tarts!' cried Lance, who was too constitutionallyheedless of the palate to have any charity for its temptations.'It's all Wilmet's fault,' said Bernard. 'She never gives one anythingfit to eat. There was that beastly lamp out there went and got broke,and what does she do but crib it out of our grub! Now, Lance, was anyliving soul served like that before? She gave us only that beastlystir-about at breakfast,' (Bernard worked his single adjective hard,)'no butter nor sugar at tea, and no pudding, except when there's thatbeastly mess of rice.''I'm sure I've seen pudding.''Oh! she came round when Felix came home. She knew he wouldn't standit. Alda used to buy marmalade and anchovy on her own hook, so I don'tsee why I shouldn't.''Alda didn't go on tick, I suppose.''Serve Wilmet right if we all did. I don't believe there's a beggar sobadly fed. Nares says--''You unnatural little sneak, you haven't been and gone and complainedto him!''No; but all the town is crying out upon her shabbiness. They say it isa perfect shame how little butcher's meat she gets. Nares's mother andsisters do nothing but laugh at it, and Nares says nothing will make uscomfortable but a bankruptcy. Hollo!'For a well-aimed swing of the bolster laid him sprawling on the floor.'Take that for mentioning such a word!''My eyes, Lance, is it swearing?' said Bernard, with a littleaffectation of innocence. 'How you have been and bumped my knees;' andhe sat on the floor, pulling up his trousers to gain a view; 'there'llbe a bruise as big as half-a-crown! Well, but Nares says it was a realblessing to them; for before it old Nares was always in a rage, and hismother boohooing; and now it is over they live like fighting-cocks,on champagne, and lobster-salad, and mulli--what's his name?--firstchop; and the women dress in silks and velvets and feathers, no end ofswells! and they say it is regular stoopid to pinch like that, for noone will believe we ain't going to smash while she is such a screw!''If you weren't nothing but a little donkey,' said Lance, sittingcoiled up with his head on his knee, grimly contemplating him, 'you'dbe a show specimen of precocious depravity.''I declare,' persisted Bernard, 'Nares says it is coming as sure asfate; for his governor, and Jackman, and Collis are going to stump upthe old Pursuivant with their new Bexley Tribune, and Redstone is to besub-editor.''The black-hearted rascal!' cried Lance, bounding on his feet in arage. 'He ought to be kicked out of the shop this instant!''Now don't, Lance,' entreated Bernard, 'for Nares will pitch into mefor telling. He says they've got an opening through the Pur backing upthat mean beggar Smith; and Collis and Jackman will find the cash, andNares's father is to be editor, and they vow Froggatt and Underwoodwill be beat out of the field.''Catch them,' said Lance, and he stood leaning against the solid oldcarved bed-post in silence, till Bernard returned to the insolvency atpresent far more pressing.'Won't you help me about Stingo?' he said.'Do you want me to send him to the dog-show, ticketted "The Real Animaland no mistake"?''Don't, Lance,' said the boy peevishly. 'I thought you weregood-natured, and would lend me some tin, or at least stop theblackguard from being such a baboon. He's found out that Travis hascut, and he says he'll come to Felix this very day,' ended he, not farfrom crying.'I can't anyhow, to-day, Bear,' said Lance, more kindly. 'My head isvery bad, and you've not mended it.''It was well enough when you broke my knees,' grumbled Bernard. 'Come,Lance, you used to be a fellow to help one.''I can't, I tell you,' said Lance, hastily throwing himself back onthe bed, and shutting his eyes. 'It isn't that I won't, but I can't. Icouldn't walk straight down the street for giddiness; and if I did, Idon't suppose I could talk sense.'Bernard was startled by the tone as well as the words; but he had notarrived at much pity for any one but himself, and he whined, 'Butwhat shall I do, then?' repeating it dolefully, as Lance lay for somemoments silent and with closed eyes.'Bother!' he broke out angrily at last. 'Look here. Tell theblackguard--let me see--I don't well know what I'm saying. Tell himyou've spoken to me--no, to your brother--mind, you needn't saywhich--and that he'll come and see about it. Now give me that bolster,and take yourself off. Tell them I want no dinner, and don't let anyone come! Get along, and shut the door.'Bernard could extract no more, and departed as the dinner-bell rang,leaving him without energy even to lock the door. Presently Felix wasstanding anxiously over him; but he reiterated that he could not bearto think of food, and only wanted to be left alone; but just as hisbrother was leaving him, he said, 'Fee, do you know that Redstone isgoing over to the enemy?''The opposition paper? Nothing more likely. How did you hear?''Bear picked it up. I say, wasn't that little beggar to have gone toStoneborough?''Not possible, Lance; I've gone into it with Wilmet. She is in troubleabout household expenses, as it is; and with this rival paper on ourhands, I can't undertake anything extra. Has he been bothering you? I'mvery sorry, but we must keep him here.'Lance shut his eyes without reply; but no sooner was he left alonethan he rolled over, gave vent to a heavy groan from the bottom of hisheart, and clenched his hands as he lay. Then followed some heavy sobs,and a few great tears; but gradually a look of purpose and hope cameover his face, and he slept. He was lying between sleeping and waking,when a quiet step and cautious knock made him call out, 'Come in, Jack.''Your sister wants to know if you are better, and ready for some tea.''Thank you, I'm mending. Is Wilmet come home?''Yes, but only to become the prey of an ancient female.''Mrs. Bisset! Come to inspect you!''She won't, then! Shall I get you some tea?''No, thank you. But, I say, Jack, do you see my big box that we broughthome yesterday? Would you just dig into it for me?'John Harewood applied himself to disentangle a frightful knot,observing, 'This looks like Bill's handiwork.''Ay! Bill put all my traps together when our other fellows came back.''Together indeed!' said the Captain, looking at the heterogeneouscollection.'There's nothing to hurt,' said Lance. 'Do you see a green box?''A fiddle-case, you boy?''A violin-case,' said Lance, with dignity. 'Give it me.' And taking outhis purse, he produced its only contents--namely, the key--tried tosit up to unlock his treasure, but was forced by giddiness to lie backagain with a gasp, and hold out the key to his friend.'Come, I should think a fiddle the last thing you could want just now,'said John.'Just so. I'm afraid it is. Only, just let me see if she is all right.Ay!' and then, after a gaze, a fond touch or two, an irrepressible sighstrangled in the midst, 'lock her up again! You ain't by any chancegoing home to-morrow?''Do you want anything?''Why, when I got her at old Spicer's sale for twenty-two and sixpence,Poulter was beside himself at my luck, and said she was worth doublethat any day, and he would give it me if I got tired of her. Now, ifI'd only known yesterday, I could have done it myself; but I can't go,and I can't write--but if you could but send or take it to Poulter, andget the money for me!''Do you feel bound to give Poulter the refusal? for if it is really agood instrument, it ought to be worth more than that.''Poulter has been very good to me. He taught me to play on it,' saidLance; 'that is, he showed me a little; but Robin made me lock it upand give her the key all last spring, for fear of hindering my mugging;and I can't touch her now, so she has been very little use to me. Ipromised Poulter, and I think he should have her. Besides, I want themoney slick at once. It's no good sticking it in a window to wait forsome one to give what it is worth.'John marvelled what need of money could have come upon the boy inthe last twenty-four hours, but he was too discreet a friend to takeadvantage of necessity to ask questions, and said, 'The fact was, I wasthinking of running up to town to get a sewing-machine for your sister,but if I start by the earlier train, I can see Poulter on the way, andif he does not want it himself, he can tell me where to dispose of itto the best advantage.''Only it must be ready money,' said Lance; it must be owned withscarcely the alacrity of gratitude John deserved. 'If it didn't makemuch difference, I wish Poulter could have her, for then I shouldsometimes see her and handle her again, and I think he would use herwell.''Very well, I'll tell him.''And don't tell any one here,' added Lance. 'You don't go and tell W.W. everything, do you?' he added, wistful and perplexed.'Not other people's secrets,' said John. 'Now I am going to fetch yousome food; you are looking quite faint, you have had nothing sinceyesterday's dinner.'Poor Lance! when John was gone, he turned with another groan, once moretook the violin in his arms, laid it on his shoulder, and made themotions of playing, then kissed it, and whispering, 'Poulter will begood to you, my pretty. It's not for that little beggar of a Bear! It'sfor Felix, for Felix--' and then at a sound of steps, hastily replacedit, shut the box, and fell back again, dizzy and exhausted.The next day, he betook himself to a refuge more impregnable to Bernardthan even Mr. Froggatt's bed-room, namely the office, which suited hissociable nature, and where he was always welcome. He found employmentthere, too, in cutting out extracts from newspapers, labelling librarybooks, and packing parcels, and sometimes also, it must be owned, indrawing caricatures of the figures he spied through the chinks of thedoor.CHAPTER XXIII.SMOKE-JACK ALLEY.Launce. It is no matter if the ty'd were lost, for it is theunkindest ty'd that ever man ty'd.Panthino. What's the unkindest ty'd?Launce. Why, he that's ty'd here--Crab, mydog.--Shakespeare.John Harewood returned, bringing with him what Alda took for adressing-case, and Cherry for a drawing-box, but which proved tocontain a wonderful genie to save the well-worn fingers many a prick.To Lance he first administered the magical words, 'All right,' and thenmaking an opportunity, he put five sovereigns into his hand. Lance'sfirst impulse was, however, not to thank, but to exclaim, 'Then Poulterhas not got it?'No, Poulter's conscience had forbidden him to purchase 'littleUnderwood's' treasure at what he knew to be so much beneath its value;but he had given Captain Harewood his best advice and recommendations,and by that means the violin had been taken at a London shop, still ata price beneath his estimate, but the utmost that could be expectedwhere ready money was the point. Lance ought to have been delighted,and his native politeness made him repeat, 'Thank you;' but he couldnot quite keep down his regret--'Now I shall never see or hear heragain.'However, the next day, when Bernard flew upon him at twelve o'clock,asseverating that there was shade all the way, he allowed himself to bepersuaded, prudently carrying with him only ten shillings, and trustingto his blue umbrella rather than to Bernard's shade, which could hardlyhave been obtained by sidling against the walls.Bernard did not seem to have enjoyed much more of Stingo's society thanLance of his violin's--the produce of the same bounty. He confessedthat he had only ventured on taking the dog out three times in astring, and on one of these occasions he had broken loose after a cat,on another had fought with Nares's dog, and on the third had snapped atAngela.'You didn't take Angel into these places!''No, she came to meet me.''That's a sign of grace; but, Bear, I can't stand these diggings atall. I've a great mind to turn back.''You won't!' cried Bernard. 'You must have been here often when youwere a grammar-school fellow.''Not we! This is a cut below us! Fulbert would never have been caughthere!''But you are going to get me out of this fix?''Haven't I said I will? only hold your tongue, and let me alone tomanage the rascal. If you open your mouth, I've done with it.'Bernard was forced to acquiesce, though Lance's manner vexed andirritated him. Popular and valuable as Lance had been with thechoristers, he was not dealing as well with his brother, perhaps partlybecause he was more consciously trying to influence him; and likewisebecause the state of his health and his prospects so far affectedhis manner, that though never ill-humoured, it had lost some of theeasy careless sweetness of high spirits, and assumed an ironicaltone, exasperating to a child who could not brook ridicule. He wasashamed and dismayed at the place where Bernard was leading him, solow and disreputable that the boys of his time had never haunted it,and his own gamin propensities had never extended so far. It was atumble-down quarter; the houses, deplorable hovels, run up hastily forthe workmen at the potteries, and every third or fourth a beer-shop;and in the midst dwelt Mr. Sims, a maimed poacher, who kept a largelive-stock with which to trade on the sporting tastes of the youth ofBexley.Probably he was gratified to see that 'my brother' meant nothingmore imposing than the chorister; but Lance had so cultivated hisopportunities at Dick Graeme's home, as to be more knowing on thesubject than Felix would have been. Indeed, it did not take muchscience to estimate the value of the 'real animal,' whose market priceseemed to have fallen considerably. Lance, as he looked at the pied,bandy-legged, long-nosed cur, felt it impossible to set his costagainst his keep, nor was he designed by nature for driving bargains;but Sims' expectations were founded on the probable, and the debt wasannulled for three-and-sixpence and Stingo himself. Much civility wasexpended on Lance; dogs, rabbits, and other curiosities were exhibited,and an invitation given to come with the other young gents to admirethe favourite terrier's exploits upon a cage of rats shortly expected,admission free.'You will come, won't you?' cried Bernard eagerly, as they went out.'What? To all the vilest sports in the place!''But Lance, you told me about the rat hunt at Mr. Graeme's.''What? Turning out the barn, with Mr. Graeme himself, and Bill, and allthe rest? Do you think that's like letting a lot of wretched beasts outof a trap to be snapped up by a cur of a dog, with no end of drinkingfoul-mouthed blackguards betting on him?''You are always so savage, Lance; and now you've gone and paid away allthe money.''What more?''There's the shooting-gallery, you see.'Lance did see a public-house called the Flying Stag, where Bernard hadcontrived to incur a debt of a few shillings under Nares's patronage.While inquiring after the amount, he saw Mr. Mowbray Smith coming alongthe alley, and was more amused than shocked at the amazement his ownpresence there would cause the Curate; but just then he perceived thatmen were standing scowling at their doors, and slovenly women throngingout like ants when their hill is disturbed: and asking an explanationfrom the damsel in ear-rings who attended to him, he heard that 'thechaps are determined that that there Smith shall not have the impudenceto show his face here again, for a hypocrite, defrauding of the poor.You'd best be away, young gents, there will be a fracaw!''A row!' cried Bernard, between excitement and alarm. 'Shall we stayand see it? Won't Smith spy us?'Lance deigned no reply, but seeing the rough-looking men gathering asif to obstruct the Curate's way, he shot across the street to shakehands with him.'You! I am sorry to see you!' said Mr. Smith severely: at which Lancegave what under other circumstances would have been an impudent smile,and asked, 'Have you anywhere here to go?''I am just come away from a sick man. But you know how wrong it is tobring your little brother here. Take him away,' he added, trying toprevent them from joining him, and at the same time a voice shouted,'Let him alone, young gents, he aint your sort;' and a hissing andhooting broke out all round, 'A parson as ought to have his gown pulledover his head!' 'What's gone of the coals?' 'How about the blankets?'Bernard got a tight grip, out of sight, of Lance's coat; Mr. Smith grewred and bit his lips; but Lance walked close to him, and as they beganto be jostled, took his arm, holding the blue sun-shade over both theirheads. Unsavoury missiles began to fly; but a woman screeched, 'Badluck to ye, ye vagabone! ye've ruinated the young gentleman's purtyblue umberella!''Down with it, young chap,' called another, 'or ye'll be served withthe same sauce!''Serve un right too!' was the rejoinder. ''Tis they Underwoods, asnever stands up for poor men's rights, and is all for the tyrants.'(All this full of abusive epithets.)'Who said that?' broke out Lance, beginning hastily to close hisumbrella, and trying to wrench his arm from Mr. Smith; 'I'm ready forhim.'But Mr. Smith, with an angry 'Are you mad?' held him fast; and hisstruggles provoked a good-humoured laugh at the little champion, stillso white and slight.'No, no,' said a big powerful man, collaring a great lad who had beenthrusting forward at Lance's defiance, 'we don't have no mills withnatomies like you! Go home and mind yer own business. Your father wasanother guess sort of parson, and I'll not see a finger laid on you. Beoff, till we've given that other bad lot a bit of our mind.''Not I!' growled Lance. 'I'll have it out with that rascalthere.--Nonsense, Mr. Smith; I can, I say--and I will!'But the big man and Mr. Smith were perfectly in accordance this time;and without a word between them, the impulse of the coal-heaver'sweight somehow opened a path, where, shoved by the one, and dragged bythe other, Lance was at the corner--then round it--the crowd followedno farther.'A plucky little chap that!' quoth the coal-heaver to Mr. Smith. 'Youmay thank your stars that he's his father's son, or it would have beenthe worse for you! And if ever you show the face of you here again, youknow what to expect.''I expect nothing but what I am willing to receive in my Master'sservice,' said Mr. Smith, firmly meeting his eyes. 'Meantime, thank youfor the help you have given me with these boys. Good morning. You willjudge me more fairly another time.'The man added another contemptuous oath to those with which he hadfreely laden his discourse; but Lance paused a moment to say, 'Thankyou too, you meant it well; but I wish you'd have let me have it outwith that foul-mouthed cad.''Wait till ye're a match for him, and welcome,' said the man. 'Blessye! what could that fist do with Black Bill?''For shame, boys! come away,' said the infinitely disgusted Curate;and not a word was spoken down the first street; Bernard was stilltrembling with excitement, and Lance, conscious perhaps that though hisinterference had answered his purpose, he had been betrayed into whathe now saw to have been absurd.At last the Curate spoke, his naturally harsh voice wavering a littlebetween reproach and acknowledgment. 'I am very sorry for all this,Lancelot Underwood. I believe you joined me out of a kind and generousfeeling, of which I am sensible; otherwise, I should feel it my duty toreport to your brother where I met you.''You are quite welcome,' said Lance, coolly.'And I must say,' continued Mr. Smith, 'that if your whole training,as well as your recent severe illness, do not withhold you from suchassociations, at least I entreat you to pause before leading yourlittle brother into them.'Lance made no answer, except to halt at a public drinking fountain,to wash away the damage his umbrella had sustained; and there, with aserious 'Take care!' the Curate left the brothers.'Catch me going to his help again!' exclaimed Bernard, entirelyunconscious that his own gratitude to Lance was on a par with Mr.Smith's. 'He may get out of the next row as he can!''Ah! Bear! You see how you are corrupting my innocent youth!''A meddling donkey! I wish he had a rotten egg in each eye! Now it willall come out.''What will?''Where we have been.''That's the best thing that could happen.''You don't mean that you mean to let it out?''If you expect me to tell lies for you, you are out there.''But, Lance, Lance,' in an agony, 'you wouldn't be such a sneak, when Itrusted you?'Lance laughed. The bare idea of betrayal seemed so absurd, that hescarcely thought it worth removing.The two were slackening their pace as they saw Felix at thecarriage-door of a lady customer; and Lance said gravely, 'I'll see toMother Goldie; but now, Bear, that you are out of this scrape, I giveyou fair warning, that if I find you grubbing your nose into that sortof thing again, I'll put a stop to it, one way or another.''I'm not a bit worse than the rest. All the other fellows do it.''Oh, I suppose, if you think Stingo the right thing in dogs, you thinkNares the right thing in fellows!'At that moment the customer drove off, and Felix having spied the bluesun-shade, tarried at the door to administer a remonstrance to Lanceon being so foolish as to venture into the noon-day sun. He was notable to come in to dinner till it was half over, and then it was with amerry look and question, 'What's this, boys, about Mowbray Smith beingmobbed in Smoke-jack Alley and your making in to the rescue?''Oh,' said Lance, 'there was an attempt at getting up a shindy, but itwas of the meanest description. No one knew how to set about it. Therewas only one Irishman there, and he was a woman.' (This with a wink toSibby.)'And you didn't offer to fight big Ben Blake?''Ben Blake, on the contrary, elbowed us all safe out, because my fatherwas another guess sort of parson!''And there was a horrible little cad making faces,' exclaimed Bernard,unable to resist claiming part of the glory, 'and I was just going tohave pitched into him----''What--you saw the row getting up, and went to stand by Smith?' saidFelix.'Yes,' said Bernard boldly; 'and nobody durst lay a finger on him whenwe were on each side of him!'At which everybody burst out laughing, including Mr. Froggatt, andLance most of all. 'Who was it, then,' he struggled to say gravely,'that pulled so hard at the back of my coat? I suppose it must havebeen some little cad. I thought it had been you.''Well, it was time to hold you back, when you were going to fight thatgreat lout!''For my part,' said Lance, 'I think it must have been Smith and I thatwere holding the Great Bear back by his tail from fighting big BenBlake. Eh?'Bernard, never able to bear being laughed at, looked intensely sulky;and a true description of the affair being asked by Mr. Froggatt,Lance gave it, exactly enough, but with so much of the comic sidethat every one was in fits of merriment, all of which, in his presentmood, the younger boy imagined to be aimed at him. He was too full ofangry self-consequence really to attend, so as to see how entirelydisconnected with himself the laughter was; all he cared for was thatLance should not betray him; and to assure himself on this head, itmust be confessed that he hovered on the upper stairs out of sight,while Felix was lingering on the lower to say to Lance, 'Of course itwas only Smith's affair that took you into Smoke-jack Alley?''Not exactly,' said Lance.Bernard trembled with resentment and alarm.'I don't want to ask questions, but you know it is not a nice place foryourself or for Bernard.''My dear governor, I know that as well or better than you do, and itwon't be my fault if I go there again.''Don't let it be anybody's fault,' returned Felix, and vanished throughthe office door; while Lance, sighing wearily, was heard repairingto his refuge in his own room, and Bernard grimly and moodily swunghimself down-stairs, on his way to afternoon school, believing himselfa much aggrieved party. Here was Lance, whom he had believed afellow-inhabitant of the Alsatia of boyhood, turned into one of thosenatural enemies, moral police, who wanted to do him good! True, Lancehad helped him out of his scrape, and guarded his secret; but Bernardcould not forgive either his own alarm, or the 'not exactly;' and theterms of confidence so evident between him and Felix seemed to placethem in the same hateful category. Worse than all, Lance had laughedat him, and Bernard was far too proud and self-important not to feelevery joke like so many nettle-stings. He had expected an easy carelesshelper; he had found what he could not comprehend, whether boy or man,but at any rate a thing with that intolerable possession, a conscience,and a strong purpose of keeping him out of mischief.To detect which purpose was to be resolved on thwarting it. Nor, itmust be allowed, was Lance's management perfect. He wanted to makehimself a companion such as would content the boy instead of theNareses; but to cross the interval of amusement between sixteen and tenrequired condescension, that could not but be perceived and rejected,nor did he perceive that ridicule was an engine most fatal in dealingwith Bernard. Of course nothing like all this passed through theboy's mind. Lance simply saw that his little brother was getting intomischief, and tried to play with him to keep him out of it, but wasneither well nor happy enough to do so naturally, and therefore did notsucceed. Yet if he had abstained from showing Bernard a picture in thestyle of Punch, of the real animal and no mistake, and Bernard himselfpointing to Felix and observing that the governor didn't know what'swhat, he might have prevailed to prevent the boy from eluding him andgoing to Mr. Sims' rat-hunt.Of all this Felix knew nothing. He still had much lee-way to make up,in consequence of his absence, and the excitement in the town told uponthe business.Mr. Bevan's reply had been a timid endeavour at peace-making whichfoes called shuffling, and friends could only call weakness, so thatit added to the general exasperation. Then came the Archdeacon'sinvestigation, which elucidated the Curate's moral integrity, butshowed how money subscribed for charity had gone in the churchexpenses, that ought to have been otherwise provided for. It wasallowed that the Rector had been only to blame in leaving the wholeadministration to the Curate under his wife's dominion, and as the ladycould not be put forward, Mr. Smith was left to bear the whole brunt ofthe storm.His obsequiousness to Lady Price had alienated his brother clergy, andhis fellow-curate allowed himself to be kept aloof by his mother, in amanner that became ungenerous. Half petulant, and wholly ungracious, asMr. Smith's manner was in receiving assistance, only strong principlecould lead any one to befriend him; and his few advisers found itdifficult to hinder him from making a public exposure of 'my Lady,' orfrom throwing up his work suddenly and leaving the town, which would ofcourse have been fatal to his prospects.The Pursuivant had a difficult course to steer. Mr. Froggatt wouldfain have ignored the strife altogether, but the original note ofdefiance having been sounded by his trumpet, this was not possible,and the border line between justice and partizanship was not easyto keep. Whether the young editor did keep it was a question. ToMr. Smith, he seemed a tame, lukewarm supporter; to Mr. Froggatt, adangerously conscientious and incautious champion; and the vociferouspublic despised the dull propriety, and narrow partizanship, of theold country paper. Finally, on the first Saturday in October, thereappeared the first sheet of the Bexley Tribune, with a cutting articleon bloated dignitaries and blood-sucking parasites, and an equallypersonal review of all the Proudie literature. On the Monday morningone hundred and twenty-nine Pursuivants remained on hand. Redstonetook the trouble to count them, and to look into the office to ask Mr.Underwood where they should be stowed away.'I wish he was smothered in them, the malicious brute!' said Lance,grinding his teeth, when Felix had given a summary answer. 'What ablessing to see the ugly back of him on the 1st of November!''I'm not so sure of that,' said Felix, as he sorted the letters of theSunday post.'Do you think he can do us any harm?''No; but he seems a specimen of an article hard to supply at the sameprice.''Are those answers to your advertisement?''Yes, and very unpromising.'Lance came to look them over with him, and to put aside those worthshowing to Mr. Froggatt; but it seemed that an assistant suitablein appearance and intelligence was so costly as to alarm theirold-fashioned notions. He must be efficient, for Mr. Froggatt wasequal to little exertion, and never came in on bad days; and to givean increased salary when the paper was struggling with a rival wasserious; yet the only moderate proposal was from a father at Dearport,who wanted his son boarded, lodged, and treated as one of the family.'That is impossible,' said Felix, 'unless the Froggatts would do it.''Eighteen!' said Lance. 'I'm sixteen, and up to the ways of the place!Why don't you set me to work before I have eaten my head off?''It would not do for you afterwards,' said Felix; 'I don't like yourrushing out to serve.''But really, Felix, I mean it. I can do all Redstone does, exceptlifting some of the weights; and I am as old as you when you began.''No, no, Lance; your line is cut out for you.''It was,' said Lance, 'but I'm off it, and no good as I am; and if youcould save Redstone's salary, you might send Bear to Stoneborough,instead of letting him stay here and go to the dogs.''Ah!' groaned Felix, 'it is hard that all this should come to upset hischances!''Are you really afraid those rascals can do us much harm?''We have a sound county circulation beyond their reach, but everycopy they sell is so much out of our pockets; and there are so manypeople possessed with a love of the low and scurrilous, as well as somany who differ in politics, that it must thrive unless they stultifythemselves. Don't look so appalled, Lancey boy; we aint coming togrief, only it will be a close shave at home this winter.''Then, Felix, let me help! You don't know the comfort it would be.''Not so loud,' said Felix, stepping into the shop. Lance stoodthoughtful, then hearing more footsteps, ran out, and found two orthree boys come for school materials, and some maids waiting to changevolumes for their ladies. He gave his ready help; and there ensueda lull, for it was a wet day, such as to make Mr. Froggatt's comingdoubtful. Felix took a second survey of the applications.'Now, Fee, do think about this; I am in earnest.''So am I, Lance; I am very thankful to you, but it is not to be thoughtof.''Why not? Am I too small? For that's mending. There's one good thing inbeing ill, it sets one growing. My thick go-to-meeting trousers that Ileft at Minsterham, are gone up to my ankles; I must ask Wilmet if Clemhasn't left a pair that have got too seedy for Cambridge.''It is not that, Lance, but the disadvantage it might be to you inafter-life.''If I took to it for good?''No, no, Lance; one is enough.''Stay. Don't shut me up that way. Recollect what this horriddonothingness is doing for me. I am losing all chance of theexhibition, and they can't keep me on at the Cathedral without, for myvoice has got like an old crow's; and besides, if I can't read, what'sthe good of standing for scholarships?''You will feel very differently when your head is stronger. Besides, ifthere should be anything in what we were told at Ewmouth, it would be apity to get more involved with trade.''I thought that was never to be spoken of.''And this is my first time. Don't take it as a licence.''I could see the sense of that, if it were you,' said Lance, 'but notfor No. 5.''No. 1 would have his place and work found for him, but No. 5 might notfind it easy to turn to something else.''Well!' said Lance, considering, 'you said that possibility was notto make any difference to us. Wouldn't it be making the wrong sortof difference to let it keep a great lout like me in idleness whileBernard is going to the bad?''What do you mean about Bernard?' said Felix, now thoroughly roused.'Is it worse than you and Fulbert were in your gamin days?''I am afraid so,' said Lance. 'Ful took better care of himself than heseemed to do, and his friends were decent fellows, not like the lotthat have hooked in poor little Bear.''I suppose it was some scrape of his that took you into Smoke-jackAlley. I thought you would get him out best without me.''The little dog, he was always after me when I didn't want him, but nowI can't get at him. In short, there's nothing for it but cutting theconnection between him and Jem Nares.''Just tell me how far it goes. What has he been doing with him?''Taking him to see rat-killing at Sims' in Smoke-jack Alley.''You couldn't hinder it?''No. Indeed, Felix, I did my best,' and the tears sprang into the boy'seyes; 'I did all but go after him, for I knew that would be worse thanno good.''You need not apologize to me,' said Felix, laying down his pen; 'Ihave been very wrong. Between this business of Smith's and all the restof it, I have hardly known which way to turn. I knew that I had nottaken the right line with Fulbert, and interference made him worse, andI thought you had taken Bear in hand. Why, Lancey, I never meant toupset you. You have done all you could.''I did think I was good for that,' said Lance ruefully, 'after allour old swells at Minsterham said about influence on the choir andbosh. That when it comes to one's own brother--'The tears were almost girl-like, and Felix's comfort was in the tonethat suited them. 'Indeed, Lance, you may be doing him more good thanyou know. I thank you with all my heart; you are a much more real helpand comfort to us all than you guess.''That's what you say to Cherry!' said Lance, impatiently. 'Now I can bereal help, if you would only let me, and then Bernard could go out ofthe way of these fellows.''That he shall do, if I have to dip into the Chester legacy again.''Better take my way,' said Lance, reviving; 'a young man with goodreferences only wants board and lodging.''It is not possible, Lance. It would not be respectful to the Bishopor the Dean, who have strained a point to keep you. There--I hear Mr.Kenyon's voice in the shop. I must go.''Only one thing, Felix. Will you hear what Jack Harewood says to it?'To this Felix readily assented. He was hurried and harassed nearlyto the extent of his time and capacity; he could not pause to givefull consideration to his young brother's project, and was glad thatthe ungracious task of silencing it should be imposed on one lessimmediately interested.John Harewood was always at Wilmet's side after four o'clock. Beforethat time he sometimes went to his home; he often spent the afternoonwith Geraldine, but he was not usually about the house in the morning.So Lance, in a fever of impatience, wandered till he hunted him downwriting letters in the coffee-room at the Fortinbras Arms.'Jack, I say, come and have a walk.''Pleasant weather!''You want to be watered, after all that parching in India. It isn'training now, and such a jolly cool day!''Jollier for you than a finer day, mayhap,' said the good-naturedsoldier, who greatly commiserated Lance's enforced idleness, and onlywondered at his not making it a greater misery to every one else. Healso understood what the inured ears of the family never guessed, sinceLance never complained, the distress of Theodore's constant hum andconcertina to sensitive ears and excited nerves; and had observed thatLance had flagged ever since the journey to Minsterham, with less ofvigour and more of sharpness. Sure that something was preying on theboy, he deferred his least important letters, to splash away with himin mud and mist, and hear him explain his views, with the fullnessoften more possible towards friend than family.John was greatly surprised, but did not make any crushing objection,and listened with thorough sympathy. He doubted, however, whether Lancewould be doing any real good, and not only throwing more, instead ofless work upon Felix. Sensibly enough the boy went into the matter.He said that when Felix began, the staff had also consisted of Mr.Froggatt, Redstone, a lad called Stubbs, and a boy. Now Felix did muchmore than Mr. Froggatt had then done, and Stubbs was a useful pieceof mechanism without a head, and Lance believed himself quite able tofill the place Felix had taken at the same age; indeed, he had far lesseither to learn or to overcome, and though his arithmetical powers werestill in abeyance, he had rather excelled in that line at the Cathedralschool.'I know, of course,' said Lance, 'that a man from a London house wouldbe of more use; but there's this awful salary, and he would never careto look after Felix.''I allow that; but even if you can be of much present use, is it not atthe expense of greater usefulness by-and-by?''I am sick of that! Edgar and Clem both mean to be of use by-and-by,and what comes of it? Edgar has spent Felix's two hundred pounds thathe borrowed, and now has got his own, all to repay when he is a greatpainter. And he is six years older than I am! Now if I earned my guineaa week, as Felix did, it would be real good now, and I should belearning the trade for the future.''That's the question. First, would the guinea a week make so muchappreciable difference?''Is that all you know about it, Jack? First, I should be earning mykeep, not eating my head off; and then Bernard might be sent safe offto school.''You don't mean to say that otherwise he could not?''It has been a terribly costly year. There's Edgar. Then Clem couldn'tsettle in at Cambridge for nothing; there's been Alda turned backon Felix's hands; there's been illness, and goodness knows what thedoctors may charge; and there's Felix's outing and mine!'John answered by opening his pocket-book and showing Dr. Manby'saccount receipted.'O Jack! You don't mean--''Considering that Will was the sole cause of the doctor being wanted atall, we could only wish to bear the damages.''I hope you have told Wilmet. It would be a ton weight off her mind.''I hope she would think the Chapter did it; but if you think she isanxious, let her know that it is all right.''You are a brick, John! But Felix himself said it would be a closeshave. I wish I could throttle that Bexley Tribune, and all its dirtysupporters!''Do you know, Lance, I am very much struck with your brother's--ay, andold Froggatt's conduct in this matter.'Lance flushed with pleasure. 'Go ahead, Jack!''Of course, for a paper to keep its politics is nothing; but to take upthe cause of an unpopular man, whose slights have been marked--''Who has been a malicious little cad,' chimed in the chorister.'To take up his cause, simply as a matter of justice, and therewith ofthe Church, without truckling to public opinion, at absolute risk andloss, seems to me generosity and principle quite out of the common way.''You're about right there,' said Lance, intensely gratified; 'anddoesn't it make one burn to help the old fellow?''Quite true. The question is, which way to help him; and while I grantyou that the being idle at home just now is a terrible trial, whetherit might not be better to be patient under it, than to disqualifyyourself for a line in which you might do more--that is if it doesdisqualify you.''What line do you mean?' said Lance.'Scholarship, the University.''That wasn't what I wanted most,' said Lance; 'and as for that, I'mdisqualified enough by all this waste of time.''What was your wish, then?''I'll tell you,' said Lance, with lowered voice. 'When I used to liecatching notes of the chanting, and knowing that the organ was quietfor me, I used to feel that if I got well, I must give up my lifeto it, and study music in full earnest, so as to be a real lift topeople's praise, perhaps in our own Cathedral. I thought maybe I couldget in as a lay-vicar when my year is up, and work at harmony underMiles, and take a musical degree. But then came that day when the organseemed to be crushing and grinding my head to bits--and of all Psalmsin the world it was the forty-second! and Manby telling me on my lifenot to try to do anything for I can't tell how long.''Was that the reason you sold your violin?''No, of course not; except that it was a sin and a shame to keep it forno good, when I thought a pound might pull that little ape Bernard outof the mire. And I've been asking questions, and find it would takehuge time and cost to study music so as to be worth anything; and heream I, a great lout, not doing that or any other good on the face of theearth--as much worse than Theodore as I am bigger. So if I can helpFelix, when he is fighting the fight in the Pursuivant for God's honourand good and right, wouldn't that be a sort of service?''So undertaken,' said John, with a huskiness in his voice. 'Well,Lance, I will talk it over with Felix, if you like.'For John Harewood, not having any strong musical bias, did not greatlyappreciate the career that Lance had chalked out for himself; andwhile thrilled by the boy's devotional feeling, thought it tingedby enthusiasm, and had seen enough of Cathedral singing-men to haveno wish to see him among them. If the loss of time was to preventa University career, he thought book-selling under Felix's eye thepreferable occupation.Discussion was, however, deferred by the arrival of a home friend, whohad sought him out at the hotel; and Lance had to go home without him,and wear through the day between dawdling, drawing, and playing withStella, as best he might, till after school-hours; when, eager to turnto the account of his wardrobe these moments when Wilmet was free fromher Captain, he drew her into his room.Presently after, Felix heard the most amazing noises to which hisfamily had ever treated him, and thankful that the wet day had reducedthe denizens of the reading-room to one deaf old gentleman, he hurriedupstairs, and beheld through the open door of Mr. Froggatt's room,Bernard raving, roaring, dancing, and stamping, in an over-masteringpassion, and tearing some paper up with teeth and hands. Just thenLance grasped his collar, and tried in vain to rescue the paper; buthe fought with fists, bites, and kicks, like something frantic, untilFelix, with a bound forward, suddenly captured him, and dragged himback, still tearing and crunching the paper.'For shame! Be quiet! You are heard all over the place.--Shut the door.'The door was shut by Wilmet, while Bernard stood quailing under thestern face, strong hand, and tone of displeasure in which Felixdemanded, 'What is the meaning of this?''That Bernard refuses to wear Lance's outgrown clothes,' said Wilmet.'Do you mean that this is the cause of this disgraceful outbreak?''I--I don't see why--' growled Bernard, 'why I should wear everybody'sbeastly old things.''It is right you should hear the whole, Felix,' said Wilmet. 'WhenI showed him that Lance would have some still shabbier clothes ofClement's altered for him, he said if Lance chose to be a snob, hewould not. Lance answered that it was a choice between that andpetticoats; and then he fell into this extraordinary state, when I canonly hope he did not know what he was saying or doing.''He was drawing me,' bellowed Bernard, 'drawing me in his brute of abook!' and he was so infuriated, that words never before heard by hissister followed, as he quivered and stamped even under Felix's grasp,which at length forced him into desisting; but the command, 'Go upto your room this instant,' could only be carried out by main force,amid tremendous kicking and struggling, Felix carrying him, and Wilmetfollowing to unfasten the hands that clutched at the rail; while Lancestood aghast at one door, and Cherry in an agony at another, and Stellacrept into a corner, and hid her face in terror.'Well, we never had the like of this before!' said Felix, coming down,having locked him in, and heard him begin to bounce about the barrack,like prisoners in the breaking-out frenzy. 'Can it be all about theclothes?''I don't think you know what a grievance the having to take to old oneshas always been to him, poor little boy!' said Cherry, very nearlycrying, for Bernard was so much her own child, that in spite of hishaving cast her off, she was in full instinct of defence; 'and hedislikes Lance's most of all, because of the Cathedral peculiarities.''Ah! you have always humoured him by taking off that chorister'sfrill,' said Wilmet; 'but there could be no objection to thosetrousers. They were almost new when Fulbert left them, and Lance hasonly had them for best one winter.'Felix could not help laughing. 'Long had she worn, and now Belindawears,' he quoted. 'My dear Mettie, the effect is better than thedetail. You should spare us the pedigree, however respectable.''Well, I said nothing about it,' said Wilmet. 'Was it what you saidabout petticoats, Lance?''Lance does tease and aggravate that child unbearably!' exclaimedCherry, too much vexed not to be relieved to turn her blame uponsomebody; 'and it is very unkind of him, for he knows Bernard cannotbear to be laughed at.''Hush! Cherry,' said Wilmet; 'if Lance did, he didn't mean it. It hasbeen quite too much--''Indeed it has, said Felix. 'You had better lie down at once, Lance.'A good deal more than Bernard's outbreak had gone to the pain anddizziness that prevented Lance from even attempting to reply toCherry's accusation, but made him turn quietly back into his room;while Felix was obliged to hurry downstairs again; and Alda made herfrequent remark that 'those boys were really unbearable.''Poor Lance! it was not his fault,' said Wilmet.'You don't know, Wilmet!' said Cherry indignantly. 'I did hope thatwhen he came home, my poor little Bernard might get better managed--heused to be so fond of him; but he has done nothing but worry and laughat him, and I don't at all wonder it has come to this. I shall go upand see about the poor little fellow.''Do you mean to let her go and pet him after such outrageousnaughtiness?' asked Alda, as Cherry moved to begin the difficult ascent.'I should not do it myself,' said Wilmet; 'but I daresay she will dohim good.'Alda held up her hands in wonder. How many quarrels might have beengoing on at that moment, if three of the family at least had notexercised the forbearance she so little understood.Cherry and her Lord Gerald mounted the attic stairs. It was for thefirst time in her life, and she was so imperfect in the geography ofthe upper floor, that she had to open one or two doors before she found'the barrack,' with Bernard lying kicking his heels fiercely at thebeam across the low room. The amazing presence of Geraldine suspendedthis occupation. 'How did you come here?' he gasped.'I came to see you, Bear. My poor Bear! I am so sorry!' said Cherry,sitting down on one of the beds; 'how could you go on so?'There was rebuke and pain in her voice, and Bernard resented it.'They've no business to bait me,' he said. 'I've no peace in my life!''But that doesn't make it right to fly into such dreadful passions.''I wouldn't do it if they'd let me alone. I don't see why I should bethe one to wear every one's nasty old clothes.''Why, Felix and Clement couldn't well wear yours!''It was all Lance's doing. Lance has bothered me out of existence eversince he came home.''But you should try to bear it, if he is a little cross and tiresome.You know he is not at all well yet, and all this has quite knocked himup.''I'm glad of it!' said Bernard viciously. 'Served him right for settingWilmet on, and then drawing his abominable pictures; as if it wasn'tenough to have spoilt all my pleasure, and sold Stingo!''What was Stingo?''Oh, just a dog--''A dog!''Yes, my dog; and Lance went and sold him, and then drew a beastlypicture of him and me.''But, Bernard, how could you have a dog?''Oh, I bought him with some money Travis gave me, and a cad down in thetown kept him for me; but then Travis didn't give me any more--''But, Bernard, you must have known you ought not. Did you get intodebt?''Ay, just for a few shillings; and the brute threatened me so that Ijust asked Lance--''Was he such a dangerous dog? O Bear!''No, no--the man that kept him. I thought Lance would tackle himwithout making a row.''And did he?''Ay. He said he hadn't got a penny, and he kept me waiting ever solong; but I fancy he got it from Harewood. He might as well have let mekeep Stingo!'Cherry's views of the relations between Lance and Bernard had begunto adjust themselves, and she began to reason on the impropriety ofkeeping the dog; but she soon perceived that this was only rangingherself on the side of the enemy, and exciting the obduracy of herfavourite, who was determined to be a victim. In truth, Bernard wasnot repentant enough to treat her with confidence, and his world wasso entirely beyond her knowledge, that she did not possess the threadsthat would have led to it. All that she did perceive was, that much ofBernard's irritation was at the endeavour to keep him out of mischief,and that her own gentle persuasions were almost as distasteful asLance's jests. She sat on, arguing, talking, entreating, till it hadlong been quite dark; and Wilmet at last came up to say that she mustnot stay any longer in the cold, and to ask Bernard whether he wouldsay he was sorry.'I didn't want her to come here bothering,' was Bernard's gratefulremark.'Well, I advise you to take care you are in a better mood before Felixcomes,' said Wilmet.--'Come, Cherry, it is not safe for you to go downalone.'Cherry could only entreat, 'Do, Bear, do,' and try to kiss the avertedcheek.She did not know that as soon as the door was shut on him and thelittle flicker of gas, Bernard fell into an anguish of sobs and tears,the work of her persevering love, softening and lessening the obstinatepride so far that the next visitors met with a much better receptionthan they might have done. The first came stumbling up with a wearystep, and pushed open the door, saying, 'Here, Bear, don't bear malice.I'm awfully sorry I ever drew that thing! I'll never do you again. Soshake hands, and have done with it.''All right,' returned Bernard, outstretching his hand as one who feltthat amends were made him, but could not receive them graciously; andLance's weary and confused senses were satisfied. He never perceivedhard lumps of offence unless he ran his head very hard against them,and even now little guessed the amount of annoyance his raillery hadgiven.And next came a quick, resolute tread that made the little fellowshiver with apprehension, never guessing at his brother's self-debatewhether obstinate impenitence ought not to bring the rod, and wonderingrecollection of his own displeasure when Mr. Audley recommended itsdisuse in the fatherless household. Felix held by the spirit ratherthan the letter, and had decided that unless he found submission,signal punishment must ensue.It was an immense relief to him to detect by eye and ear that the childhad been crying, and to be able to say that seeing that he was sorrymade it possible to attend to Lance's kind entreaty not to be hard uponhim. Absolute words of penitence Felix did not try to exact; but aftera few words of sympathy, which Bernard had by no means expected, on thehardship of the second-hand wardrobe, and a reminder of the necessity,he proceeded to rebuke for the passionate behaviour, and above allfor the language Bernard had used; expressing to the full how much ithad shocked and appalled him, by showing what sort of associates theboy must have chosen since he had learnt such words at all, and whata shame and disgrace he felt it that one of the brothers should everhave uttered them. And Bernard--who had learnt that Satanic primerwith a certain shame and repugnance, under the strong desire to showhimself neither girl, muff, nor choir-boy, and certainly would neverin his right senses have betrayed his proficiency at home--was a gooddeal impressed, and finally began to cry again, and to promise to curehimself.Believed to have thus fulfilled the least pleasing of all his duties,Felix went down to his long-delayed evening meal, and therewith to afamily council. Lance was gone to bed, and his proposal was the morefreely discussed, as well as his relations with Bernard.'That boy must go at once to Stoneborough,' said Felix. 'I shall writeto Dr. Cheviot to-night.'Wilmet sighed. 'I suppose I ought not to have objected,' she said; 'butI did think Lance would have kept him in order.''He has tried,' said Felix.'O Felix!' cried Cherry, turning to him with tears in her eyes, 'I amafraid I was unjust to Lance just now, and I am so sorry! Do you know,the naughty little fellow had been keeping a dog and got into debt; andLance paid all--I can't think how!''That I believe I can tell,' said John Harewood, 'though I am afraid itis a breach of confidence. He sold his violin.''That violin that I was so angry with him for buying!' said Wilmet.'Well, he is a dear little fellow!''And I scolded him for being unkind!' cried Cherry, in despair. 'Oh, ishe asleep? I should like to beg his pardon,' and her hand clasped LordGerald.'About the worst thing you could do to the poor boy, Cherry,' saidFelix, 'when he is only lying there trying to get his head quiet enoughto let him sleep.''Nor must you betray me,' added John, smiling at poorconscience-stricken Cherry.'And it is a mercy the fiddle is gone!' said Alda. 'I used to hear himplaying it somewhere among the out-houses in the spring, and it wasenough to distract one, added to Theodore's dronings.''It must have been like parting with a bit of his life,' sighed Cherry;'and yet Bernard would not mind him, and they did quarrel!''Boys who deal well with juniors at school do sometimes fail withlittle brothers,' said John. 'Besides, I observe that where there ispride there is always a distaste and dread of those who have much powerof ridicule.''I suspect, too,' said Felix, 'that Lance has made the turn in lifewhen one gets superfluously earnest, and nothing so upsets influence. Ihave felt it myself.''So all this trouble and vexation has been weighing on the dear littlefellow,' said Wilmet. 'No wonder he is not half so well as when he camehome!''No,' said Felix; 'I wonder whether the Froggatts would let him come tothem for a week or two, or whether it would be too dull to be good forhim.''If his mind were settled about the future, it would be rest ratherthan dullness,' said John; 'but I think a good deal of his trouble iscaused by Manby's verdict, and for that perhaps the best cure would beletting him have his wish.''You, John!' exclaimed Felix; 'I thought you would have put that out ofhis head!''On the contrary, he made me think there was a good deal in hisarguments. First, as regards you, would he be of any real use?''Never mind that,' said Felix. 'I heard something to-day that wouldmake it practicable; but I can't have that boy wasted.''The point is, what is waste? Now his strongest aptitude never was forclassical work; and if he is not to touch a Latin book till Christmas,and then only cautiously, I do not see what chance he would have, evenif Will were out of the way.''And if not at Minsterham, so much the less anywhere else,' saidWilmet. 'Besides, it might be a dreadful risk if his head were to beoverstrained.''And in the meantime, the being kept here doing nothing, and vexinghimself, is wearing his spirits, and hurting him more than any lightoccupation, especially what he felt to be a labour of love.''That is quite true again,' said Felix. 'I quite believe he would bemuch happier if he began working with me to-morrow; but it might beletting a mere fit of impatience and despondency fix him for life in anuncongenial business.''I thought you preferred it!' exclaimed Wilmet.'Oh yes,' said Felix, with a sort of half contempt in his tone; 'butthese boys of ours are a different sort of stuff, and we have seen thatit will never answer to pin them down to plod.''Lance would never be like Edgar!' exclaimed Wilmet; 'as if Edgar everthought of doing anything so unselfish in his life!''O Wilmet! indeed he thought!' cried Cherry.'Yes, but always of five or six years hence!' said Wilmet.'Lance is very like Edgar,' said Felix. 'He has what I believe belongsto the artist temperament; and that he is the bravest, the mostuncomplaining little fellow I ever came across, and probably wouldnever break off what he had begun, makes me the more anxious not to letthis access of generosity--ay, and tedium--lead to taking any decidedstep while he is so young.''When you come to artist temperament, I don't understand,' said Wilmet.'Lance doesn't even draw anything like Cherry or Edgar--much good doesthat do! and as to his music, it would not be much of a living.''I believe he thinks that the alternative,' said John.'For goodness' sake!' cried Alda, 'he doesn't want to get taken onin London! To have him singing and fiddling in public would be worsethan anything. You put that out of his head, I hope, John. Even if hechanged his name--''It never was in his head,' said John. 'He never thought of anythingbut his old line--Cathedral music: and the sacrifice to him is of that,not of the chance of the University.''That's not so bad,' said Alda, 'because it is a great chance whetherany one ever heard of it.''But I doubt if it be a very desirable life, as things are at presentconstituted,' said John. 'I am not sure that it is not better to givethe musical talent freely for that service, than to make it one's tradeand livelihood.''I think you are right there,' said Felix. 'I suppose there is alwayssome degree of disenchantment.''What did you say made his notion practicable?' said Wilmet.'I've had Mr. Lamb with me this evening--''Mr. Bruce's managing clerk,' explained Wilmet to the Captain. 'Does hewant you to have Ernest?''Yes. He has missed the exhibition from the grammar-school; and as hecan't go to Oxford, fancies (deluded youth!) that he will get morereading in this line than any other. He is ready to give a premium withhim, and spoke what Mr. Froggatt would call very handsomely about ourhouse being one where he could trust him. I believe Mr. Froggatt willbe gratified, and accept him.''Ernest Lamb--Serious mutton,' repeated Cherry; 'doesn't he look veryheavy?''Yes; he is bookish without being quick. I don't expect he will be ofmuch use just yet, but he is as steady as old Time; and though he andLance would neither of them do alone, yet together I think we could geton.''Then,' said John, 'does it not seem to you, Wilmet, that it would bea greater positive benefit to accept Lance's offer for the present--ontrial, as one may say--than to leave him to the depression that iscertainly doing him harm?''And if Lance was there,' said Wilmet, 'I should have some comfort thatFelix would be properly looked after.''Whatever happens,' said Felix, 'I shall send Lance out to Marshlandsfor a fortnight, and see if he is in the same mind when he comes back.After all, it depends on Mr. Froggatt: and he will be afraid peoplewill say we have turned in the whole Grammar-school behind the counter.I wonder if Lance is safe not to laugh in the old ladies' faces whenthey ask--What number of what magazine, how many years ago, had areceipt for washing anti-macassars?'By which they knew him to be very much exhilarated.That fortnight at Marshlands was not wasted. Lance had facultiesfor never being dull. He pottered about with Mr. or Mrs. Froggatt,fed their chickens, gathered their apples and nuts, petted theircats, tried to teach words to their parrot and tricks to their dogs,played cribbage and back-gammon with them in the evening, never had ahead-ache, never was at a loss or upon their hands, gained their heartscompletely, and came home wonderfully benefited by the respite fromnoise and harass, and quite decided to stand by his proposal, to whichthe partners, with some hesitation, had finally acceded.END OF VOL. I.CHAPTER XXIV.
FAMILY GHOOLS.
'Know ye that Love is a careless child,
And forgets promise past?
He is blind--he is deaf where he list,
And in faith never fast.'
Raleigh.
Captain Harewood was gone. There was a good deal of truth in Wilmet's
plea that much pain might have been saved if she had been allowed to
abide by her first answer; but by this time she would not have saved it.
She was a brave woman, and never sought indulgence; and all she
accepted was the spending his last Saturday and Sunday at his home with
him; and even on this she durst not venture without taking Alda, and
exposing the dear untidy household to her disdain; but that October
Sunday walk by the river was worth it all--worth infinitely more than
the July walk; and they both declared it gave them strength.
Wilmet returned in time for Monday's school, nor did she give in all
the week; but she looked whiter and whiter, and on Saturday morning
turned so faint while dressing, that Alda in a great fright called in
Sibby; and the unprecedented event occurred of her spending two whole
days in bed. She only begged to be let alone; and after this space of
quiet came down again fully recovered, only, as Geraldine daily felt,
softer, gentler, tenderer, less severely strict, and moreover a less
hard mistress to her own beauty.
Meantime Alda grew increasingly restless and drooping as the autumn
advanced. The confined rooms and monotonous life really affected
health accustomed to variety, change, and luxury; nor could idleness,
disappointment, or ill-humour be wholesome diet. Listless and weary,
she dropped all semblance of occupation, except novel reading; and
there she perversely set her mind on whatever Froggatt and Underwood
wished to keep out of their library. If Ferdinand did come down for a
Sunday, they both looked at the end of it as if they had been worrying
one another to death; if he did not come down, she was affronted and
miserable. Her restlessness was increased by the fact that people were
returning to their winter-quarters in London, and it was to be inferred
that the Thomas Underwoods might soon be there; but Marilda had not
the art of letter-writing, and though she had several times sent a few
warm-hearted lines, encouraging Alda's correspondence, this had dropped
soon after the yearly migration to Spa; and no more was known of the
family movements till there was a letter from Edgar to Cherry. He was
a very uncertain correspondent--always delightful, affectionate, and
amusing, when he did write, but often not doing so for weeks together;
and nothing had been heard of him since he had as usual gone abroad in
the middle of the summer.
He now wrote from Spa, in amazement at the accumulation of family
events which Marilda had poured upon him, and especially desirous to
know how any captain of any service had ventured upon accosting W.W.
He could not recover the loss it had been not to witness the siege and
the surrender! For himself, Cherry gathered that he had begun, as he
had led her to suppose he would, with the Channel Isles; but whether
he had seen Alice she could not make out; and he had then made his
way, wandering and sketching in old Continental towns, as he had done
last year. He always declared that it answered; he could dispose of
his sketches when he came home, and could likewise write clever bright
descriptions, that could usually command tolerable remuneration. This
time, however, he had been nearly reduced to the condition of George
Primrose, and had made his way to join the family caravan at Spa, by
way of getting helped home.
There he was hailed with delight, for Mr. Underwood was very unwell
and irritable, prejudiced against German doctors, yet not choosing
to have advice from England, and not fit for a journey without some
effective person to rule him and his wife; for resolute as Marilda
could be, the passionateness of one parent, and the fat flabby
helplessness of the other, had overcome her powers of management at
such a distance from home. It was Edgar's private belief that 'the
poor old boy had had some kind of stroke;' but he had recommended
the homeward journey, and under his escort it was to be immediately
undertaken. A few days more, and tidings came that it had been
successfully accomplished. Mr. Underwood had grown better at every
stage, and now scouted the notion of a doctor; Alda's letters of
inquiry were joyously answered and her spirits sank.
One afternoon, however, a moon face beamed upon Felix, and a hearty
voice exclaimed, 'How d'ye do? This is a surprise, ain't it? My father
is come down on business, so I made him bring me. I don't like Alda's
account of herself.'
'I'll take you to her,' said Felix, who decidedly disapproved of
private greetings in the present locality; so as soon as she had dealt
with her fly, he conducted her upstairs. Her father had gone to Mr.
Bruce, and would come for her. Alda was alone in the drawing-room,
but she sprang to her feet in ecstacy; and the two cousins were soon
clinging together, and devouring one another with kisses. Felix asked
where Cherry was.
'Oh! for pity's sake, Felix, do let us have a little time to
ourselves!' said Alda; 'I'll call Cherry by the time she has done with
Stella.'
Felix had come to trust nothing concerning Geraldine to Alda; so he
shut the door, and found Cherry in her own room, overlooking Stella's
copy to the sound of Theodore's accordion, all three in warm jackets.
Six months ago he would have made an authoritative remonstrance. Now
he had learnt that cold and exile were more tolerable than Alda's
displeasure.
Stella leapt up, connecting Cousin Marilda's name with the choicest
presents; but Cherry was quite willing to withhold herself. It was
eight years since she had seen Marilda, and she was conscious of more
repulsion than attraction. She was still debating between civility and
consideration for the tte--tte, when Wilmet, for whom Felix had
sent, came for her, with cheeks glowing from Marilda's energetic kisses
and congratulations.
There certainly was a treading on the delicate tips of the feelings.
'O Geraldine, I am glad to see you getting about so well! You are a
courageous girl.' Then to Stella: 'You little darling duck! Here is a
box of goodies for you and the other poor little dear.--Where is he?
You'll let me see him.--What, Lance! I've not seen you since I found
you up a tree!'
The cousinly cordiality was pleasant, and her patronage was not coarse,
like her mother's; but there was a certain excess of frankness that
made them feel like sensitive-plants, when she examined Wilmet how
often she heard from India, and how the Harewoods treated her--when
she wanted to know exactly how matters stood between the Pursuivant
and Tribune, whether Mr. Smith were to blame, why Lance had gone into
the business, and--worse than all--what was the measure of Theodore's
intellect.
It was all meant in kindness and sympathy, but it was very trying to
each victim in turn; and the lookers-on found it as impossible to lead
it away as to divert the rush from a pump. When Felix was about to
return to his work, Marilda jumped up, exclaiming, 'Felix, I must speak
to you;' and when she had him alone in the drawing-room, she began,
'Felix, I must take Alda home. We can't get on without her; and she
looks very poorly, and all that nonsense is blown over.'
'You know she is still engaged.'
'Oh yes; but no one will think of that unless it is brought forward,
and that she promises not to do.'
'I believe it will be best,' he answered. 'Our life is not suited to
her, and she is neither well nor happy; but it is very kind of you.'
'Kind to ourselves. If Wilmet had married at once we should never have
got her back at all, and we want her sadly. I can help my father in
some ways, but I can't amuse him as she can. You don't mind?'
'Certainly not, if Mr. and Mrs. Underwood wish it,' said Felix,
wondering how Alda made herself either amusing or useful; 'I suppose it
is all right, and that they know how it stands.'
'Of course they do. They will only be too glad to have her; and though
it is better to say nothing about it just yet, very likely it may end
in his coming into our house, and being what Edgar might have been. How
well he has behaved!'
'So has some one else,' thought Felix, as he saw her glistening eye;
but he only answered, 'He is an excellent fellow.'
'Another thing, Felix. This engagement of Edgar's--is it in earnest?'
'Yes!' emphatically said Felix; 'I trust so.'
'You! I should have thought nothing could be more foolish. Is she such
a nice girl, then?'
He had had time to recollect himself, and answered in his set manner,
'She is all that could be wished; and though of course there is a
certain imprudence in the engagement, I can only wish to see Edgar
persevere honourably in what he has undertaken.'
'But wouldn't it be great misery?'
'It might be,' said Felix; 'but it is not going to happen yet. Of
course, no one could have wished it to begin; but having begun, he
ought to go on.'
'Of course! I hate shilly-shally. My father would not believe there
was anything in it. But you are right, Felix; it has done Edgar good.
Somehow there's more purpose in him; and I believe he has worked more
steadily this season. I am so glad you say she is a nice girl.'
And Felix went down to his work happier than he had been for nearly a
year. What loss to himself equalled the gain of such a report of Edgar?
Marilda insisted on being shown every corner of the house, and was
evidently full of enjoyment, like a child let loose from school,
talking at random, so as to draw on herself more than one remonstrance
from Alda, who had perfectly recovered her good-humour, and was
absolutely gracious to Cherry.
About four o'clock came Thomas Underwood, embracing Alda like another
daughter. 'My poor child, you are not looking well.'
'Not at all, papa,' said Marilda. 'We will take her home, and set her
up again.'
'Ay, we will!' said her father. 'It has been a pretty muddle
altogether; but there--we'll say no more about it. You'll come home,
and be a wise girl.'
'O Uncle, how kind you are!' cried Alda.
Wilmet and Cherry looked at each other in amaze. What might this mean?
How could Alda bear to be received back on such terms? But they could
say nothing; indeed, they were scarcely seen till the greeting to Alda
was over. Then, however, he made up for it by hearty kisses, for which
they were not prepared; and Wilmet coloured crimson as she was again
congratulated and rallied on her slyness in making the most of her time
at Minsterham.
The illness at Spa had told upon Thomas Underwood. He was still under
fifty, but an elderly look and manner had come on him; he walked
feebly, and seemed to look to his daughter to help him out with
purposes and recollections; while towards Alda there was an almost
imploring tenderness, as if she had carried away with her a good deal
of the enjoyment of his life, which he hoped to bring back again with
her. He did not even seem to like leaving her for the evening to pack
up, but wanted her to come out to Centry Park, and caught eagerly at
Marilda's proposal that Felix should come and spend the evening there.
It was as if they were both afraid of their own dullness in the great
uninhabited house; and no doubt they would have caught at an invitation
to share the family meal. Alda and Wilmet, for different reasons, sat
in dread of Felix, in the reckless hospitality of the male heart,
making such an offer; and in very truth, he was only withheld by
certain authoritatively deprecating glances from those housewifely eyes.
And let it be observed that Wilmet was right. She could not have fed
Mr. Underwood as would have suited him on such short notice, without
a great deal more expense and personal exertion than would have been
becoming; and to his eyes, their ordinary fare would have seemed
ostentation of neediness.
Needy was exactly what the Underwoods had never been. It was not merely
the effect of conscience and of resolution, but of Wilmet's more than
ordinary power of method and adjustment, which had kept them from ever
being behindhand, or in difficulties requiring external aid; and it was
this that had won them already respect that hardly belonged to their
years.
Thomas Underwood really respected Felix, as one who had never asked
assistance from him, yet who had not declined what was offered in
a friendly kinsman-like manner; and besides, had more than once
asserted--modestly indeed, but still asserted--an independent will
and way of his own, and shown that he was capable of carrying it out.
It was five years since Mr. Underwood's prediction that he would find
the attempt keeping house for such a family an utter failure, and would
have to fall back on help he had not deserved: and here he was, without
having made one demand, a partner in the business, and with so small a
fraction of the family apparent, that there was no air of oppression,
no complaint, even though Thomas himself had returned on his hands both
those of whom he had meant to relieve him.
No wonder, then, that without intending it, his manner to Felix was
not that of patron, but of equal--of kinsman to kinsman, not of rich
man to struggling youth. And Felix, as he sat in the great handsome
dining-room, could not help being amused at all the state that had
followed one man and his daughter for one dinner in their own house:
the courses, and the silver, and the perplexing family of wine-glasses
beside every plate, and all with the Underwood rood and its motto
shining on him--whether on the servant's buttons, on the panels of the
oak-wainscotted hall, and the very china from which he ate his dinner.
Nothing interested Mr. Underwood more than the account of the visit to
Vale Leston; and warming up under the influence of dinner, he talked
much of the old times there, and with much disparagement of the two
present Fulberts; but Felix was startled to find that he regarded
himself as next in the succession.
'If you could only have gone into the Church, Felix, I could have given
you the Vicarage. Or is not one of your brothers to be a parson?'
'Yes, Sir--Clement,' said Felix, smiling, but feeling a sense of injury
that revealed to him how much more he must be reckoning on the chances
than he had supposed himself to be doing. As Alda said, wealth flowed
to wealth; and a little attention from Thomas to his cousins would
easily turn the scale.
At any rate, poverty did not suit Alda. She was a different creature
now that her exile was coming to an end.
'It had been like Portsmouth to Fanny Price,' said Geraldine, not
greatly flattered by the overflow of benevolence, which Wilmet accepted
as the token of real affection.
What would she do about Ferdinand? Wilmet ventured to ask.
'He certainly must not call,' said Alda; 'that would never do; but with
Edgar's help it will be manageable enough. It will do the gentleman no
harm to have a few difficulties in his way. I don't want him to feel
his coming such a favour.'
So Alda went; and must it be owned, if there was more peace in
the house, there was also a certain flatness after the incessant
excitements of the former part of the year. At least so Geraldine
felt, and hated herself for feeling, when the numbers had come down to
'the peace establishment,' and she had no companions but Stella and
Theodore through the greater part of the day. She had been recommended
to walk, when the weather permitted, for half an hour every day; and
whenever it was possible, Felix contrived that he or Lance should be
her companion; but as the days shortened, and it became less easy to
contrive this, the constitutional turns up and down the narrow garden
were more dispiriting than sitting occupied upstairs, especially when
she viewed this distaste as frightful unthankfulness; and even when
one of the brothers took her out in the street, or to the 'People's
Park,' though she was happy with them, the wearisome sameness and
dull ugliness of the town oppressed and wearied her; and to be taken
out by Wilmet on a Saturday was more wearing still. Each brother was
her devoted cavalier; but Wilmet, though kind and considerate, made
airing Cherry a secondary object; and to be set upon a high chair in
a shop, to see Wilmet bargain, was what she did not love. She might
have admired to see Wilmet's perfect knowledge of articles and their
value, and the manifest esteem in which that experience was held by
the respectable tradesmen, who did not scruple to tell her that they
had thought 'this will just suit Miss Underwood;' while her scorn and
indignation at an encounter with a Cheap Jack were something rich. But
though Cherry could describe such an expedition with humour that threw
Felix and Lance into a convulsion of merriment, it was very wearisome
to her; and the more she knew it ought to be instructive, the more
it depressed her, and made her feel, as never before, the straitness
of the family means. She longed wearily at times for the sight of
something beautiful. Edgar's descriptions came back on her with an
almost sick longing. She had made much progress in drawing, but the
want of criticism, instruction, or models, made her feel baffled; and
when her brothers and sisters admired most, she was most dissatisfied.
Edgar's criticism alone was worth anything to her sthetic sense, and
gave her real assistance; and his not coming home was a great loss to
her art, as well as to her affection and intellect. Those windows that
he opened to her of all lovely scenes and forms in nature or art, his
brilliant stories of artist society and foreign manners, could not
but be greatly missed as she lived her monotonous life, not without
intellectual interest, for that came to her through the help she was
able to render to Felix in his newspaper work, and the books she
reviewed or discussed with him; but it was not the living interest of
actual communication at secondhand with that outer world, which looked
so full of beauty, and of all that was bright and charming; and then
poor little Cherry applied to herself all the warnings about not loving
the world.
Her aspiring compositions and her studies in drawing she almost laid
aside in a fit of hopeless disgust, and she applied herself to what was
less improving, but more immediately profitable. She and Lance took to
the manufacture of Christmas cards, she taking the sentiment and he
the comedy; and what they produced by their joint efforts were pretty
and clever enough to bring in an amount of pocket-money that was very
agreeable to those who otherwise would have had no claim to any.
The chief outer interest was, as usual, parish affairs. Mr. Bevan was
too ill to come home; but Mr. Mowbray Smith's resignation was accepted,
and he was to go at the beginning of the new year, while his successor
was reported to be elderly and wise.
Another interest, that was not at all bad for Cherry, was stirred up
by her brothers. There was an interminable family belonging to one of
the printers, who died, leaving them in circumstances that somewhat
parodied those of the Underwoods themselves; and in which the example
as well as the counsel of the young master was no doubt a great
incentive and assistance to the pillars of the still humbler house.
There was a perennial supply of 'little Lightfoots,' to fill the office
elegantly termed printer's devil; and the existing imp being taken
young from school, Felix had his education on his conscience, and asked
Cherry to give him lessons after hours. She was at first desperately
afraid of the boy, and only accepted the work when she found that if
she did not, Felix would impose it on himself; but by-and-by she became
enough interested, and enjoyed enough devotion from her pupil, to make
the time she daily expended upon him not far from one of the pleasures
of her life.
So came on a winter of unusual bitterness; and the holidays filled
the house, bringing Bernard back under an entirely new phase. At
Stoneborough he had discovered that it was some distinction to be an
Underwood of Vale Leston, and his accession of dignity was enormous. He
regarded the Nareses from a monstrous elevation; and thus infinitely
scandalized Angela, who had a great hatred of pretension, and whose
laughter threatened to dissolve their mutual alliance, offensive and
defensive. Their janglings were a novelty, and not a pleasant one; and
one bitter afternoon, when a sore throat had made Felix come up early
from the shop, Cherry quite rejoiced that Bernard was reported to be
reading downstairs.
And there sat Felix by the fire, with Theodore at his feet, humming in
rivalry of the big kettle, which had just been brought in, and was soon
followed by Lance, whistling as he came upstairs.
'Look here!' and Angela, who, for her bane at Brompton, had her full
share of the family talent for caricature, showed him a likeness of
Bernard strutting down the High Street, turning his back on certain
figures in the distance; and beneath was written--
'There was a young Bear of Stoneborough,
Who thought his gentility thorough;
To his townsfolk he said,
"Snobs! I'll cut them all dead,"
This high-bred young Bear of Stoneborough.'
'Capital, Angel!' said Lance; 'but don't show it to him; he's a horrid
Bear to poke fun at.'
'Oh, but he does get into such jolly rages!'
'It is beyond being jolly,' said Lance. 'I did this once too often last
holidays; and I don't think he has got over it yet, though I promised
never to do it again.'
'The more reason I should,' said Angela, laughing saucily in his face,
though both spoke under their breath.
'No,' said Lance. 'Consider! He is absurdly stuck up; but anything to
disgust him with the Nareses is good.'
'I see no harm in Jem Nares,' said democratic Angela. 'I'll not have
him cut! give me my picture.'
'No, I promised he should not be done again.'
'Promise for yourself another time.'
She snatched, and there was a sparring match. Lance held off with one
hand, and with the other dashed her drawing into the fire, where it
fell on the top of some black coals; and as he relaxed his grasp, she
sprang to rescue it. Felix looked up in time to see the kettle toppling
over. He flung Theodore out of the way of the boiling stream that
rushed from lid and spout as the whole descended on the hearth, amid
cries from Angela and Theodore that brought all the others together;
nor could the little one be pacified, even though Wilmet ascertained
that he had only been touched by one boiling drop.
'But Felix!' exclaimed Lance; and they all turned.
'Never mind,' he said, but with more of a contraction of the lips than
a smile; 'only my neck and arm. Here, Lance, help me;' presenting the
end of his sleeve, and setting his teeth.
The hasty vigorous pull, made in ignorance on both sides, removed
the coat; but Felix gave something between a gasp and a cry, tried
to totter to a chair, and was caught by Clement as he fainted away;
so much to the terror of Lance, that in three minutes' space he had
broken in on Mr. Rugg's dinner with a peremptory summons. By the time
he crept into the room behind the doctor, he saw Felix on the sofa,
white as a sheet, with closed eyes and drawn brow, Clement standing
ready with a roll of wadding, and Wilmet, having more gently removed
the shirtsleeve, regarding the injury with some perplexity, increased
by the tearful Sibby's voluble counsels.
She welcomed the arrival with the anxious inquiry, 'O Mr. Rugg! I am so
glad! Should the cotton touch where the skin is broken?--Here--inside
his elbow and hand.'
'Broken! You have been tearing off the clothes, instead of cutting
them! I thought you knew better, Miss Underwood.'
'It was my own doing,' murmured Felix, so faintly, that Mr. Rugg, with
his usual roughness, scolded at his not having had some brandy at
once, and then at there being none nearer than the Fortinbras Arms,
whence Clement brought some in about the time that a grand butler would
have taken to produce it. Felix choked at it like a child, but it
brought back his strength; and Wilmet and Clement were assistants too
handy to give much occasion for scolding. The shoulder and chest had
suffered likewise, though partly protected by the flannel shirt.
On the patient asking how soon he might hope for the use of his arm,
the gruff answer was, 'Not so soon as if you had not begun by tearing
it to pieces. I can't tell. Depends on general health. May be three
weeks, may be six, may be three months, before you get these places
healed, if you trifle with them. Now I'll stay and see you in bed, with
this arm properly settled.'
This was real kindness for a man in the middle of his dinner; and
Felix stood up, finding himself more shaken than he had expected, and
commanded by acclamation to betake himself to Mr. Froggatt's bedroom.
He chose, however, first to go into the next room, where Cherry had
sunk down, trembling and overcome, and so hysterical that her utmost
powers had been taxed to prevent herself from disturbing those who
could be useful.
'Here I am, all alive!' he said in a cheerful tone, that somehow had no
solidity in it, and which she could hardly bear. 'Why, Cherry, you poor
little thing! you have come by the worst of it!'
'Don't, Felix! Isn't it dreadful pain?'
'Not now; I scarcely feel it. Never mind, Cherry; I'm all right now,
only you will have to write those little fingers nearly off.'
'Oh! Felix, if Wilmet had been gone!'
'She wouldn't be looking Gorgons at me now. Where's Angel?'
Angel had been seized by Robina, and forcibly withheld from flying out
after the doctor; and when assured that Lance was gone, she had dashed
upstairs, and hidden herself in bed, so that Felix was obliged to go to
sleep without seeing her. Remonstrate as he would, he was not allowed
to get up the next morning. Mr. Rugg, who came very early, assured him
that the speed of his recovery greatly depended on perfect stillness at
first, and told him that he would feel the injury if he tried to move;
and Wilmet would not do anything but rejoice that he was compelled to
submit to discipline that was so good for the cold, a much more real
subject of anxiety.
'I must not grumble,' he sighed, as the doctor shut the door; 'but I
did not reckon on such a stupid disaster when I got two boys to look
after everything.'
'People will not mind for a few days.'
'I hope not. Tell Lance to send Lamb up to me as soon as he comes in.
And would Clem walk over to Marshlands? or the Froggery will be in
great commotion.'
'Perhaps Robina will go too; and they always like to have her.'
'And Angel? Poor child! I wish she would come.'
'I'll send her. I want you to talk to her. She is such a perplexity.'
'This was no fault of hers!' exclaimed Felix.
'I don't know that. Lance takes it on himself, and says it was just a
squabble; but that is sure to have been her fault.'
'I shall not go into that,' said Felix.
'It does seem a chance of making an impression, if you would try,' said
Wilmet. 'Sibby says she was crying half the night, (you know she has to
sleep in the nursery,) and you might get at her now. I don't know what
to do with her.'
He looked up, astonished at this avowal, from her who had hitherto
queened it so easily.
'Look at this letter,' she proceeded. 'I have been keeping it till you
had time to think about it.'
He sighed, feeling, like many another head of the house, that time was
swept away from home responsibilities, and indeed, that great girls
needed a more experienced guide. The letter was the school character,
speaking most highly of Robina, who had quite reconquered esteem. If
she had not so much of any one talent as some of the others, she had
excellent capacity, and studied in a business-like way, as one learning
a profession; so that she had won her promotion into the first ranks,
among elder girls.
But Angela was one of those who will not or cannot do anything
tolerably except what they like; and she had only two tastes--for
music and fun--except perhaps for churches. She was a puzzle to every
one, by her eagerness for devout observances, and the very little good
they seemed to do her, even by outrageous irreverence when the spirit
of mischief was roused. Teachers detested her, but she was the idol of
half the school. All unclaimed misdeeds were laid to her share; and in
recklessness or generosity, she never troubled herself to disavow them,
even when not her own. She was popularly believed to learn nothing
but music, and even in that to use talent to save pains; and she had
a lead-like affinity to the bottom of her class, yet in the final
examination she had surpassed far more diligent girls.
Felix read, and puzzled himself, and did not refuse obedience when
Wilmet insisted that he should 'talk to Angela;' though he was only too
well aware that reproof was that paternal duty to which he was least
adequate. First, however, he had time to despatch Robina and Clement on
their mission to his partner, whose winter rheumatics had set in--to
receive young Lamb, laden with a pile of letters and papers, and
lastly, to be cooed over and stroked by Theodore, who curled himself up
at his feet in that perfect serenity that his presence always infused.
At last Angela came in on tip-toe, looking immensely tall and lank,
with Clement's propensity for longitudinal growth, and the same
infantine smallness of feature, and much less brilliant colouring than
the others; but while his hair was as closely cropped as if he were
just out of a cell, hers was as long and as unmanageable as herself;
and she had moreover the beautiful large-pupilled, darkly-lashed,
mischievous blue eyes that belonged to Edgar, only now their lids
were swollen, and all the colour in her face centred in two great red
patches beneath them--a scarlet garibaldi over a very old brown skirt,
half-way up a long pair of grey legs, seeming to make the whole object
more deplorable.
'You poor Angel!' exclaimed Felix, his heart more than ever melted;
'you look as if you had been crying all night. Why don't you come and
give me a kiss?'
'I'll--I'll do anything you please, Felix, but I had rather not.'
'But I do please! I want you,' said he, holding out his hand; so that
she was forced to come, touch his cheek with her lips, and submit to
a far heartier kiss. 'You are as cold as ice,' he added, trying to
capture the blue, chilly, long, sausage-like fingers, and warm them in
his grasp.
'No, don't! it will only make my chilblains rage. Let me go, now you've
forgiven me for your own comfort.'
'Forgiven you for my own comfort! I don't want to forgive you--'
'Oh--h!' and the eyes disappeared, and the face puckered in unutterable
woe.
'I haven't anything to forgive you, Angel.'
'Oh, that's worse! when I've hurt you so terribly!'
'You didn't; you never meant it. Of course I never blamed you.'
'Then,' said Angel, trying to get away her other hand, 'why did you
send for me to row me, for I don't call that forgiving.'
'I heard you were unhappy.'
'And did you think it would make me any happier to see you lying there
frowning with pain?' broke out Angela, with an angry sob.
'If I frowned, it was not with pain, but because I don't know what to
make of you.'
'I don't want to be made anything of!' she said pettishly. 'Wilmet told
me you wanted to talk to me. I suppose that meant she ordered you! So
now you've done it, let me go.'
'My dear Angel, don't you see that I am just as anxious about you as
Wilmet can be? and when there is plainly something amiss--'
'Oh, it's old Ful and Fen's character of me, then?'
'It is, Angela. Perhaps it does seem taking an unfair advantage of you
to catch you now; but you see I so seldom get a chance of a talk with
any one; and I must do the best I can for you, you poor little ones,
who, I'm afraid, haven't even the faintest recollection of our father
and mother to help you.'
'I remember mamma, but after she was ill,' said Angela, probably trying
not to be softened. 'But I don't think that has much to do with it. You
and Wilmet mind us as much, or more, than most people's born parents.
Yes, Wilmet worrits twice as much as any rational mother does.'
'That's the very thing, Angel; parents can do the thing without
worrying.'
'No, I didn't say you did,' said Angela; 'you never did till this
minute, and now you are druv to it;' and she regarded him with a
certain fellow-feeling so comical, that she nearly made him laugh,
though he felt sad enough.
'Have I neglected you then, Angel?'
'Oh no; I think you do just as well as most fathers. You keep us all
going,' said Angela, considering; 'and you look after us and set us a
good example, as people say; and isn't that all that fathers have to
do?'
'My poor little sister! you just show that I cannot be really like a
father to you.'
'Would a father do all the scolding?' asked Angela in an odd voice.
'If we still had our own, you would be coming to him to help you, and
telling him freely what it is that makes things go wrong with you.'
'I'm sure,' answered the girl, 'I'd just as soon tell you, Felix, if
I only knew; but there's only one thing that would do me any good, I
believe.'
'And that?'
'If I could only be a Trappist.'
'A what?'
'A Trappist, or one of those Sepolte nuns, that never see anybody,
and can't talk to their relations. Oh! I wish I was old enough to turn
Roman Catholic! and then wouldn't I go and cut off this horrible hair,
that is the plague and torment of my life, and never be naughty again!'
'Which do you want to be rid of most--your hair or your relations?'
asked Felix, half diverted, half dismayed and wholly at a loss.
But Angela had passed the boundary of earnest now, and went on more
from the heart. 'If I could but be in a real strict nunnery, it would
be so nice! It would always be church. Oh! if church could but last
always!'
He was more puzzled than ever at the intent yearning look that had
changed the face. 'You could not keep up. It would lose effect,' he
said.
'I don't know. Lots of girls much better than I--Bobbie herself--don't
like long services, and get tired, but I don't. I'm safe then; I'm
happy altogether. I seem to get wings inside--I could go on singing for
ever. I don't want to be bad; but the instant I go out, I can't live
without fun; and so they think me a horrid false hypocrite--but I'm
not! Only unless I get shut up somewhere, I don't know what will become
of me.'
'You must try to make your life out of church suit your life in
church,' said Felix, much puzzled how to answer.
'I would, only I can't be half-and-half, and wishy-washy.'
'I don't understand.'
'Don't you? Why, if I have fun, I like to have it real fun. I can't
be always drawing it mild! It is no real fun if one is to be always
thinking about who will be vexed, and what's lady-like, and all that
stuff!'
'But that's what life in this world is made of.'
'I know it is; so I hate life in this world, unless one could just
have no conscience at all;' then, as she caught his anxious eye, she
went on, trying to rattle, but with tears in her voice, and submitting
to let him warm her hands all the time, 'Felix, you'd better let me
go into a Sisterhood. It is the only chance for me! Thinking about
being a horrid governess makes me wicked. When I'm good I do long for
a Sisterhood; and when I'm bad I want to get some great rich duke to
marry me, and let me have no end of horses, and go to the races and
the opera--and I don't suppose he will ever come. And I suppose you
are all too dull and tiresome to let me get to be a public singer! No,
don't tell me to put it out of my head, for it is what I should like
best--best of all!'
'Better than the duke?'
'Oh yes! for I think he would be in the way--Felix! do let me be a
Sister! You see it is the only chance.'
'I can't, Angel; they would not accept a Sister at your age.'
'Then let me think about it really, Felix. Promise that I may be when
I am old enough.'
'It is impossible to promise that; but I do not think I am likely to
hinder you, if you then wish it, and it seems right.'
'I wish you would promise me. Look here, Felix,' and the eyes assumed
a deep yearning expression; 'I always did think that if I had a
dedication, like Clement, I could be as good as he is. But I don't
think anything else would put the duke or the opera out of my head.'
'My dear Angel,' and Felix's eyes grew soft too, 'I could not wish
anything better for you than to be such another as Sister Constance,
but I do not know how you could be dedicated. Even Clement is not; he
could change his mind before he is three-and-twenty. It all depends on
how he goes on.'
'And if I go on well, will you let me look to it?'
'As far as may be right.'
'Only then what is the use of my going to this school, if I am not to
turn governess? It only makes me worse.'
'No, Angela. It would not be right to stop your education. You must
have the means of maintaining yourself. It would be against my duty to
hinder that. And remember--some Sisterhoods require an endowment. You
would not wish to be a burthen. You may have to work to raise means
for admission; and if you are set to teach, you will need all you are
learning now.'
'May I think I am preparing?'
'Yes.'
'I will, I will--I mean, I will try,' said Angela. 'O Felix! I do like
you now I find you don't want me to be respectable. No, don't say
something grave and prosy, for I do like you now; and never mind
about not being one's father, for I don't believe anybody could be
better to me.' And she put her face down to his and kissed him as she
used when she was a baby girl; then ran away on thinking she heard some
one coming.
'So,' thought Felix, as he raised himself on his sound elbow, 'the
upshot of it is that I don't want her to be respectable! I hope to
goodness she won't take to being like Tina--though I don't know why I
should either! Poor child! I'll write to Audley about her when I can.
And here comes the dear little Cherry for her hard day's work.'
With his dictation and superintendence, Geraldine was quite equal to
the Pursuivant's Friday requirements; and altogether this day of rest
and leisure was welcome. The sisters were much less anxious about the
sore throat than if it had been in the shop! and indeed it was nearly
well, and no obstacle to his being talked to and amused, to the
general enjoyment, in the rare pleasure of having him at their mercy.
In the afternoon came a message--'The Miss Pearsons' love, and if she
could leave Mr. Underwood, would Miss Underwood step up?' Such messages
were not infrequent, and this was supposed to spring from a desire to
know the particulars of the accident; so that on her return Wilmet was
greeted with the inquiry whether she was considered responsible for the
tea-kettle's misbehaviour, since she had been kept in so long.
'No,' said Wilmet, gravely. 'Run away, little ones!'
Stella alone accepted the epithet; but Wilmet was too much absorbed in
her tidings to look about in the fire-lit twilight for further victims.
'The Miss Pearsons are very much troubled by their letters from St
Heliers,' she said. 'Alice Knevett is actually married.'
'To Edgar?' Angela sprang up with a bound. 'Oh, what fun!'
'No, indeed,' Wilmet replied in her most repressive tone. 'It is to a
Frenchman of the name of Tanneguy, in the wine trade.'
'The abominable girl!' cried Angela at the top of her indignant voice.
'A Frenchman! I'll never believe in any one again.'
'Yes, Angela,' said Wilmet; 'it is a lesson, indeed, of what tricks and
subterfuges--'
'Never mind that, Mettie,' disrespectfully broke in Cherry, who had
quietly moved a curtain so as to cast a shade over Felix's face. 'Tell
us about it. Who writes?'
Wilmet told that Major Knevett, in a storm of fury, had written to
the aunts that the whole affair had been so secretly conducted, that
neither he nor his wife had guessed at it until his daughter's sudden
disappearance, only sending home a letter to announce her marriage to
M. Achille Tanneguy, with whom she had embarked for Havre, and given an
address at Pau, where her husband was concerned in a wine agency. Major
Knevett had then found out that she had been in the constant habit of
meeting this Tanneguy in the garden of their next neighbour, which
joined to their own; and that she had entirely eluded the vigilance of
'her second mother,' who had, however, never ceased to warn and watch
her; but nothing had been capable of curing her of the coquetry and
intrigue, with which in his passion he accused Bexley of inspiring her.
'Too true.' The words were breathed on the back of a sigh suppressed
with difficulty.
'Nonsense, Felix,' said Wilmet; 'It was in her before, or she could not
have so carried it on here. I am sure it had gone on at her horrible
school!'
'What has she done about Edgar?' asked Clement.
'The aunts doubt whether she has done anything.--Children, you ought to
be getting ready for tea;' then when Robin and Angel had obeyed this
very broad hint--'I would not say so before them, but they believe that
there is a sort of excuse in the unhappiness of her home.'
'Of course,' said an almost grateful voice from the pillow.
'Ever since Edgar was there in the summer,' said Wilmet, 'she has been
doubly watched and teased and scolded. Nothing she could do was right.
The aunts heard from her last a fortnight ago, very miserable, and
entreating them to believe that whatever might happen, she was driven
to it by the unbearable wretchedness of home.'
'Do you call that an excuse, Wilmet?' exclaimed Clement. 'Is the
privilege of suffering to be made an excuse for treachery?'
'Much Clement knows of the privilege of suffering,' said Felix, low
and quietly; but Geraldine detected so much of that privilege in his
voice, that she longed to clear the room for him; but though she rose
to set the example, and laid her hand on Clement's arm, there was no
preventing his testimony from being delivered.
'Personally I do not know it; but I do not understand Wilmet's lowering
her standard to excuse disobedience and unfaithfulness.'
'Come along, Clem,' entreated Geraldine; 'it is all most sad and
grievous, but the more we say about it the worse we make it;' and she
succeeded in dragging him out without a defensive reply from Wilmet.
Presently she was sought out by Wilmet herself, to say, 'Cherry, do you
know, there's Felix looking as pale as when he fainted yesterday.'
She could believe it; but she only ventured to ask, 'Did he say
anything?'
'No, only to answer "No," when I asked if I hurt him as I was doing
his arm. Cherry, can you tell me, or do you know--does this touch him
for himself?'
Cherry could only look up with eyes swimming.
'How blind I have been! Oh! if I had not come and told it so abruptly,
before every one!'
'Perhaps he liked the unconsciousness better!'
'Were you in his confidence, or is it guess?'
'Guessing at first; but we had a very few words about it when he came
home from consulting Dr. Lee last summer.'
'Then it was that wretched child that hurt his health?'
'So we thought. Dr. Lee asked him if there was not something on his
mind.'
'The little wretch! Oh! if I had never asked her here! she has done
more harm than she is worth!'
'He had got quite well,' said Cherry; 'and now he has his cough back
again. O Mettie!'
'No,' said Wilmet, 'it is not that cough. It is only a chance cold;
it is nearly gone. Besides, it cannot be the same as her first treason
to him must have been.'
'That's true,' said Cherry, mournfully.
'After all,' said Wilmet, 'it is a happy escape for both our boys, if
they can but feel it, poor fellows--but oh! to have been so deceived.
And how ignorant one is--even living in the same house!' And Wilmet had
a hearty fit of crying.
'And Edgar!' sighed Cherry.
'You must write. They all come to you, Cherry,' she added wistfully.
'You shall sit with dear Felix this evening, and I will keep the others
away.'
This ordinance was carried out, but with no result as to conversation;
for Felix's distress took the form of great tenderness as to the manner
in which the blow was to fall upon Edgar. Nothing would satisfy him
but Geraldine's writing immediately, under his own eye. Of course
he ascribed all his own feelings to his brother; and though Cherry
doubted, and could have written much better as from herself, she could
but patiently write and re-write, when poor Felix found--as he did
with everything that cost him consideration--that he was falling into
his leading-article style; while all the time she saw him becoming more
excited and flushed, till at last Wilmet came in, put an end to it, and
sent her to bed, almost brokenhearted for both brothers, and struggling
against her own hatred to the mischievous little witch who had played
with their hearts.
She took care that the letter should go by the earliest post, partly to
ensure Edgar's getting it without the Sunday's delay, but still more
that it might not be within Felix's power to recall for two whole days.
He just inquired after it, and finding it was gone, said no more. He
was not so anxious to get up as the day before; his arm had come to a
more painful stage, and he had had a feverish sleepless night; so that
he looked so worn and depressed, that Mr. Rugg concluded that he had
been imprudent, and scolded him accordingly.
When Geraldine came in to put the finishing strokes to the Pursuivant,
she found him so silent and dreamy, that she did nearly the whole on
her own responsibility; till at last he suddenly roused himself, begged
her pardon, and gave his whole mind to the dictation of the political
summary; then became dreamy again, and presently fell into a long sound
sleep, after which he looked, even to the anxious eyes of his sisters,
much better, and began to talk of getting up for the evening.
At about five o'clock, just as Wilmet was laying his things ready for
him, the door was opened, and there entered first a perfume of tobacco,
the next a lively voice--'What, Blunderbore, lying in state in Froggy's
four-poster! Whom have you been getting into hot water with? Is there
much the matter?' he added in a lower tone, as Wilmet kissed him.
'Not much,' said Felix; 'it is nothing but a scald in a disabling place
on my arm.'
'The tea-kettle ought to know its friends better. I met Jem Bruce and
heard of it, so I ran down to see how much of you was boiled. I looked
into the shop, but Master Lance was too important to vouchsafe me a
word. Are you sure it is only your arm, old fellow? you look baddish.'
'I'm well enough,' said Felix, shifting his head into the shadow of
the curtain; and Wilmet, perceiving that he wished to have it out at
once, left them together. 'Edgar, do you know?' said Felix, earnestly.
'I scent a crisis in the air, and am doubting whether the Pursuivant is
up a tree, or Wilmet's engineer turned out no go.'
'You have not had Cherry's letter?'
'No. Don't torment yourself to beat about the bush. I'd stand anything
rather than see you look like that.'
'Have you heard from Jersey?'
'Oh! It is that, is it? I believe it has lasted twelve calendar months,
and that is as much as is reasonable to expect. Little humbugging puss!
What has she taken up with?'
'Had you no idea that she had fallen in with--with a Frenchman?'
'The beggar! How far has it gone? or is it only a report from the old
cats of aunts?'
'It is too certain.'
'Well, what is it? I suppose she hardly commissioned you to give me my
cong?'
'I fear that she commissioned no one. Harsh treatment seems to have
driven her to desperation. She was married privately, and has written
from France to announce it.'
Edgar gave a long whistle, then turned round and laid his hand on his
brother's, saying with a short laugh, 'Cool and easy! Well, it was
pretty sport; and this conclusion is unique for simplicity and saving
of trouble. Dear old Fee, here's that pulse of yours going like a young
lady's in a field with a mad bull. Have you been working yourself up
all day to expect me to hang myself, or shoot the frog-eater? Didn't I
always tell you that only the ancient chivalry of the Pursuivant could
take the affair au grand srieux?'
'Very well,' said Felix in a somewhat smothered voice, 'it is your
affair, and I must accept modern customs. I am glad you understood one
another so well.'
'Spoken with grave irony worthy of the heavy father, your laudable
model. Dear old chap, you'll be better now.'
There was something strange in the half-reverent, half-pitying tone of
the tall powerful young man, as, with a sneer on his curling lip, but
a tear in his softened eye, he stooped, pushed back the fair hair, and
kissed the face which in its wistfulness looked younger than his own
(having moreover the hirsuteness of only two days instead of two years).
Felix fulfilled his intention of getting up, though he went no farther
than his own fire-side, where soon after tea he was joined by Clement,
looking very serious, and armed with Bible, Prayer-book, and copy-book.
He was to take Felix's Sunday class the next day; but whereas he had
done so for the two months of the Ewmouth visit in the summer, there
seemed no special necessity for a consultation, which in fact proved
to be a rehearsal of the morrow's lesson, with various instructions to
Felix himself, on what Clement called 'Church Teaching,' in oblivion
that the simple truths of religion are as much Church teaching as the
distinctive doctrines of his own set.
As vehement laughter pealed across the passage, Felix ventured to
suggest that something was going on there.
'Yes,' said Clement; 'they were beginning some game, but I distrust
Edgar's wit.'
'I don't think holding aloof always good.'
'When one's presence is a stimulus to irreverence?'
'Because you present yourself as a butt, instead of laughing with him,
and giving things a turn.'
'Impossible, where one feels deeply.'
Felix believed it was impossible in the present case, and resigned
himself, though pricking up his ears at the ripples of mirth and the
shrieks of ecstatic uncontrollable laughter that reached his ear; until
at last Lance burst in, laughing so that he could hardly stand upright,
and bringing a paper in his hand for Felix's benefit.
It had been the game of adjectives, and Edgar, the conductor, had
audaciously made its framework the Pursuivant's report of the
valedictory sermon that Mr. Mowbray Smith was to preach on the morrow.
It was a most comical combination, so well had Edgar's outline hit off
the editor's desire to make the best of it, coupled with personalities
that neither Mr. Smith would have preached nor he reported unless they
had been in the palace of truth; the whole rendered the more grotesque
by the hap-hazard adjectives that seasoned the discourse, sometimes
deliciously inapposite, sometimes fantastically appropriate. An
audience had stolen behind Lance to taste its sweets a second time; and
the drollery, the vraisemblance, and touches of malice, quite choked
him as he read, and overpowered Felix with mirth, all the more at the
shocked countenance that Clement preserved throughout, while in the
background there was a renewed chuckling, roaring, and rolling, at the
more brilliant sallies.
The whole family had been viewing Edgar with more or less of awe, pity,
and curiosity, as an injured hero, but had been beguiled into the
maddest mirth, though as much disgusted with themselves for giggling
as with him for making them giggle. Wilmet herself had succumbed, and
Cherry had been in an almost hysterical transport of laughter, till her
jaws ached, and her eyes were weak; and she was so exhausted that she
could hardly crawl into Felix's room to wish him good-night, and then
scarcely durst speak to him lest she should burst into tears; while
as to the younger ones, it was altogether delightful to them at the
moment, and they regarded the transactions of February as a dream.
When they met the next morning, Edgar professed that he could not
venture on sitting under Mr. Smith's actual sermon, but should go to
Minsterham, to pay his respects to Wilmet's future relations, if there
were a feasible train.
'Yes,' said Clement, 'there's one in twenty minutes, which brings one
in time for the Cathedral.'
'Dr. Wilmet is engrossed with a distinguished patient. Eh? Come along
then, Lance; I must have some one to present me.'
Lance gave a joyful leap; but Wilmet interposed, 'Indeed, Lance, it is
hardly safe. Remember how bad your head was after Christmas Day.'
'It's my own head, and I may do as I like with it!'
'That's just what you can't now. If you were knocked up to-morrow--as
you certainly would be, between the railroad and the organ--'
'That would be what you may call a fix,' observed Edgar. 'Knocked up
between a railway and an organ! What a position!'
'It is quite true, Edgar,' said Wilmet, the more severely for the
laughter of Lance and Angel. 'Lance knows very well that one of his
headaches perfectly disables him. Felix would not be content to leave
Mr. Lamb alone in the shop; and all the good of these three days would
be undone.'
'Oh--h! it was a pillar of the state I was asking?' said Edgar. 'Is
your head really so ticklish, Lance?' as the boy made a gesture of
disgust.
'Don't persuade him, Edgar. He ought not to do it,' said Wilmet, in her
blunt authoritative way.
Lance kicked the heel of his boot against the floor, and said, 'Don't I
pity Jack Harewood, that's all!'
'Well, a couple of ducks instead of a goose--Bob and Angel, you've no
heads.--Come! I'm too modest to face the Librarian alone, much less the
red-headed daughters.'
The two girls eagerly looked at their sister.
'"Gorgons and hydras and chimras dire!"' ejaculated Edgar. 'If I were
you, W.W., I'd get up a little more charitably disposed towards my
brother on a Sunday morning!'
'It is Angela's wildness that I am afraid of,' said Wilmet.
'She sha'n't go near a tea-kettle,' said Edgar. 'Put on your hats,
chick-a-biddies, if you wish to catch the Cathedral.'
'May we? O Wilmet, pray!' entreated Robina.
'I will see what Felix says.'
'A graceful form of shifting the obloquy of the negative,' muttered
Edgar, as Wilmet disappeared.
'Felix will decide as he thinks good,' said Robina with dignity.
'As she thinks good, you mean,' said Edgar. 'Well, I wonder how you
all contrive to stand it. I couldn't, I know, even for a quiet life.'
'You've not been broken in, you see,' said Lance, trying to answer with
nonchalance.
'No, I only see a specimen occasionally. What has she been doing to you
this morning, that has spoilt your appetite, and brought you under her
thumb?'
'Don't, Edgar!' burst out Lance, starting up and running away.
'No, Edgar,' said Geraldine; 'it is not kind. It is hard enough for
him as it is, and it is all for Felix's sake.'
Luckily, Clement had the wisdom not to speak, and therefore Cherry
obtained a more reasonable answer.
'Well, that is a plea, Cherry; but it does rile me to see a fellow
like that dragooned over, and thrown away, to bolster up a wretched
little business such as this. It's a mistake, depend upon it, to let
the demon of present necessity engulf another of the best of us. My
squibs are conscientious, I assure you.'
'I don't care for her!' exclaimed Bernard: 'I'll go with you whenever
you please, Edgar!'
'Well, Wilmet, under what decent mask do you veil your stony heart?'
asked Edgar, as she re-entered.
'Felix sees no reason against their going,' said Wilmet, rather
gloomily. 'Only, Edgar, pray don't encourage Angela to get into one of
her states. You don't know what they are.'
For Felix had decided it against her. 'Yes, let them go. I don't
believe he can bear to face any one in the town, and the charge of them
will be a safe-guard.'
'But Angela?'
'My dear, the worst that can happen with her is that she should be a
little boisterous with the Harewoods;' and as Wilmet showed that the
prospect was unpleasing, 'that is better than what he could do alone,
or with Lance.'
'Yes, I was resolved to stop Lance. I don't know whether to tell you,
but I think you ought to know.'
'What?' asked Felix anxiously,
'Last night at half-past eleven--just when I had finished your hand--I
smelt smoke. So I went down to see what was on fire and--'
'You found Edgar smoking in the kitchen.'
'If it had been only Edgar, I should not have minded, but it was Lance
too. I do think you ought to give him a warning, Felix, for they would
do nothing but laugh at me. Edgar would only go into transports about
my hair, and say how long it was. I don't think I was ever so nearly in
a passion in my life! If he is teaching Lance those ways--'
'He is not Lance's first instructor in smoke,' said Felix; 'I believe
your own Harewoods were that, Mettie.'
'Now you are laughing too, Felix! I don't know how you can. It seems to
me that it is all up with us if Edgar is to lead away Lance; and Lance
was not up this morning for Church--the first time I have known him
miss.'
'Well,' said Felix, rather hastily, 'it is of no use pulling reins too
tight. Don't keep those poor children waiting, or you'll make them all
too late.'
Wilmet had to obey, with the fretted sense that she had not been met
as she expected, and that her alarms were injudiciously made light of;
and Geraldine meantime tried to explain Edgar's bitter mischief as pain
of heart; but it grieved her, whatever it was, and her spirits sank
the more for the physical exhaustion of yesterday's violent laughter.
But Edgar, looking in to see whether the little girls were ready, and
finding her alone, leaning against the window disconsolately, came up,
and putting his arm round her, said, 'So I scandalize you, Gerald? I
can't give my carcase to be battened on by the ghools, were they the
best family ghools in the world.'
'Edgar!'
'Besides, you know all this was diligently fostered by old
Blunderbore's duteous intermeddling; and as it was not my fault that I
furnished a spectacle for gods and men then, I will not now.'
'Only, Edgar, if you do care for Felix, do not, pray do not spoil his
comfort in Lance!'
'If I don't, nature will, Cherry. That boy is not the stuff to make a
journeyman stationer, at Wilmet's orders. Oh! if you could but have
seen her, when she surprised us with our pipes last night! I couldn't
get her to stand still, or she would have been a perfect study for
Antigone. She is a magnificent creature with her hair down!--Ha! little
kids, we must scamper for it for the train!'
And off he went, leaving Geraldine not much less unhappy for his
apology. The long day alone with Felix was a better consolation. She
could not leave the house in such cold as the present; and Felix was
dressed as soon as breakfast was over, and came into the drawing-room,
where after their home service, and when he had proved his freedom from
cough by reading a grand sermon of Newman's, his reserve gave way in
the Sunday calm, and he asked, 'Did Edgar say anything to you, Chrie?'
She repeated the saying about the ghools, as it was evidently meant for
circulation among those respectable parties.
Felix smiled, and said, 'I thought so,' and told in return Edgar's
defiant reception of the tidings.
'I don't think,' said Cherry, 'that I was ever more uncomfortable than
through his fun. It felt like laughing-gas; it forced one on, and yet
it was so unreal. He wants to treat it on the hawk-gone-down-the-wind
principle.'
'It is the gallant and the wise one, Cherry. So you ought to admire it
more than you seem to do.'
'It cannot be wise if it be not true. That is, if it ever went deep
with him.'
'He never meant it to go deep,' said Felix; 'but the very extravagance
of his defiance makes me afraid it took stronger hold than he knew, and
that the shock may be very bad for him.'
'But she--' and Cherry stopped, afraid to vex him by speaking of
Alice's incapacity to raise a character.
He calmly finished. 'She was not all we thought her. True, poor child;
but an attachment worthily and steadily maintained, as for all his
nonsense this has been, must be well for a man; and a disruption of
this kind must be a breaking-up--whether he treat it lightly or no--of
foundations such as one who seems to have little besides can ill afford
to stand.'
It was the first time that the secret anxiety had been openly named,
and Cherry clasped her hands.
'That is my chief anxiety,' resumed Felix. 'Otherwise the end of this
matter is of course an advantage.'
'If she could use him so, she was not worth constancy,' said Cherry.
'No!' It was a decided No, though it was followed by 'As they had made
her. Poor child! She was full of sweet womanly gifts, and might have
been made everything excellent; but Edgar estimated her more truly
than I did. There was always a certain spirit of intrigue, and want of
substance, or she could never have so treated him.'
'Entirely unfeeling.'
'Or rather, too light to appreciate feeling otherwise than as a tribute
to herself, or to dwell on the absent,' said Felix sadly. 'I now
believe that she was conscious of--of my liking. Indeed, I am sure of
it; I only tried to hope otherwise, though it was easy to forgive her
preference for one so much more attractive. There was no harm in that.
But as things stood with him, to throw him over without a word shows
an essential want of comprehension of what was due to others.'
'She might at least have written through her aunts.'
'With a right sense of honour she would; but I believe she had no
education in such things. Poor little thing! I hope the Frenchman will
do well by her.'
'Felix dear, may I ask you--this is not the pain that it was before?'
'No' said Felix, looking steadily at her, with his chin on his hand.
'No, certainly not. I was greatly shocked and upset at first, but
not personally; though of course I must always feel towards her as
I never can for any other woman;' then, at Cherry's start, 'I mean
that the woman who fills one's life with a certain glory and radiance
of--possibility, never can be the same as others to one, even though it
lasted ever so short a time, and was ever so great a mistake. But that
does not mean wishing to begin it over again.'
'Not with her.'
'It is absurd to make auguries or protests,' said Felix quietly; 'but
from a boy I knew well that that sort of thing could hardly be for me,
and I am content to have returned to that conviction. Even ending, as
it has done, the year of--of--perhaps fools' paradise was well worth
having, but I hope it will serve me for life. If I can keep faithful to
what I once thought Alice, it will be best for all of us. So don't be
anxious about me, my Whiteheart. The trouble of last winter was over
long ago, and the zest and spirit of life came back with strength and
work. I am quite as happy now as I was before--happier, I think.'
'Then this need not make you ill,' breathed Cherry, aware that she was
saying something foolish. Indeed, Felix laughed a little.
'Hardly,' he said playfully. 'Remember, Cherry, what a predicament I
was in--obliged to act the heavy father, as Edgar calls it, when I was
so much concerned myself, and with him telling me I was a fool for my
pains, as I believe I was. Besides, it was a good honest cold I caught
at Brompton, in a very sharp east wind. If you insist on going any
further, you will become a family ghool, Cherry.' She was obliged to
laugh; and he continued, 'No, don't be anxious. This was an opportune
scald. I should have found the day's work severe, if I had not had
time to face this thoroughly. Such a quiet day last spring would have
been worth a quart of cod-liver oil later.'
Therewith the pattering of many feet resounded on the frost-bound
street; and the church-goers returned, averring that Mr. Smith's
sermon had been like enough to Edgar's to render it difficult to keep
their countenances, and to make them rejoice in Angela's absence. Of
this Felix might judge for himself, for not long after the preacher
himself arrived, offering the MS. for an abstract for the paper, all
unconscious of the second-sight that had reported it already.
There he lingered, trying to talk, as if he wanted to say something
that would not come out; and at last he was only driven from the field
by the return of Edgar and the girls, who came in open-mouthed and
eager out of the cold.
Edgar had had a great deal of fun with Mrs. Harewood, and had on his
side fascinated all the family; so that Robina confided to Lance that
she thought Grace Harewood ought to be warned, for Edgar went on with
her like 'You know what.'
'Make yourself easy,' said Lance; 'Grace and Lucy know all about that
better than any girl in Minsterham. What did old Bill say? and what
anthem did you have?'
Felix and Geraldine spent the Evening Service hour in very different
fashion from the morning; for Edgar was their companion, and took the
opportunity of making the remonstrance he had threatened about Lance
and his prospects. He had never been fine in Alda's way, and had
not her feelings about losing caste; but whereas his politics were
diametrically opposed to those of the Pursuivant, he thought Felix
ranging himself, according to his essential Blunderbore nature, on the
side of the old giants destined to destruction, and wasting talent and
substance on a hopeless and thankless cause; but he knew his brother to
be past remonstrance, and to be perfectly well aware that this was the
losing side. Only Edgar entered a strong protest against Lance being,
as he said, sacrificed just to make Wilmet's pot boil, and bolster up
the old Pursuivant a little longer.
'You can't be more averse to it than I,' said Felix. 'If he could only
go back to his work, he might yet get to the University.'
'Pshaw! that's not what I meant. He is not the stuff; you were the only
one of us that had the making of a scholar. Now Lance has got just the
taste and the talent that were baulked in my case by old Tom's sticking
me down to hides and tallow, when I ought to have been cultivating
them.'
'There's this difference,' said Geraldine; 'Cousin Thomas stuck you,
but Lance sticks himself.'
'Under moral compulsion, eh?'
'The compulsion was on me,' said Felix. 'I was really afraid to deny
him; the idleness, and the fretting over it, were doing his head so
much harm.'
'That's all very well. No harm done; but to let him go on here in the
stodge is a bit of short-sightedness I can't understand. He'll never be
happy in it; and you'd better let him go before it is too late.'
'Go? but how, and where? His health is not fit for study, and his voice
ought to rest for another year.'
Then Edgar explained his own plan. Lance had already considerable
musical knowledge, and ability such that his way in the musical world
would be secure. Amateur as he was himself, Edgar had such a footing
there that he could secure an introduction for his brother, who while
learning would be able to maintain himself; and either by violin or
voice, if not by original composition, win name, fame, and fortune, in
a few years. A manager of high reputation Edgar mentioned as likely to
accept and train the boy; and he added that for his own part he would
watch over the little fellow; and he added, with a look in his eyes
that went to Felix's heart, 'And nothing would do me so much good now
as the charge of him.'
'That I do believe, Edgar,' said Felix warmly; 'but it would be
throwing the helve after the hatchet in a way you can't expect of a
heavy father.'
'Exactly what I knew you would say. You veil it a little more; but we
poor Bohemians don't meet with much more charity from you than from our
stately sister. Reprobates all--eh?'
'Living a life of temptation enough to make me choose no one to be
drawn into it that I can prevent. Have you been talking to Lance about
it?'
'Well, it rose out of last night's talk to him. Not that he gave in to
it. He's loyal to you to the back-bone, and all importance too with the
charge of the shop. Besides, that cathedral--it's a sort of mother's
milk to him, not out of his mouth.'
'That's a good hearing!' said Felix, with a rather defiant smile.
'But it won't last,' said Edgar; 'the drudgery and sameness will tell;
and you'd better give in with a good grace in time, Blunderbore.'
'You've been persuading him,' said Cherry reproachfully.
'Well, Cherry, I'm not in the habit of confounding virtue with dulness;
and when the little chap talked to me of the musical doings I had been
after, I felt the sin and shame of getting a nightingale to make a
barn-door fowl of.'
'I can only tell you,' said Felix, with more annoyance than he usually
betrayed, 'that if you took your nightingale to the din of London, and
the excitement of a concert, you'd have him with inflammation on the
brain before the week was out. Why, I sent him over to see his doctor
at Minsterham, and he says it would be murder to send him back to his
books and the choir for this next quarter at least; and if cathedral
music will not do for him, judge if London concerts would!'
'And did you think I wanted to carry off your deputy right hand while
your own is hung up in a bag, you jealous old giant? Why, I proposed to
devote myself to the Pursuivant to-morrow!'
'Thank you; I am afraid it would be taken for the Tribune.'
'As if I couldn't hit off the complacent, gentlemanly, stick-in-the-mud
style for squiredom! I'll write you a leader--on what shall it be,
municipalities, or the smut in wheat?--that you shall not know from
your own.'
To wish Edgar away was impossible, and yet how feel willing that Lance
should be under such influence? Withal there was the difficulty of
showing Wilmet that to fret Lance with restrictions was a dangerous
thing at such a moment. She would yield to Felix's desire that she
would not interfere with that orgie over the kitchen fire--which he
regarded all the time with as much dread as herself--but she thought
his concession weak: and Lance himself was perilously like Edgar in all
his bright pleasant qualities, talents, and tastes, so that the two had
an enjoyment in one another's company that it was painful to regard
with anxiety.
CHAPTER XXV.
DON GIOVANNI.
'Towered cities please us then,
And the busy hum of men.
*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *
And ever against eating cares
Lap me in soft Lydian airs.
*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *
With wanton heed, and giddy cunning,
The melting voice through mazes running.'
Milton.
The Monday brought business instead of sentiment. Not only was the
Pursuivant to be provided for, but Felix had on his mind the year's
accounts. No one had ever had Froggatt and Underwood's Christmas bill
later than the second week in January--and no one should. Besides,
he was very anxious to balance his books this critical year, and was
unwilling to employ a professional accountant for what, as far as head
went, he could do perfectly well. His willing helpers began to perceive
what they had never realized before--his practised power of quickness
and accuracy. The Pursuivant was quite work enough for Cherry, even if
she could have borne the strain of application to accounts; Lancelot
was needed in the shop; and Wilmet and Clement found themselves whirled
on beyond their power of speed. Robina proved the most efficient
helper; for arithmetic had been so well taught by Miss Fennimore,
that she understood with less trouble to herself and Felix than any
of the rest. They laughed to find that five had been about what he
usually did singly; and that he had all the time been the main-spring
of them all--referee to Lance and Cherry, arranging for the others
in pencil with his left hand, breaking off to direct one, verify for
another, explain to the third, and often distracting them by whistling
to Theodore, amusing Stella, or gossiping with Edgar--all with ease
and without hurry, as if it came naturally to him. 'Julius Caesar was
nothing to him!' laughed Geraldine, as she perceived the ability and
power that she had never ascribed to him before, because he had not
Edgar's brilliance. As to Edgar, though he had been trained for a
merchant's clerk, he professed to have forgotten all his training:
he would only proffer help to the editorial business, and there put
out Cherry's arrangements more than he helped her; and finding every
one much too busy to loiter, he took his departure early on Tuesday
morning, leaving an unsatisfactory sense that he had not been comforted
nor made welcome enough--a sense of regret and yet of relief.
The result of the balance was that the Pursuivant was a less profitable
investment than hitherto, but by no means a loss; while the Tribune
seemed to have reached a present level of circulation, where it
might rest till some further excitement. There would henceforth be
a hand-to-hand struggle; but the Pursuivant still held its own. And
as to the private budget, the household had pulled through without
exceeding their income, when all the demands of the year were answered.
Moreover, Fulbert had been appointed to a well-paid office, and had
sent home twenty-five pounds, begging that Lance might have the
preference in the disposal; and the whole family were very proud of
this, the first substantial help that had been sent in by any of the
brothers--Lance proudest of all, perhaps, though he declared that it
was no good to him, and begged that it might clear Bernard's first year.
Lance had said nothing all this time of Edgar's invitations, and no
one was sure whether that unscrupulous person had made them to him in
person or not, till one dismal foggy afternoon at the end of the week.
Felix, though still helpless as to his hand and arm, had resumed his
place down-stairs; and Cherry was sitting in the window, to get light
to pursue her work of unpicking a dove-coloured French merino dress, a
legacy of Alda's, which was to be dyed and made up again for Angela. It
was a business that she disliked--it always seemed to bring the sense
of grinding to her mind--and this particular dress seemed to carry in
every fold the remembrance of some jar between the wearer and herself;
nor was she exhilarated by the accompaniment, for Robina was dutifully
puzzling out on the worn old piano a long difficult sonatina--a sort of
holiday task, which lay heavy on the child's mind, and seemed to Cherry
a mere labyrinth of confused sounds. The dull day, the dull work, and
weary clash up to the place where Robina never failed to stumble, and
then go back to the beginning with no better success, wore Cherry's
spirits. She began to feel as if this were like her life--all mist, all
toil, all din, everything fair and lovely closed up from her, nothing
left but the yearning knowledge that it existed, and that everybody
could enjoy it except herself--she, who felt such capacity for making
the most of it. The sense of imprisoned tedium grew so strong at last,
that she was ready to cry out to stop the only thing she could stop,
when she was sensible that a very different hand was on the keys--no
confused or uncertain touch, but the harmony was being read off, and
the stammering spelling work was exchanged for clear, true, feeling
discourse. She needed not to look round to know that Lance was standing
behind Robina; but presently he came to a dull discordant note, and
broke off with a growl of disgust, 'What, another gone!'
'Didn't you know that?'
'No; I can't bear to touch the wretched old thing, it makes me sick!'
'I wish we could learn to tune it.'
'Poulter did show me once, but it's no good. It is just as makeshift
and disgusting as all the rest of it!'
'You've got a head-ache, Lance.'
'No, I haven't. Felix has been at me, too.'
'What! he sent you up?'
'Ay;' and as Robina sat down on a low stool, he threw himself on the
floor, with his head on her lap, delivering himself of a howling yawn.
'Why did he send you up?' as she stroked his hair back from his temples.
'Oh, it has been an intolerable bother! All the samples of
writing-paper have somehow been and gone and got into the wrong
drawers, and Mr. Underwood has been in no end of a state of mind--quite
ferocious; and Lamb and I have been sorting and struggling to get 'em
right, till at last I didn't know fancy pink from widow's deepest
affliction; and Felix, by way of the most cutting thing he could do to
me, orders me up-stairs!'
'I am so sorry! It must have been Lamb's doing.'
'No: he's much too sober-sided. It was mine, I'm sure, one day when I
was hating it all a little worse than usual.'
'Hating it all! O Lance! I thought you got on so well!'
'A nice sort of getting on! I know when it was. There were those two
Miss Bayneses--out at Upham--came in with some fad about note-paper,
made a monstrous fuss; but they are very pretty--something like that
girl at Stoneborough. So I wrote up to Scott's--took no end of trouble.
Scott had to cut it on purpose--wouldn't do less than a ream--and after
all, when it came down, my young ladies just take one quire of it,
turn everything over again, never say one word of thanks, but stand
chattering away to an ape of a cousin that came in with them. I was in
such a wax, that I believe I jumbled up the paper when they'd gone,
and tumbled it all over again; and it has never got the better of it,
though I always meant to set it to rights.'
'Well, I think it served you right, if you only did it because they
were pretty!'
'It wasn't altogether that; but I knew they would say nothing was to be
had when Mr. Underwood wasn't there. That's the way of it; one's just a
bit of a machine for getting things!'
'You knew that before, when you took the work.'
'Yes; but somehow I did not know it would be so disgusting. I don't
suppose that girl at Stoneborough would look at me over the counter
now. No, and I don't know that she ought, either; only people might
have a civil "Thank you" to throw at one. I'm an ass, that's all! Only
one hates having no one to speak to!'
'It is different from the Harewoods.'
'Don't talk about that!'
'But, Lance, I thought you liked it all. You said you did when I came
home; and when Felix was laid up, you were everything, and did so well.
I thought you would have been pleased.'
'Yes; I saw the whole stupidity and botheration of the thing. It has
got to be work instead of play--I suppose that's it.'
'But, Lance, does it follow that you must go on with it all your life,
because you are helping Felix through this winter?'
'While the accounts look like this, I don't see how he is to pay a
stuck-up shopman. No, it is all stuff and nonsense! I didn't think
Edgar's talk would have upset me like this.'
'What? his talk about operas, and concerts, and pictures--?'
'And the spirit and the fun that are always going there. That must
be life! One's eyes and ears do seem given one for something there!
Do you know Bob, he wants me to come up and live with him, and get an
engagement as a pianist, and learn the violin?'
'O, Lance! but Felix and Wilmet would never consent!'
'No, and they didn't ought to. No, I could never,' and he spoke low,
but Cherry heard his clear voice distinctly, 'give the stage what was
taught me for that other purpose. If I can't be what I want, I must do
this common work for my living, and not make a market of my music. I
can give that freely to the Church--that is if I ever get my voice
again.'
'That's right, dear Lancey,' said Robina, looking down at the face on
her knees; 'you could not really like that odd life Edgar leads.'
'Like it? Much you know about it, Bob. It does make everything else
seem as dull as ditch-water!'
'Not always.'
'Not when I can get it out of my head. Only I do wish things wouldn't
be so stupid here. It's just like a horse in a mill seeing a fine
thorough-bred come and kick up his heels at him in a meadow. I say,
Bob, let's go and get a turn at the organ--you can blow for me; it will
get the maggots out of my brain best.'
'Oh yes, dear Lance, only--'
'Only what?'
'If you didn't much mind those horrible notes, could you just show me
the sense of that thing? I must learn before I go back to school; and
Angel hates it so, I did it when she was out.'
Lance made an ineffable grimace; but having undertaken to act
music-master, he first played the piece as exquisitely as the cracked
piano would allow, and then scolded poor Robin within an inch of her
life at every blunder, for her utter lack of taste, vituperating the
stupidity of those who threw good music away upon her.
She took it all as an honour and a kindness, though she cried out
for a respite long before she had come up to his rather unreasonable
requirements; and reminding him that it would soon be too dark for his
designs on the church organ, she went to get ready; and the two were
not seen again till after dark, when the patient Robina came in very
cold, but there was a bright peacefulness on Lance's face, as if he had
played away his repinings.
Felix explained the having sent him away by saying that the strain of
the days when he had been in charge had told on him, for he had grown
so confused and distressed in the endeavour to remedy the mistakes that
had been made, that it had been needful for every reason to send him
away from the scene of action. No doubt the responsibility, and the
resistance to Edgar's invitations had been a considerable pressure on
his mind; but whatever his longings might be, he said no more about
them, and continued to be the sunshine of the house--so bright, frank,
and open that no one would have guessed at the deep reserves within.
It was about a month later that one evening he darted into the room,
exclaiming, 'I say, who do you think is here? Why, Renville, Edgar's
boss!'
'Nothing the matter, I hope?' cried Cherry.
'Oh no, nothing; only Tom Underwood has sent him down to see about some
picture at Centry, and so he dropped in, and Felix has asked him to
spend the evening.'
'The evening!' Wilmet started up.
'Hark! there they are on the stairs!'
The introduction was deferred, for Felix shut him into Mr. Froggatt's
room, and then came himself to say, 'I couldn't but ask him; I hope it
is not very troublesome?'
'N--no--oh, no,' said Wilmet 'Only--Lance, should you mind just running
down to Prothero's to get some rashers; and let me see--eggs, if he has
any he can recommend, and not above sixpence for seven?'
'Little Lightfoot is there,' said Felix, who even in his shoe-cleaning
days would not have liked such a commission.
'He has no sense,' returned Wilmet; 'and I can't spare one of the
maids. You don't mind, Lance?'
'Not a whistle. Only how is my sense to act, if Prothero's conscience
won't warrant his eggs?'
Wilmet's answer was lost in the clank of coppers, as she left the room
with her willing aide-de-camp, and neither of them was seen again for
the next half hour, during which time Felix had introduced the neat
dapper little Mr. Renville to his sister Geraldine and little Stella;
and a conversation had begun which entertained Cherry extremely--it
was so like a breath from that wonderful world of art in which Edgar
lived; and meantime the painter's quick eye was evidently taking stock
of the drawings on the walls, and feasting on little Stella's childish
beauty, though he was too polite to make remarks. There had been only
just time for Felix and Cherry to look at each other, wondering what
their house-keeper designed, when the door between the rooms was opened
by Lance, with a face as red as a boiled lobster: and behind the
tea-tray appeared Wilmet's head, likewise considerable heightened in
complexion, though not so unbecomingly. Nor had they roasted themselves
for nothing. Lance looked and winked with conscious pride at the
poached eggs, frizzled contorted rashers, and crisp toast, wherein he
had had his share of glory; and Wilmet's pile of scones in their snowy
napkin divided the honours of the feast with the rissoles, previously
provided for the brothers, who since Felix's health had become matter
of thought, had come to make their principal meal in the leisure of the
evening, when that notable housewife of theirs could provide for them.
Certainly, Mr. Renville's own Nuremburg haus-frau could not have turned
out a neater little impromptu supper than Wilmet had done; though she
had decidedly objected to Lance's concealment of the uncouth forms of
the butter with fern-leaves from the garden, and had flatly refused to
let him station either a pot of jonquils or a glass of snowdrops in the
middle of the table. 'Eating, was eating, and flowers were flowers,'
she said; which sentiment somehow tickled Lance so much, that choking
added to the redness of his visage, as, while buttering the muffins, he
tried to exercise some sculpture on the ill-shaped lump.
To a Londoner, however, all country fare was fresh, pure, and
delicious, more especially when dispensed by one who, for all
her disdain of the poetry of life, could not but be in herself a
satisfaction to the artist's eye. He could not help a little start
of amazement; and as he paused while Cherry made her slow way into
the other room, he could not refrain from whispering to Felix that
he had always thought the portraits Edgar brought from home a little
too ideal, but that he perceived that they did not do justice to the
reality; and Felix, with a little curl of his mouth, and rub of his
hands, asked whether Mr. Renville had seen his other twin sister. 'Yes;
she was extremely handsome, but somehow her style did not explain that
classical beauty in the same manner.'
To look at Wilmet and Stella, and to talk to Felix and Geraldine, was
no despicable pleasure. Felix's powers of conversation were a good deal
cultivated by the clients of the reading-room, who had always gossiped
with Mr. Froggatt as now with him; and Geraldine had native wit and
liveliness, that were sure to flash out whenever the first chill of
shyness was taken off, as it easily was when her brother was there to
take the lead.
But Cherry was not prepared for that proposal of Felix's that she
should show her drawings to the guest. Poor man, he must be so much
used to the sight of young-lady drawings; and of late Cherry had been
in the depths of despair about hers, with all their defects, that
she knew not how to remedy, glaring full upon her. She would have
protested, but Lance had handed out the portfolio; and fluttering,
nervous, eager, she must conquer her silly sense of being 'all in a
twitter.'
Those two or three fanciful groups--his 'Ah, very pretty!' was just
courteous and almost weary. But then came an endeavour to produce
Lance as the faithful little acolyte in the Silver Store. Mr. Renville
looked at that much more attentively, smiled as he nodded at her
model, and praised the accuracy of the drawing of the hand. From that
moment his manner of looking was altogether different. He criticised
so hard that Wilmet was in pain, and thought poor Cherry would be
annihilated; but Cherry, on the other hand, was drinking in every word,
asking questions, explaining difficulties, and Mr. Renville evidently
extremely interested, seeing and hearing nothing but the sketches and
the lame girl.
'Who had been her teacher?'
'Edgar.'
'No one else? Only your brother?' in great surprise. 'I don't know when
I have seen such accuracy even in the school of art.'
'Edgar is so particular about that.'
'Well, if I could only get him to learn his own lesson!'
'I have so little to copy,' said Cherry. 'I have nothing to distract
me.'
It was little enough; a few second-hand studies of his; a cast that
Felix had given her off an Italian boy's board, which came opportunely
on her birthday; and her living models when she could catch them,
generally surreptitiously. But upon her small materials she had worked
perseveringly, going back to the same subject whenever she gained a
new light, profiting by every hint, till the result was an evident
amazement to the artist; and as he emphatically said, pointing to an
outline caught from John Harewood as he was reading last summer, 'This
is not talent, it is genius! You ought to give yourself advantages,
Miss Underwood.'
Cherry smiled rather sadly. 'It is quite enough that Edgar should have
them,' she said.
'Ah! if he would only take half the pains with his drawing that he
seems to have inculcated upon you!'
It was a disappointment. She had much rather have heard Edgar's genius
praised than her own, which, be it what it might, she had come to
believe must, for want of cultivation, be limited to the supply of
Christmas cards and unsatisfactory illuminations.
But when the sisters had gone to bed, Mr. Renville had much more to
say. He had sought Felix out a good deal for the purpose of talking
over Edgar, He said that the young man's talent was of a graceful,
fantastic, ingenious description, such as with application would be
available for prosperity if not for eminence; but application Edgar
had never perseveringly given, since he had first found himself
surpassed in the higher efforts of art. His powers were too versatile
for his own good, and he dabbled in everything that was not
his proper occupation--concerts, amateur theatricals, periodical
literature and journalism, comic sketches. His doings were not all
wholly unremunerative; but though he viewed them as mines of wealth,
they were really lures into a shifty uncertain life, and distractions
from steady consistent labour. His fine voice, his brilliant wit, and
engaging manner, made him a star in the lively society on the outskirts
of art; and he was expensive, careless, and irregular in his hours to
a degree that sorely tried the good man, a precisian in his domestic
customs. He and his little German wife, however, loved the lad, as
everybody did love him who came under the influence of his sunshiny
grace and sweetness of temper--the unselfish manner inherited from one
whose unselfishness was real; and used as they were to the freedom of
artist life, their allowances were liberal; but of late there had been
a recklessness and want of purpose about his ways which both grieved
and alarmed them: he was more unsettled than ever, seemed to have lost
all interest in his studies at the Academy, was getting into a set that
had degenerated from permissible eccentricity into something very like
lawlessness, and even while an undesirable inmate, had vexed his kind
friend and master by proposing to remove from under his roof, and set
up with a chosen comrade of his own.
Committed to his charge, as Edgar Underwood had been by the elder
brother, the kind little artist felt it his duty not to let him go
without an intimation to his family, though well aware that a father
could have little control in such a case, how much less a brother only
by two years the elder?
All that Felix could hope was, that since this state of dreary
recklessness was so evidently the effect of disappointment, it might
pass with the force of the shock. He himself had experiences of the
irksomeness of the dull round of ordinary occupation when the heart
was rent by a sudden shock; and though he had forced himself on under
the load that had so nearly crushed him, he could perfectly understand
the less chastened, more impetuous nature, under less pressure of
necessity, breaking into aberrations under a far more astounding blow
of desertion. So he hoped. But what could he do? He knew but too well
the cool manner in which Edgar turned over his remonstrances as those
of the would-be heavy father. He could only thank Mr. Renville, promise
to write to Edgar, and entreat him not to remove from the roof which
was so great a safeguard against the worst forms of temptation, advise
him perhaps to study abroad for a time to pacify the restlessness of
his disappointment--at any rate, if he could do nothing else, not let
the brother whom he still loved best of all drift away without feeling
that there were those who grieved and strove for him.
It was not only of Edgar that Mr. Renville spoke, however. He was
so much impressed with Geraldine's drawings, that he argued that
she should have a quarter's study in the South Kensington Museum,
undertaking, as one of the masters, to facilitate her coming and going,
so that she should not be involved in any scrambles, and declaring
that she only needed a few opportunities of study to render her talent
really excellent and profitable.
Felix declared her going to be simply impossible; but either Mr.
Renville or Edgar did not let the matter rest there, for a warm
invitation arrived from the family in Kensington Palace Gardens,
backed by many promises of tender care from Marilda. It seemed to
be absolutely throwing away opportunities for Cherry to refuse to
avail herself of such an opening; and though she was in exceeding
trepidation, she had enough of the sacred fire to long to perfect her
art, justified by the wish to render it substantially beneficial. And
then Felix could not help thinking that the presence of his favourite
sister might be a wholesome check to Edgar in one direction, and
incentive in another, at this critical time, and this was no small
weight in his balance. While Cherry, on the one hand, dreaded going
out into the world with the nervous dismay of an invalid, who had
never been anywhere but to St. Faith's; and on the other, felt this
opportunity for herself almost an injustice to Lance, with all his
yearnings.
She was to go immediately after Easter; and whether by Edgar's
suggestion or not, Marilda imperiously begged that Lance might bring
her up to London, and stay as long as he could be spared. It was
impossible to give him longer than from Saturday till the last train
on Monday, for Felix had reporting business on hand, and must be out
on Tuesday, and did not perhaps regret that things had so settled
themselves.
Lance's overflowing enjoyment somewhat solaced Geraldine's alarm on
the way up; he was so careful of her, and so proud of the charge; and
after his wistful glance at Minsterham, the novelty was so delightful
to him. His journey with John Harewood reckoned for nothing, for he had
then been far too unwell to look about, and it had besides been on a
different line; but now everything was wonderful, and his exclamations
almost embarrassed Cherry, she thought they must so astonish their
fellow-travellers. Even the hideousness of the suburbs seemed to
fascinate him--there was something in the sense of the multitude that
filled him with excitement. 'It is getting to the heart, Cherry,' he
said, 'where the circulation is quickest.'
'Into the world--the vortex, I should call it,' returned Cherry
thinking of drops being attracted by the eddy, and sucked into the
whirlpool; but Lance was gone wild at the glimpse of a huge gasometer,
and did not heed.
Edgar's dainty beard and moustache were the first things that met their
eyes upon the platform; his strong arms helped Cherry out, and in a
wonderfully short time seated her beside Alda in a great luxurious
carriage.
To her disappointment, however, the two back seats remained vacant.
'No, no,' said Edgar, his white teeth gleaming in a smile; 'we must
make the most of our time, Lancey boy. What do you say to walking by
Westminster--then we'll get something to eat--and you shall know what
Don Giovanni is like before you are many hours older, my boy?'
Cherry's last view of Lance was with a look of dancing ecstasy all over
his person.
'Don Giovanni is the opera, isn't it?' she said in bewilderment.
'Of course; what did you think?'
'But I thought that was dreadfully dear.'
'Oh! Edgar can always get tickets for anything. You must not bring out
Wilmet's frugalities here, Cherry. Dear old Wilmet, how does she bear
this long waiting?'
Alda was really interested in home tidings, and pleased to point out
matters of interest, so that Cherry was fairly happy, till the awe of
the great handsome house, alone in its gravelled garden, fell on her.
But when once up the stately stone steps, she was kindly, solicitously,
welcomed by Marilda and her mother. The reception-rooms (as Mrs.
Underwood called them) were all on the ground floor; and Cherry had
only to mount one easy flight of broad steps to reach the former
school-room, with two little bed-rooms opening into it--one assigned to
her, the other to Marilda's old nurse, who had been kept on with little
or nothing to do, and was delighted to devote herself to the lame young
lady.
She took charge of Geraldine's toilette for the late dinner, so
tremendous to the imagination used to the little back-room at home,
but which turned out after all more tedious than formidable. In truth,
Cherry was very tired, and Alda quite kindly advised her to go to bed.
She wanted to sit up and wait for her brothers, but was laughed at, and
finally was deposited in her very pretty pink bed, where, however, the
strangeness of all things allowed her very little sleep. Quiet as the
place was, she thought something seemed to be going on all night; and
at some semi-light hour in the morning she bounded up as if at a shot,
for there really was a step, and a knock, and her door opening.
'Cherry, are you awake?'
'O Lance! what is the matter?'
'Matter! nothing--only I'm going out to look about me, and I thought
I'd leave word with you and see how you were.'
'Out! Why, didn't I hear the clock strike five?'
'Ay. Have you been awake?'
'A good deal. Have you?'
'As if anybody could sleep after that! I've gone it all over and over.
I see there's a piano in this outer room. I'll just show you.'
'O Lance!--now--and Sunday!'
'I forgot. But it is so awful, Cherry: it made one feel more than a
hundred sermons;' and the far-away look came into his eyes; as in
rapid words he sketched the story, described the scenes, dwelt with
passionate fervour on the music, all with an intensity of feeling
resulting in a great sense of awe. His excitement seemed to her so
great that she begged him to go back to bed for the hours that yet
remained before breakfast.
'I couldn't, I tell you, Cherry.'
'But you'll have such a head-ache.'
'Time enough for that when I get home. I don't know what to do with
myself, I tell you; I must get into a church somewhere, or I can't bear
it.'
'You'll lose your way.'
'I've got the map of London. If I can I shall get to St. Matthew's; and
so I thought I had better tell you, in case I wasn't back to breakfast.
Edgar showed me your room.'
'Is Edgar sleeping here?'
'No; he went to Renville's when he'd put me in. I'll be back anyway by
the time Robin and Angel come, but I can't stay quiet. Nobody ever gave
me any notion what this place is. It makes one feel I don't know how,
only just to see the people--streaming, streaming, streaming, just like
a river! And then that wonderful--most wonderful music!'
The boy was gone, and Cherry felt as if his fate were sealed--the drop
gone to join the other drops, and to swirl away!
Edgar was rather amazed and disconcerted, when on coming in about ten
o'clock he found that he had vanished. He had meant to take him to any
ecclesiastical wonder that he wished; but he laughed at Cherry's fears
of the boy losing himself. 'He is a born gamin,' he said--'takes to
London streets as a native element. But Felix is right, he must not
have too much of it. I was heartily glad when it was over last night,
and durst not keep him for the ballet, though I much wanted to see what
he would say to it; but he was worked up to such a pitch I didn't know
what would come next, and I'm sure his remarks taught me more about Don
Giovanni than ever I saw before. He was in such a state when he came
out that I hardly knew what to do with him. I should have given him
a glass of ale but he wouldn't hear of that, so I could only let him
have his will--a great cup of coffee--and send him to bed. I knew he
wouldn't sleep.'
Lance did appear at the moment of luncheon, when Robina and
Angela arrived to spend the rest of the day. He had not reached St
Matthew's; but he had found a church open early for a grand choral
Celebration, and this not being customary at Minsterham, had been
almost overwhelming to a nature like his. It had lasted so long, that
the bell rang for matins before the congregation had left the church;
and Lance had stayed on, and heard a service far exceeding in warmth
and splendour that of his sober old cathedral, and such a soul-stirring
sermon as was utterly unlike the steady-going discourses of his canons.
He had never even missed his breakfast, and yet seemed not to care
for the meal before him, though he ate what was put on his plate; and
he had that look of being all brow, eyes, and nose, that had often
recurred ever since his illness; but he would not allow that he was
tired; and so far from being able to sit still, wanted his little
sisters to walk with him in Kensington Gardens, and Robina being a
discreet person, and knowing her way, there was no reason against
this; and off they went, all three supremely happy, and Cherry
feeling a certain hopefulness that Robina's steady good sense would
be a counterpoise to other influences and excitements. But Lance had
not come to any state for sober sense. Under the trees of Kensington
Gardens, the influence of the brilliant spring beauty, and the gay
cheerful vivacity of the holiday crowd, still acted on his eager
self; and he used his sisters as audience for all his impressions as
to Don Giovanni, till he had driven Angela almost as wild as himself
with his vivid descriptions--and to be sure, he treated it as a sort
of religious exercise. Indeed, the sensation he seemed chiefly to
have carried off with him, was that London had been maligned; he had
always supposed it to be a Vanity Fair, where one's religion would
be in extreme peril; and behold, he had found religion there like
everything else--more quickening, more inspiriting, more exquisitely
beautiful and satisfying in its ministrations, than anything that he
could have conceived! Nor did the late Evening Service with which his
day finished--with all its accessories of light and music, and another
sermon from a celebrated preacher--lessen this impression, which made
St Oswald's by comparison so utterly flat, dead, and unprofitable.
Robina could not help saying to Cherry, with that old-womanish air of
wisdom that belonged to her sometimes, 'I do wish we hadn't taken Lance
to such a nice church. He knows less what London really is now than he
did before.'
Dear little Robin! as if she knew what London really was! And Cherry
was too anxious an elder sister to give her much comfort, except by
saying, 'It is fair that he should know the truth of what is to be
found there, Bobbie. You see he is only getting good out of it in his
own mind.'
'Yes, that's true; only he will make himself ill.'
This had come to be Edgar's fear as well as Cherry's, when they found
that Lance had slept quite as little the second night as the first,
though he brought down those great lustrous blue eyes of his quite as
wide open and full of zest in the morning. It made Edgar cautious in
his choice of sights for the Monday; but one so long habituated to
London, and regarding with contempt its stock lions, could not estimate
what they were to a lad at once so susceptible and so unsophisticated,
and his diversion at Lance's raptures passed into anxiety, not
unmingled with tedium, and almost disdain, at anything so very
countrified; but his real care and good nature never flagged till he
had safely, and to his positive relief, seen his little brother off for
Bexley by the five o'clock train, to work off his intoxication at home,
among his proper guardians.
'I am sure,' he said to Geraldine, 'if I had had any notion that his
brain had continued so ticklish, I would never have had him on my
hands. The difference between lionizing him and old Blunderbore! why
it was--not exactly fire and water, but Ariel and Gonzalo. Shut the
two up in the same shop! It is ridiculous! No, no, Lance must vegetate
down there till his brains have cooled down from that unlucky stroke;
but after that, you'll see, nothing will keep him down in Felix's hole;
'tisn't in the nature of things that he should be buried there. I've
given him the violin I got at Lige, so he won't be quite wasting his
time.'
There was rest--at least, for the present--in Edgar's acquiescence in
Lance's vegetation, except so far as it gave food for present anxiety,
by showing how the boy's excitability had alarmed him; and Cherry
anxiously watched for reports from home. Felix and she herself were
the chief letter-writers in the family, and he kept her daily supplied
with tidings. His first account--written at intervals at the reporter's
table at Minsterham--bore that Lance had come all right, and seemed to
have enjoyed himself much. So he had kept up for one day; but on the
third came the inevitable tidings, 'Poor Lance is in bed, with headache
in its worst shape. Wilmet has been obliged to stay at home to attend
to him. It must have been coming on yesterday, for he seems to have
talked more than enough, and made more blunders than can be remedied in
a day. I suppose Edgar would have laughed if I had cautioned him; but
I would about as soon have put the boy to stand on the Equator as have
taken him to that opera.'
The days of pleasure seemed to have a heavy price; it was not till
Saturday that Felix reported Lance as in his place as usual, but still
looking ill, quiet, and subdued. 'I am afraid,' proceeded the letter,
'that it has been a very fascinating glimpse he has had of Edgar's
way of life, and that F. and U.'s house is more against the grain to
him. I doubt whether it be suited to him; but the other course seems
over-perilous. I wonder whether fathers have the power of insight and
judgment that I need so much. However, for the present, health speaks
plainly that home is the only place for him; and I can with a free
conscience enjoy his bright face and service of good will. To have you
and him both out of the way was severe; but if it were not for his
good, it is for yours.'
Yes, Geraldine trusted it was for her good. When Thomas Underwood went
to the City in the morning she was always set down at the Renvilles',
whence the transit to the Museum was so short, that she could make it
either with her brother's arm or the master's. It was not thought fit
for her to work all day, so Mrs. Sturt (the old nurse) always came to
meet and take her home to luncheon; after which she either went out
with Mrs. Underwood and Marilda, or was carried about by her brother,
in which case her conveyance was always defrayed at the door with so
little knowledge on her part, that Edgar accused her of supposing
Cousin Thomas to keep innumerable very seedy equipages always in
waiting on her steps.
It was great enjoyment--real instruction of the best sort in that
which was most congenial to her, putting the crown on her long lonely
perseverance, and giving a daily sense of progress and achievement,
was delightful. She had no notion of rivalry; but when she perceived
that she was excelling, that commendation almost always attended her
attempts, and that in any competition she always came near the mark
and was sometimes foremost, she was conscious of a startling sense of
triumph; and Edgar was full of exultation. If his own studies at the
Royal Academy had been fulfilling all his golden dreams, he could not
have been half so uplifted as he was by Cherry's chances of a medal;
while, if he had only acted on a quarter of the sensible advice he gave
her, he would already have been far advanced in his profession.
If he had been imprudent in Lancelot's case, he showed much tender
good judgment in his selection on Cherry's behalf of exhibitions and
rehearsals--never overdoing her, and using all his grace and dexterity
to obviate her fatigue and prevent embarrassments from her lameness,
till she began to take courage and feel at ease.
Alda never went with them. She said Cherry's pace would be the death
of her, and she knew it all by heart. Yet, go where they would,
there generally appeared, soon after four o'clock, a tall, handsome,
black-moustached figure, seldom uttering more than 'Good-morning!' and
'All well at home?' and then content to stalk beside them, perfectly
indifferent to their object, but always ready to give an arm to Cherry,
or to find a cab.
'Dogged by Montezuma's ghost!' Edgar would mutter when the inevitable
black head came towering into view; and even Cherry sometimes felt
the silent haunting rather a bore. Edgar and Ferdinand were both good
company alone, but together she knew not what to do with them; since
her sole common subject of interest to Ferdinand, church details,
provoked Edgar's sarcasm; and though Edgar had enough to say on a
thousand other points, Fernan was totally silent on all, except horses,
of which on her side she knew nothing. Nevertheless, for very pity, he
was always allowed to know their designs; and Cherry delivered messages
between him and Alda, and marvelled at her never finding it possible to
avail herself of such chances of meeting.
Indeed, it puzzled Cherry why Ferdinand should be banished from the
house, since Marilda took pains to mark her friendly feeling towards
him as Alda's betrothed; and the resentment of her parents appeared
to be inactive; but Alda declared that any advance on his side would
provoke great wrath, and that open intercourse was impossible; and it
could only be supposed that she was the best judge.
However, to Cherry herself, Alda was far kinder than at home--perhaps
because her own ground was too secure to leave room for jealousy; and
she viewed her sister as guest rather than rival. During the first
shyness and awe, she was a kind helper, full of tact, which parried the
rather obtrusive patronage of her so-called aunt; she provided books,
quietly ameliorated matters of dress, and threw in judicious hints
and encouragements, so that Cherry's warm heart beat gratefully, and
she thought she had never known how nice Alda could be in her proper
element.
As to Marilda, she was thoroughly good-natured, perhaps rather teasing,
and tyrannical as to what she thought for Cherry's good, and very
careful that she should not be neglected; but there did not seem to
be much in common between them, they never could get on in a tte 
tte; and Cherry, who had heard vast statements from her brothers
about Marilda's original forms of goodness, was disappointed to find
her life so entirely that of a common-place young lady. She was clumsy,
over-dressed, and of a coarse complexion; and though she sometimes said
odd things, they were remarkable not for wit but for frankness. It
seemed as though the world had been too much for Marilda's better self,
and as if she were becoming the purse-proud heiress who fancied wealth
could atone for want of refinement or of delicacy towards people's
feelings.
It was with the master of the house that Cherry got on best. At first
he treated her like a frail china cup that a touch might break, but
gradually he discovered in her resemblances to all manner of past
Underwoods, talked to her about her parents in their youth, expressed
endless wonder how 'that lad Felix made it out,' and by-and-by
found that a few questions about the day's doings would draw forth
a delightfully fresh, simple, and amusing narrative, given with
animated lips, and eyes that charmed him. He became very fond of little
Geraldine, and accepted her as his special evening companion when his
wife took the other two girls into society. She could talk, read the
paper, or play at cribbage; and was so much pleased to be of use, that
she became as much at ease and therefore as amusing as with old Froggy
himself.
She had been assured of exemption from parties, but she found that the
sumptuous luncheon was a popular institution, and that radiant ladies,
lounging men, riding parties brought home by Alda, and stout matrons on
a cruise of morning calls, were always dropping in. It was diverting
to sit quietly by and listen to the characteristic confidences of the
city dames, to the dashing nonsense of the girls, and the languid
affectations of the young men; and capital material was furnished for
the long letters that amused the breakfast-table at home--journals,
half full of beautiful description, half full of fun and drollery.
Those gay dames and demoiselles little thought what a pair of keen grey
eyes were watching them, as they passed, almost unheeded, the little
sober-hued person whom they never fairly understood to be the sister of
the beautiful Alda.
Of the school establishment at Brompton Cherry saw something. She was
invited to drink tea there, for the sake of talking over Angela;
the two heads of the establishment being very glad to get an elder
sister to discuss that puzzling personage with. Of Robina, since the
catastrophe eighteen months ago, they had nothing but good to say; she
had really lived it down, so far as to have proved that if she had
erred, it was only in judgment; but with Angela they still knew not
what to do.
She had come back subdued and with better impulses, and these had
carried her on up to Easter, giving such satisfaction to the Vicar,
that he had sanctioned her Confirmation; but immediately after the
holidays, the wild spirit had broken out again. She neither learnt nor
tried to learn, attended to nothing but music, and showed up exercises
and dictation flagrantly ill-spelt, and not unfrequently making fun
of the whole subject. As a reward for her weeks of propriety, she had
been promoted to the German class; but she had openly declared that
she hated German, and saw no use in it, and she would not attempt
anything but an occasional caricature of pronunciation. Everybody
liked her--even those whom she most disrespectfully provoked; and
she was like a kind of tame monkey to the school, turning her very
punishments into absurdity. She would lighten solitary confinement
by fantastically decorating the chairs and tables. If shut up in the
dark, her clear shrill voice would convulse all the household with
Lance's whole repertory of comic songs, the favourite being Thackeray's
'Little Billee,' which she always sang as if she expected to be rescued
by the sight of 'Admiral Nelson, K.C.B.,' if not made 'Captain of
a Seventy-three!' and even impositions she always managed to make
ludicrous, by comments, translations, or illustrations, bringing them
up with a certain irresistible innocence and simplicity of countenance.
What was to be done? No, they did not want her to be taken away;
she was a bright dear girl, with a great deal of good in her--very
warm-hearted, and certainly devout; and Miss Fennimore confessed that
she should be very sorry to part with her, or to confess herself beaten
in the struggle. 'Your name is Geraldine?' she asked, suddenly; 'are
you Irish?'
'My grandmother was.'
'That accounts for it!'
'She must have absorbed all the Irish nature in the family, then,' said
Cherry, laughing.
'Perhaps. But it throws a light on it. I don't know which is the most
curious subject, national or family character.'
Of course Cherry was set to talk to Angela--an operation that she hated
almost as much as Felix did; and the result of which attempt was this,
'Now don't--don't, Cherry!'--hugging her round the neck; 'you never
were made for scolding, and it is no use spoiling your own pleasure and
mine! Leave it to Wilmet; she does it with dignity, you know!'
'But, Angel, I do really want to understand why you are so set against
German?'
'It's a nasty crack-jaw language, that all the infidels write their
books in.'
'I only wish they did!' murmured Cherry.
'And it's the Protestant language, too; and that's worse,' persisted
Angela. 'No, I won't learn it on principle.'
'I thought principle was to do what one was told.'
'That depends. Now, German will never be of use to me; I'm not going to
be a governess, and I sha'n't qualify myself for it!'
'Yes, Angel, I know what you mean; but isn't obedience the
qualification you must learn--if you are to come to the other thing?'
'I shall learn it fast enough when the time comes. Don't you know,
Cherry, a republic is much better preparation for despotism than one of
your shilly-shally rational limited monarchies?'
'That may be true,' said Cherry; 'but you know I think the rational
loyalty the most wholesome training.'
'Yes, I know. Family life suits you; but I must have the--the real
religious life or none. I don't like secularity.'
'O Angel, you are much worse with these fine words that deceive you,
when you are really and truly only a naughty idle child!'
'That's true, Cherry; and yet it is not true,' said Angela,
thoughtfully. 'I am a naughty idle child, and yet I am more.'
'How is it--after this Confirmation and all?'
'Ah!' said Angel, frankly. 'I thought it would have done me good and
made me different; but instead there's just one anticipation gone, and
nothing to look to.'
'Not your own possible future?' (Cherry knew of it, though not Wilmet.)
'That's such a dreadful way off! No, if you all will keep me in the
world, I must have my fun! Come, Cherry, don't look so horribly vexed!
I'll tell you what, if you'll cheer up, I won't have another flare-up
with old Fen as long as you are here to be bullied about it!'
And she kept her word so faithfully, that the two ladies thought
that charming little elder sister had had a great effect upon their
troublesome charge.
CHAPTER XXVI.
TRANSMUTATION.
'Affection follows Fortune's wheels,
And soon is shaken from her heels;
For, following beauty or estate,
Her loving soon is turned to hate.'
Sir Walter Raleigh.
'Do you remember,' wrote Cherry, 'poor Fernan's old rival in the Life
Guards, Sir Adrian Vanderkist? I have seen him! He descended upon
us at luncheon-time in all his glory; and Mrs. Underwood was like
Eve entertaining the Angel. I hope that is not profane! it is only
Paradise Lost. I don't comprehend her delight, for he is only the
grandson of a man who made a great fortune by inventing some metal to
look like silver. Though he must have been Dutch, this youth is not
the conventional Dutchman in seven knickerbockers perched on a barrel,
but is small and insignificant, in spite of his magnificent get-up.
Never did Fernan, in his most bejewelled days, equal that studious
exquisiteness; and I could pity the baronet for having had a rival with
black moustaches that curl of their own accord; but pity evaporates
when I find that he has got Brown Murad, and hear Mrs. Underwood's
gratitude for his promise of tickets for somebody's concert. I wonder
whether he is thinking about Marilda?
'April 15th. Two great events begin to loom. One is our soire
musicale, for which the cards are actually being written; and Edgar
and Alda are debating the programme. I am to have a quiet corner out of
sight, and use my eyes and ears. How I wish you and Lance could send up
yours!
'The other is a great function at St. Matthew's, on the opening of the
new infant-schools, on Whit Tuesday. Clement is coming down for it;
and Robin, Angel, and I are to go with Cousin Tom to his office, where
Clem will meet and take charge of us. It certainly is a fine thing to
come to London, and see the world; though the nicest part of the world
to me is that odd little room of Mrs. Renville's where people are so
entertaining, and one catches glimpses of great luminaries in their
moments of unbending and good nature.......
'May 3rd. Where shall I begin the story of our soire? I will pass
over the misery of serving as a corpus vile, for Alda and Mrs.
Sturt to try experiments on with scraps of head-gear and jewellery,
and merely state that I had the white alpaca with blue velvet edges,
and blue beads round my head and neck; and then they did not very
much mind the sight of me; and Edgar even said I looked a tidy little
thing enough. He and Marilda disposed of me in a nice little nook
in the recess of a window, more than half hidden by a curtain, and
capital for seeing and hearing, nearly as good as my old perch in the
organ gallery. Alda looked beautiful--such lovely rosy clouds of soft
gauziness, and wreaths of wild roses! She has put an end to the habit
of dressing like Marilda, to their mutual benefit; but, oh, if I could
see old W.W. in such garb! Doesn't she look disgusted? But who knows
what John may put her into?
'Oh, the things people wear! (then followed some pen-and-ink outlines,)
and the colours and the festoonings! I trust that in some stratum of
society somewhere there is more notion of the beautiful. If the world
is all like this, I can't tell why it should be so dangerous; for, as
far as I can see, it consists in conjugating the verb to bore.
'However, there was the music, and that was compensation. (A critical
account ensued then.) Private. Poor Edgar was quite upset when one of
the ladies varied from the programme by singing Alice's favourite old
"Sands of Dee." I saw him frowning and biting the end of his moustache,
as if he could hardly bear it; but, as you may guess, he was the more
funny and lively when he came to me, teasing me about that Sir Adrian,
whom he calls a specimen of the transmutation of metals--Dutch slime
made shiny, and threatening me with who or what would be transmuted
next; but I think Marilda has more principle.
'Afterwards I had a great treat, for Edgar spied Mr. Grinstead, whom
we had never expected, though he had a card, as he does not care for
music; and Cousin Tom only knows him through having bought his lovely
group of Una and the Lion. I had met him at the Renvilles'; and Edgar
brought him to my corner, where he leant against the window-shutter,
and talked most pleasantly, only he would go on all through the songs;
but one could excuse a great deal to a man who knew Thorwaldsen, and
has seen Canova; and he told me so much that I wanted to hear, that
it was a perfect feast. When he found I had never seen the Leonardo
at Morecombe House, he caught Mrs. Underwood, and arranged to take us
there at four o'clock on Wednesday. Fancy seeing a Leonardo! and with
him to explain it! Mrs. Underwood was quite in a rapture, because she
wants to see a cabinet that Lady Morecombe gave 150 for; but I thought
it very nasty of Sir Adrian to say that he knew Lord Morecombe very
well, and could take her there any day, to which Alda answered that she
hated show houses.'
(Enclosed from Edgar.)
'The fact is, that the Cherry is a brilliant success. She is our one
native genius for conversation; and I will say for the Pursuivant
that it has kept her up to the day. At Renville's she is the life of
everything; and even here the ocean of dullness cannot so entirely
asphyxiate her but that she sparkles up through it; and luckily Alda
has not so perceived it as to begin the extinguishing process--indeed,
she has affairs of her own to look to. As to Grinstead--it is a case
of captivation. Don't be afraid, or the reverse: he is a confirmed old
bachelor, bald and spectacled. Renville showed him her sketch of his
Una, and he said nothing had ever so hit off the soul. He met her at
their house; and she, not knowing who he was, was not encumbered with
any awe of greatness, but chattered like her own little self, till he
was taken with her freshness and cleverness, came here on purpose to
meet her, and is to show her the Morecombe gallery. A fine chance!
Altogether, the little maid has so many feathers in her cap, that she
wouldn't know where to stick them, if--poor little dear!--she ever
found them out, and didn't think every attention pure pity to her lame
foot.'
*       *       *       *       *
The next was the day of the festival at St. Matthew's. Mr. Underwood
graciously consented to use a carriage large enough to transport Cherry
and both her little sisters to his office, at the door of which there
appeared, however, not Clement, but Ferdinand Travis. The organist
had been suddenly taken ill, and Clement was supplying his place; so
Ferdinand, whose firm had taken a Whitsun holiday, was the substitute,
in the vain hope that Alda would have been of the party.
'No,' said Angela; 'they are going to ride. And, O Fernan! I am sure I
saw Brown Murad com--'
There she stopped short, either aghast at a sort of spasm that crossed
Ferdinand's countenance, or diverted by the full current of life in
Holborn; and he, recovering, began to point out whatever could interest
Cherry. He had a great deal to tell about St. Matthew's, where he knew
his way as well as Clement himself, and piloted his charge in good time
to the very place their brother had indicated for them.
The service was most beautiful, and full of life; and then ensued a
procession to, and benediction of, the new school and nursery for the
little ones. Afterwards came the new experience of luncheon for the
large motley party in the refectory of the clergy-house--new at least
to Cherry, for her sisters were not unfamiliar there; Robina had a dear
friend's little brother among the choristers, and Angela was chattering
to a curate or two. Clement was happy in meeting with old comrades; and
Cherry was glad that she was saved from being a burthen by Ferdinand's
devotion, and quite accepted his assurance that it was a great delight
to him.
Then followed a feast for the school-children and the aged; but the
atmosphere soon became too much for Cherry, and she thankfully accepted
Ferdinand's proposal of showing her the church in detail. It was only
on the other side of the quadrangle; and there was a great charm in
the lofty, cool, quiet building, where she could dwell thoroughly on
every decoration, permanent or temporary, and in full sympathy with her
companion, who went so fully and deeply into all these subjects, as to
lead her on, and open new meanings to her. At last they sat down in a
sort of cloister that ran round the court, to wait for the rest.
'Do you know,' said Geraldine, 'this place gives me a sense of life
and vigour. Our own seems to me, in comparison, a sort of sleeping, or
rather a mechanically acting, body, wanting a spirit and soul to be
breathed into it and make it effective.'
'You have never told me about your new curate,' said Ferdinand; and
indeed, by tacit consent, they had avoided the subject in Edgar's
presence.
'Mr. Flowerdew? Oh, he is very good, very gentle, and kind; but he is a
depressed elderly man, with all the energy disappointed and worn out of
him. His wife is dead; and he has two or three children, out, settled,
and fighting their way; and there he is alone, still an assistant
curate, tumbled about in secondary positions too long to care for any
more than just doing his duty without any life or spring.'
'Do you see much of him?' said Ferdinand, surprised by this intimate
knowledge.
'Yes. He makes the sick his special care, and he thinks me one; so he
comes sometimes, and sits half an hour when I am painting, without
saying a word. I think it is cheerful for him, in his way,' said
Cherry, with a merry laugh. 'And he is very musical; so the boys
like that. But do you know, Ferdinand, when I look at him, I do feel
thankful that my own dear father had not the long weary wear and tear
to change him. That man is older than he would be even now.'
'Of course it must be good,' said Ferdinand. 'And is there no chance of
Mr. Bevan coming back?'
'He wants another summer at the baths. The absence of the head
paralyses everything so. I always feel, when I go back from St.
Faith's, as if we had the framework, and of course the real essentials;
but we have to do all the work of bringing it home to ourselves.'
'I know what you mean,' said Ferdinand; 'though Bexley must be more to
me than any other place, this one is the great help and compensation to
me. How I wish Alda were near it!'
'Has she ever been here?'
'Once or twice; but only under its shadow does one enter into the real
life. Some day perhaps--'
Geraldine could not imagine the day of Alda's entering into the real
life of St. Matthew's; but she could only say, 'Of course there is a
vast difference between only coming as an outsider, and being one of
the congregation.'
'Immense; though I never found it out till I came to live here; and so
it would be with her. After all, were she but near, or I could see her
freely, I should enjoy my present life very much.'
'I'll tell you what I should do in your place,' said Cherry. 'I would
go straight to Mr. Underwood, and ask his leave to visit her; and I
don't believe he would make any objection.'
'No. Alda forbids that,' he answered, decidedly; 'and she can be the
only judge.' Cherry felt small. But presently he added, 'I wish I
could be rid of the doubt whether the present state of things is not
burdensome to her. Perhaps I ought to to have freed her at once; I
could have worked for her without binding her.'
'Nothing but affection really binds,' said Cherry, in some difficulty
for her answer.
'No; I might have trusted to that, but I thought the release would cost
her as much as myself; and she was at home then!' and he suppressed a
heavy sigh.
'She said it would be easier to meet you in London,' said Cherry; 'but
I don't think it is.'
'And absence leaves room for imaginations,' he said. 'And I have
nothing tangible to set against what I hear--ay, and see.'
'What?' the word was out of Cherry's mouth before she could check it.
'You can cast it out of my mind, perhaps,' he said. 'Do you ever see a
fellow of the name of Vanderkist?'
Cherry could not help starting. And his black brows bent, and his face
became stern, so that she was fain to cry, 'Oh, but it's Marilda!'
'Impossible!' he said, with what she thought a terrible smile at her
simplicity. 'I tell you, I saw his first look at her--at my Alda!' Some
ruthless Spanish ancestor must have looked out of the deep glow of his
eyes, as he added, 'I hear he has betted that she, as well as whatever
I used to prize, shall be his before the end of the season.'
'Let him!' said Cherry, proudly. 'Alda can't help that. She can't
hinder his coming to the house.'
'I know,' he said. 'Do not suppose that I doubt her. I trust her
entirely; but I am foolish enough to long for the assurance that there
is no cause for the rumour that she encourages him.'
Under such eyes of dark fire, it was well that Cherry could sincerely
answer, 'Oh no! Every one does come round her; but she does not let him
do so a bit more than other people.'
'You entirely believe that I may dismiss this as a base groundless
suspicion?'
'I do!' she said, with all her heart. 'We all know that Alda is used
to admiration; it comes to her as naturally as pity and help to me,
and makes no impression on her. Mrs. Underwood likes to have him as a
fashionable guest, that's all. Oh, Alda could never be so wicked!'
'You are right, Geraldine. Thank you,' he said, just as Clement and
the younger ones came in search of them, with Fred Somers, erst
fellow-chorister, now fellow-Cantab--a little wiry merry fellow, the
very antipodes to his bosom friend.
All wanted to stay for seven o'clock Evensong; but Robina was clear
that it was impossible, since the ladies were dispersing, and they had
no invitation to the clergy-house. Angela wildly asked if Clement could
not take them to the Tower, or St Paul's; Cherry could sit in a seat
while they went round.
'Sit in a seat!' cried Robina. 'She is tired already. Clement, do go
and call a cab.'
'Could you not go to Mrs. Kedge's, Cherry?' asked Clement. 'I want you
to hear our Pentecost Hymns.'
'Come to my rooms,' said Ferdinand. 'They are much nearer; and you
shall have tea and everything in no time.'
'Like greased lightning!' returned Angel, who always talked what she
supposed to be Yankee to Ferdinand. 'Oh, what fun! Do come, Cherry!'
'Do come,' repeated Ferdinand, eagerly; 'it is only round the corner,
no crossing, and no stairs; and you shall have a good rest--much better
than jingling away in a cab.'
'Thank you;' and Cherry looked inquiringly at Robina, whose discretion
she viewed as little short of Wilmet's. 'Would Miss Fulmort approve?'
'Yes,' said that wise little bird; 'we need only be in by ten. You had
much better, Cherry. You are quite as good as a brother--aren't you,
Fernan?'
In ten minutes more, Mr. Travis's landlady was aghast at the procession
pouring into her quiet ground-floor; while, after insisting on Cherry's
installation on a dingy lumpy bumpy sofa, their host might be overheard
giving orders for a sumptuous tea, though not exactly with the genius
of Wilmet or Lance.
He had cast his anxieties to the winds, and had never shown himself
so lively or so much at ease. To all it was a delightful frolic. Mr.
Somers was full of fun, and even Clement was gay--perhaps because
Whittingtonia had become a sort of native element to him, or else
because the oddity of the thing overcame him; and Angela was in an
ecstatic state, scarcely kept within bounds by her morning's promise to
be very good.
Those dingy bachelor's rooms, close upon the street, and redolent of
tobacco to the utmost degree, could seldom have re-echoed with such
girlish fun as while Angela roamed about, saucily remarking on the
pipes and smoking equipments--relics, not disused, of the Life Guard
days. So likewise was the beautiful little chased silver tea-pot,
which was committed to Robin's management. Indeed, there was a large
proportion of plate, massive and remarkable.
'Mexican taste,' said Ferdinand, handing a curious sugar-basin. 'It
belonged to my grandmother, and was turned over to me when I set up for
myself.'
'What's this on it? said Angel. 'I declare, 'tis the caldron the
Mexicans boiled people's hearts in.'
'For shame, Angel!' said Robin; 'the Aztecs were not cannibals.'
'I beg your pardon, Bobbie; I know we read about Cortes seeing them
cutting out people's hearts on their temples like the tower of Babel,
because I thought of Fernan.'
'Hush!' said Cherry, seeing that the horrid subject was displeasing.
'There's nothing witty in talking of horrors. Besides, is not this the
Spanish olla?'
'I believe it is,' answered Ferdinand. 'It is the Mendez bearing, and
as the Travises can boast of none, I followed my spoons.'
'With the dish,' said Mr. Somers; a joke that in their present mood set
them laughing.
'Nothing can be more suited to the circumstances,' said Cherry, 'as the
olla is the emblem of hospitality.'
'What are the three things up above?' asked Angel; 'turnips going to be
stewed?'
'Santiago's cockle-shells, the token of pilgrimage,' said Ferdinand.
'That's the best part of the coat.'
'Some day I'll work you a banner-screen, Fernan,' said Robina; 'but
that will be when you impale our Underwood rood.'
'And the pilgrim is brought to the cross,' said Angela, in one of her
grave moments of fanciful imagery.
The echo of her words, however, struck Cherry as conveying an innuendo
that the child did not mean. Crosses could hardly be wanting to one who
had Alda for his wife; but happily no one else seemed to perceive it;
and they drifted on from grave to gay, and gay back to grave, till it
was time to return to the festival Evensong.
Clement and his friends had to hurry away to the station directly
after. He would have put his three sisters into a cab, and sent it home
with them; but Ferdinand insisted on squeezing his long limbs into
durance and escorting them, to the tune of Angel's chatter and the
clatter of the windows. Cherry was the first set down; and she went
straight to the drawing-room, ready for interest and sympathy.
'How late you are!' said Alda.
'How did you come?' asked Marilda.
'In a cab. It is gone on with the little girls. We stayed for evening
service. The lights were so beautiful!'
'Just what boys and girls run after,' said Mr. Underwood. 'I like my
opera to be an opera, and my church to be a church.'
'Yes,' said Mrs. Underwood, 'staying out so late, and in the city. I
don't half like such doings.'
'What could you have done between services?' added Alda. 'Were you at
the clergy-house all day?'
'Of course they were,' said Mr. Underwood. 'Trust a curate to take
care of a pretty girl. High or low, they are all alike.'
'No,' said Cherry, in blushing indignation; 'we had tea at Mr.
Travis's.'
'Indeed!' said Alda.
And Cherry knew the tone but too well; and under this plentiful shower
of cold water, perceiving her own fatigue, bade good night. She was
kindly bidden to send Nurse for wine, tea, or whatever she needed; but
she was still conscious of displeasure.
In the morning she was weary and dispirited, and for the first time
felt that there was no one to remark, as Felix or Wilmet would have
done, that she was flagging. Failing this, she prepared as usual to go
to her class; but before starting she encountered Mrs. Underwood.
'Geraldine,' said that lady, majestically, 'you are a talented young
person; but--you must excuse me--I cannot have such independence under
my roof. It is not comifo. Bless me, don't tremble so; I don't mean
anything. You meant no harm; only you should have come home, you know,
when your brother wasn't there.'
'But he was!' gasped Geraldine, colouring.
'Why, wasn't it that young man Travis met you?'
'He met us, for Clement was hindered; but Clement was there, and was
with us all the time.'
'H'm! That ought to have been explained. Why didn't you tell your
sister? She is quite distressed.'
A summons from Mr. Underwood obliged Cherry to hurry away, her heart
throbbing, her head whirling, and no comfort but hard squeezing the
ivory back of Lord Gerald; and when she reached Mr. Renville's, her
hand was trembling so, that she could not have drawn a line if the
good haus-frau had not dosed her with the strong coffee, which in true
German fashion was always ready. Then the absorbing interest of her art
revived her; and she returned home, cheered, and believing that the
misunderstanding was cleared up.
Indeed, Mrs. Underwood was as good-natured as ever; and Alda was
chiefly employed in rejecting all the solicitations to accompany
the party to Morecombe House, and rebutting the remonstrances on
the incivility to Mr. Grinstead; to which Marilda had yielded, but
grumbling loudly at the bore of seeing pictures and taking no pains to
conceal that she was cross and angry with Cherry for having brought it
upon her.
Poor Cherry! Of the few parties of pleasure of her life, this was
that which most reminded her of the old woman of Servia! After having
Marilda's glum face opposite through the drive, she was indeed most
kindly welcomed by Mr. Grinstead; but how could she enjoy the attention
that was so great a kindness and honour, when every pause before a
picture was a manifest injury to her companions?
Mrs. Underwood indeed had occupation in peeping under holland covers,
estimating the value of carpets and curtains, and admiring the gilt
frames; but this did not hold out as long as the examination of each
favourite picture in detail; and what was worse, Marilda plumped
herself down in the first chair in each room, and sat poking the floor
with her parasol, the model of glum discontent. How could the mind be
free for the Madonna's celestial calm, or the smiling verisimilitude
of portraiture? how respond or linger, when the very language of art
was mere uninteresting jargon to impatient captives, who thought her
comprehension mere affectation? While to all other discomforts must be
added the sense of missing one of the best opportunities of her life,
and of ill responding to a gracious act of condescension.
She came home tired to death, and with a bad headache, that no one took
the trouble to remark; and she dressed for dinner with a sense that it
mattered to no one how she felt.
Just as she was ready, Marilda came gravely in, sitting down in
preparation, Cherry felt, for something dreadful; but even her
imagination failed to depict the fact.
'Geraldine,' was the beginning, 'Alda wishes you to hear that she has
put an end to the engagement.'
Cherry absolutely screamed, 'Oh, oh, don't let her do that! It would be
so dreadful!'
Marilda looked severe. 'I don't suppose you thought what it was coming
to.'
'O! I have often been sorry to see things, but it seemed so atrocious
to think so.'
'Then you must have known you were doing wrong.'
'What--how--what have I done? I don't know what you mean!'
'Indeed! It is of no use to look frightened and innocent. Perhaps you
did not mean anything; but when it grew so marked, Alda could not but
feel it.'
'What? Does Alda mean that?' cried Cherry, starting up, scarlet with
horror.
'Now I see you understand. She is terribly hurt. She excuses it, for
she says you have been so petted all your life, that you don't know the
right bounds.'
'And can you really think this of me?' moaned she.
'It is just like every one when they have the chance--no one ever means
it,' said Marilda.
'Oh!' cried Cherry, as a fresh horror came across her, 'but if Alda
thinks ever so horridly of me, how can she doubt him? Oh, stop her,
stop her! Let me only tell her how he talked of her yesterday! His
whole soul is full of her. Oh, stop her, Marilda, do!'
'It is of no use,' said Marilda; 'she has sent her letter. She was
resolved to do nothing hastily, so she went this morning and saw the
little girls.'
'Oh, oh!' broke in Cherry, with another cry of pain. 'Those poor
children have not been brought into trouble again?'
'No; it was no doing of theirs; but when she perceived the exclusive
attention that--when she found,' hesitated Marilda, forgetting her
lesson, 'how you had been sitting in the cloister--in short, how it had
all gone on--she said it was the finishing stroke.'
'Oh!' a sigh or groan, as if stabbed; then with spirit, 'but why wasn't
she there herself? He only took me for want of her! He only speaks to
me because I am her sister. He was so unhappy--I was trying to cheer
him.'
'So you might think; but that's the way those things run on. There's
the gong!'
Cherry rose, but felt that sitting at table would end in faintness, and
Marilda went away in doubt, between pity and displeasure, whether at
contrition or affectation.
No sooner was the door shut, and Cherry alone, than a terrible hysterical
agony came on. There was personal sense of humiliation--passionate anger,
despair, for Ferdinand's sake--miserable loneliness and desertion. She
felt as if she were in a house full of enemies; and had absolute
difficulty in restraining screams for Felix to come and take her
home. The physical need of Wilmet or Sibby, to succour and soothe her
agitation and exhaustion, soon became so great as to overpower the
mental distress; but she would not call or ring; and when Mrs. Sturt
came, the kind woman made as if the headache accounted for all.
She reported that Miss Alda likewise had gone to her room with a
headache; and Cherry saw no one but Mrs. Underwood, who looked in to
offer impossible remedies, and be civilly but stiffly compassionate.
The stifled hysteria was much worse for Geraldine than free tears. She
had a weary night of wretched dream fancies, haunted by Ferdinand's
sombre face, convulsed with rage, and tormented by the belief that
she had done something so frightful as to put her out of the pale of
humanity; nor was it till long after daylight that she could so collect
her ideas as to certify herself that if she had done wrong, it had at
least been unwittingly; but even then she was in a misery of shame, and
of the most intense longing for her brother or sister to defend and
comfort her.
She managed to rise and dress; but she was far too unwell to attempt
the classes for the day. Alda spoke coldly; and she crept away, to lie
on the sofa in the old school-room, trusting that before post-time
her hand might grow steady enough to write an entreaty to be taken
home, and longing--oh! longing more every hour for Edgar, and still
he did not come! Marilda looked in, began to believe her really ill,
grew compassionate, asked how she treated such attacks, deemed her
penitent, and began to soothe her as if she was a naughty baby. Then,
in desperation, Cherry ventured to ask what had been heard of him--Mr.
Travis. He had been at the door--he had taken no refusal--had forced an
interview--he was gone. Alda was in her own room, bolted in. Marilda
had not seen her since.
Cherry shook from head to foot, and quivered with suppressed strangling
sobs, as the shame of such a requital for the sacrifice of Ferdinand's
whole career agonised her at one moment, and at another she was
terrified at the possible effect on that fervid nature.
Oh, that long, long piteous day! She never did write--never even felt
as if she could sit up to guide a pen. At last Alda came in, with a
strange awe-struck paleness about her face, as if she had gone through
something terrible; and in a tone that sounded unnatural, said, 'Come,
Cherry, don't give way so. I didn't mean to accuse you. People don't
always know what they are doing. I am thankful on my own account.'
Cherry had longed for a kind word; but this sort of pardon was like
Alda's taking the advantage of her when Felix was not there to protect
her. Not naturally meek, she was too much shaken to control a voice
that sounded more like temper than sorrow. 'You have no right to accuse
me at all, as if I were a traitor!'
'Not a deliberate traitor, my dear,' said Alda, in a voice of candour;
'certainly not; but you don't know the advantage helplessness and
cleverness give over us poor beauties who show our best at first. I
blame no one for using their natural weapons.'
'Don't, Alda!' cried Cherry, with the sharpness of keen offence. 'You
may keep that speech for those you got it up for!'
'Well, if you are in such a mood as that, nobody can talk to you,'
said Alda, going away, and leaving her to a worse paroxysm of misery
than before, and an inexpressible sense of desolation, passing into an
almost frantic craving for Edgar, to make him take her home.
Marilda gave a little relief by telling her that he was sent for; but
after long expectation, word came that he was not at home, nor did his
landlady know when he would return.
By this time it was too late to send a letter; and Cherry began to feel
ashamed of having so given way, and to think of exerting herself to
recover, if only to be in a condition to go home when Edgar should be
found; so she made an effort to remember the remedies with which she
was wont to be passively dosed by Wilmet, went to bed, and tried hard
to put herself to sleep. Though it was long before she effectually
succeeded, she was much calmer in the morning, deeply wounded indeed,
but trying to accept the imputation that her habit of expecting aid
might have led her into what had given umbrage to Alda, and that self
immolation might yet heal the misunderstanding, and the desire to plead
with Alda seemed to brace her nerves; but Alda was not attainable. She
only just came in, in her habit, while Mrs. Sturt was dressing Cherry,
and said that she had such a headache, that she must take a country
ride; and Cherry, who felt as if she had been under a stampede of wild
horses, could only just crawl to the sofa, and lie there; while the
whole family were in such wholesome dread of that dumb hysteria, that
they were as tender as they knew how to be, and abstained from all
reference to the previous day.
The afternoon had come on the weary, home-sick, exhausted spirit, when
a springy step came along the corridor, a light airy rap struck the
door, and a tall, lithe, yet strong form, and a pair of kind smiling
eyes, brought the sense of love and guardianship that the spoilt child
of home had been pining for. She had yesterday meant to cry out to
him,' O Edgar, take me home!' but she did not speak, only looked up,
glad and relieved.
'Why, Cherry,' as he kissed her hot brow, and caressingly held her limp
cold hand, 'it seems to be the family fashion to suffer by proxy for
these little catastrophes. Who is to take to his or her bed when some
Indian spinster hooks W.W.'s engineer?'
'Hush, Edgar! Have you seen him?'
'Have not I?'
'Ah, I knew you must be with him, when they could not find you!'
'Me? No; I had enough of it the night before! I had had too narrow an
escape of getting my neck wrung for declining to act as go-between, to
subject myself to the same again, and went off with some fellows to
Richmond--only came back an hour ago.'
'O, Edgar! if you had but tried--'
'Take my advice, Cherry. Never put your foot into a boiling cauldron!
Besides, don't you know perfectly well that never was there a worse
matched pair? St. Anthony and Venus attired by the Graces; and very
little more attire could he give her. If dear old Blunderbore had had
a grain of common sense he would have told them so a year ago; and I
should have thought even you could have seen it to be a happy release.'
'I see you don't know the cause--'
'Visible enough to the naked eye!' And Edgar, in imitation of Theodore,
hummed 'Mynheer van Dunck.'
'For shame, Edgar! Oh no! it is only what could be mended if you would
but show her that I--that he--that he only was kind to me for her sake.
If she would only hear what he was saying to me! but she won't! Just
set it straight; and then, please--please take me home.'
'Well,' said Edgar, as he gathered the drift of her broken phrases,
spoken with her face hidden on his shoulder, 'this is as nasty,
spiteful a trick as Alda ever played! He said she put it on some motive
of jealousy--and she always was a jealous toad; but I never guessed at
this! Never mind, Chrie. She only wanted a pretext, and you came first
to hand. I'll let her know what I think of it--and Polly too!'
'But, indeed, I don't think I was guarded enough.'
'Of course you don't. You and Tina think yourselves the most
heavenly-minded when you can accuse yourselves of anything utterly
ridiculous.'
'It was what she heard from Robin and Angel.'
'The marplots of the family--little minxes!' said Edgar, with a
bitterness she was sorry to have provoked. 'No,' he added, 'not
marplots in this case. I see it all as plain as a pikestaff! Felix
having shown his usual refreshing innocence by leaving Alda in this
predicament, she had to get out of it as best she could; so she trumps
up this charge between Robin's prudery and Angel's chatter; nor would I
have blamed her a bit if she had only flourished it in his eyes; but to
poison Marilda with it, and annihilate you--I can't forgive that!'
'Oh, but she believes it.'
'If she gets up a little delusion--a slight screen to the Mynheer--she
ought to keep it to herself.'
'I shall try to write it all properly to her when I get home.'
'Home! You aren't going to be ill?'
'No; but I can't stay after all this--to be looked on in this way.'
'I'll settle that.'
'You can't expose Alda.'
'I shall expose her no more than I have done fifty times before. Don't
be afraid. We understand one another--Polly, Alda, and I.'
'Don't defend me! I had so much rather go back.'
'Of course; but you need not be a little goose. You did not come here
for pleasure, but business. And is this great genius to be stifled
because Alda talks a little unjustifiable nonsense?'
'Do you think Felix and Wilmet would tell me to stay?'
'Wilmet certainly would. Felix might be tempted to take his baby home
to rock; but even he has sense enough to tell you that the only way to
deal with such things is to brazen them out.'
'I haven't got any brass.'
'Then you must get some. Seriously, Cherry, it would be very silly to
go flying home, throwing up all your opportunities, and the very thing
to give some vraisemblance to Alda's accusation. If I had only been
here yesterday, I'd have choked it in the throat of her, and hindered
you from caring a straw; but I didn't want to meet Travis in his exies.'
'I wish you would really tell me about him--poor dear Fernan!'
'Take care! That looks suspicious. Well, poor fellow! the Mexican is
strong in him. Grattez lui ever so slightly. Well for Mynheer that he
is not out with him on a prairie, with a revolver! But, whereas Audley
and Felix caught him in time to make a spoon out of a bowie-knife, I
don't expect much to happen, beyond my distraction from his acting
caged panther in my room till two o'clock that night!'
'He came here and saw her yesterday. Have you seen him since?'
No; Edgar had kept out of the way, and would not talk of him; but stood
over his sister, wishing to soothe and relieve the little thing, for
whom he cared more than for all the lovers put together, and whose wan
exhausted looks, visible suffering, and nervous shudders he could not
bear to see. 'I wish you weren't too big for rocking, Baby,' he said.
And then he sat down to the piano, playing and singing a low soft
lullaby, which at last brought quiet sleep to the refreshment of the
harassed mind and weary frame.
The hum of conversation in an undertone at length gradually roused her.
'The long and short of it is, that she was tired of it.'
'But she wouldn't have invented such a story.'
'I never said she invented it! She's not so stupid but that she can
put a gloss on a thing; and you know she hates to have a civil word
said to any one but herself--particularly to that poor little dear.'
'Then it wasn't right to let him be always running after her.'
'Stuff! They'd been cronies ever since he was first caught; in fact,
she was one of the tame elephants that licked him into shape, long
before he set eyes on either of you. No stuff about it at all; they are
just like brother and sister. The poor child would no more be capable
of such a thing than that lay figure of hers--hasn't it in her; and for
you to go and bully her!'
'Well,' in a half-puzzled, half-angered tone, 'that's what Alda says.
She declares she only told me, and never meant me to speak to her
about the cause.'
'She wanted to play off the injured heroine; and you--not being up to
such delicate subtilties, walked off to speak your mind. Eh!'
'I thought I ought.'
'You put your great thumb on a poor little May-fly, just as if it had
been a tortoise!'
'I'm sure I had no notion she would be so unhappy; all girls do such
things; and most are proud of it. I was only disappointed to find her
like the rest; but I'd no notion she would cry herself ill.'
Here Geraldine's senses became sufficiently clear to make her aware
that she was the topic, and ought to rouse herself, no longer to let
the discussion mingle with her dreams. With some effort she opened her
eyes, and saw Edgar astride on the music-stool, and Marilda leaning on
the mantel-shelf.
'I'm awake,' she drowsily said.
'To the battle over your prostrate body,' said Edgar. 'Go to sleep
again, little one. Polly is very sorry, and won't do so no more.'
'She didn't say so, Edgar,' said Cherry; 'and if I had really done so,
she ought to have been a great deal more angry with me.'
'Well, Geraldine,' said Marilda, 'I believe, whatever you did, you
didn't know it; and I know I was hard on you. My father and mother
don't know anything about it--only that it is off--'
'And that they rightly ascribe to Alda's good sense,' said Edgar.
This much relieved Cherry, who had thought it impossible to remain
where she was, viewed as a traitor to her own sister. It wounded her,
indeed, that Marilda should merely condone the offence, instead of
acquitting her; but when she recollected the probability that Marilda
had suffered the like treatment from Alda, who was nevertheless loved
so heartily, it began to dawn upon her that there was a disposition to
view the offence as common, natural, and light, rather than not excuse
the offender. She despised her cousin for lowering the standard to suit
a favourite, and was sure she should never be comfortable again till
she got home; but she was reasonable enough to perceive the force of
what Edgar had shown her--as to the folly of forsaking her studies, and
abandoning the advantages offered to her; and his kindness had much
cheered her; so she said no more about going home, and resumed her
former habits, though feeling that Marilda's patronizing cordiality was
gone, and that Alda was simply cold and indifferent.
She felt especially unwilling to face the two little girls, who seemed
to have acted as false witnesses against her; but an imploring note
from Robina besought her to call; and on arriving in the parlour, where
interviews were allowed, she was greeted with, 'O Cherry, is it true?
and was that why Alda came here?'
Then she found that they had heard from home of the rupture of the
engagement; and that they had immediately connected it with Alda's
extraordinary visit of the week previous.
'She came to bring us a cake,' said Robin; 'but as she never did so
before, I thought something was at the bottom of it, and that she just
wanted to hear more about Ferdinand and his lodgings.'
'And,' added Angel, who, if less sensible, was far before Robina in a
certain irregular precocity, 'I thought I'd get a rise out of her, and
chaff her a little. She used to be so savage last year, whenever Fernan
treated you with common humanity.'
'O Angel, how could you!'
'You don't mean that it did the harm! Bobbie said so; but I didn't
think Alda could be so silly as to think it in earnest, Cherry.'
'Angel, you have been playing with edge-tools.'
'Cherry, tell me what you mean!' Angela pounced on both her arms, as if
to shake it out of her.
'Never do such a thing again, Angel. You cannot tell what you may be
doing.'
'Well, if any one could be so stupid! So dense, as not to see it was
fun! Now, Robin--'
'I think,' said the practical Robin, 'that all you can do, is to write
down a full confession that you meant to tease Alda.'
'Yes, yes, yes,' cried Angela, with less shame than Cherry would have
thought possible, 'I will! I will! and then they'll make it up. Who
would have thought Alda could have been so easily taken in? But how
shall I do it unknownst to the harpies?'
Cherry offered a pencil, and a bit of her drawing-block. She made no
suggestion, thinking that the more characteristic the confession was,
the more it would prove its authenticity. Angela retired into a window,
and wrote, in her queer unformed hand:
I, Angela Margaret Underwood, hereby confess that whatever I
told Alda, my sister, about Geraldine and F.T., was all cram;
and if I did it too well, I'm very sorry for it. F.T. didn't
take a bit more notice of Cherry than of Robin and me; and of
course he cannot marry the three of us: and of course it was
all right, for Clement was there. Ask him.
Witness my hand,
ANGELA MARGARET UNDERWOOD.
Then she called, 'Come and witness it, Robin.'
'Nonsense,' said Robina; and coming to look, she exclaimed, 'you have
made it simply ridiculous. This will do no good!--See, Cherry.'
But Cherry would not have it altered, and merely bade Robina write her
testimony.
This took much longer, though the produce was much briefer. It was
only--
MY DEAR ALDA,
Angela was only talking nonsense the other day. If I had not
thought so, I would have told you.
Your affectionate sister,
ROBINA B. UNDERWOOD.
'You've made a letter of it!' exclaimed Angela. 'I thought it was to be
a last will and--no, a dying speech and confession; which is it? Well,
if that does not set it all straight, I can't tell what will!'
Cherry was a good deal perplexed by the testimony now she had obtained
it. She thought the matter over on her return, and ended by seeking
Marilda; and with much excuse for Angela, putting it into her hands to
show to Alda. She felt it due to herself to make sure that Marilda saw
it, such as it was.
Marilda undertook that Alda should see it. Geraldine watched and
waited. There was no apology to herself. At that she did not wonder.
Was there any note of recall sounded to Ferdinand? Was Alda proud? or
was she in very truth indifferent, and unwilling to give up her excuse
for a quarrel? or had she really relented, and apologized in secret?
It was strange to know so little, and venture so much less with her own
sister than could Marilda, whom, in their present stiff reserve, Cherry
durst not question.
CHAPTER XXVII.
DON OR MYNHEER?
'Hear the truth--
A lame girl's truth, whom no one ever praised
For being patient.'
George Eliot.
One morning, after a private interview with Alda, Mr. Underwood entered
the drawing-room, hilariously announcing that Alda was a lucky girl
this time, for now she had a man in no fear of his relations.
Geraldine was glad of the need of getting into the carriage directly,
and that her transit to Mr. Renville's was too brief for any answer to
be needed to her companion's warm satisfaction. Affairs of this sort
had come so thickly upon the family in the course of the last eighteen
months, that she did not feel the excitement of novelty; and she wished
so little to dwell on the present, that at the museum, the absorbing
interest of her life-study drove out the immediate recollection of the
stranger life-study she had left.
There could be no question as to the veritable cause of Alda's conduct
to Ferdinand; but Cherry was too much ashamed of it to rejoice in her
own justification, scarcely even hoping that Marilda would perceive it.
Most likely Alda would have preferred staving off the crisis a little
longer--at least till those keen eyes were out of sight--but she had
now to do with a man whose will it was not easy to parry, and whom
delay and coyness might have driven off altogether. Cherry did not see
her till they met at luncheon; and there was Sir Adrian, who promoted
the little lame girl to a shake of the hand. Alda looked gracious and
unusually handsome, being, in fact, relieved from a state of fretting
uneasiness; Mrs. Underwood was beaming with triumph; Marilda--again
there is no word for it but--glum!
There was a rose show at the Botanic Gardens; but Cherry had declined
it, and Marilda immovably refused to go. After they had seen the other
two ladies set off, resplendent under Sir Adrian's escort, Marilda
announced her intention of driving, as she often did, to the City, to
fetch her father home, and, more cordially than of late, offered a seat
to Cherry, if she did not mind waiting.
The City to Cherry's ears meant Ferdinand, whom she would not face for
worlds; but she told herself that it was not like Bexley, where every
one who went to the bank was sure to be presently seen at Froggatt's,
and she would not reject this advance from her cousin.
Indeed, Marilda wanted to talk, and freely told all she had been
hearing. The baronetcy was in the third generation, having been
conferred on the original transmuter, a Lord Mayor, with whom his son
had toiled for the larger half of his days, and comparatively late
had bought an estate, and married a lady of quality. He had not long
survived, and his widow had remarried. Of her nothing more was known;
but her son was so entirely his own master, that her opposition was not
likely to be dangerous. Sir Adrian had the reputation of great wealth;
and though he partook of the usual amusements of young men, there was
no reason to suppose that he did so to an extent that he could not
afford. Altogether, it was a brilliant conquest; but 'How one does hate
it all!' concluded Marilda.
This was all the amends Cherry received for the reproach that had so
keenly wounded her. Probably Marilda had really dismissed the charge;
but hers was not a fine-grained mind, used to self-examination or
analysis; and she acted on a momentary impression, without much regard
to the past or to consistency. Her affections were deep and strong;
but partly from circumstances they were like those of a dog, depending
rather on contact than esteem. She had accepted Edgar and Alda as
brother and sister, and whatever they did, stood by them with all her
might; nor did she ever so much as realize that Alda had been wrong,
and she herself misled. She would rather believe it the way of the
world, and part of the nature of things, than open her mind to blame
Alda.
Besides, the sense of not understanding Cherry, and the recollection
of the effect produced on her by words apparently quite inadequate,
the seeing her power of talking to and amusing gentlemen with whom she
herself had not an idea in common, Edgar's tender fervent pride in her,
and Alda's half-contemptuous acknowledgment of her ability--all this
contributed to give Marilda a certain shyness, awe, and constraint,
that sometimes looked cold, and sometimes cross, and puzzled Cherry,
who never dreamt of being formidable.
When they reached the house of business, Marilda went to her father's
room, for since his illness she often helped him to wind up his
correspondence; and Cherry sat in the carriage, her attention divided
between a book and the busy traffic of the street.
Presently she saw a tall lean figure in black, with a deeply-cut sallow
face set in grey whiskers. She knew it for the Vicar of St Matthew's;
and he, after bowing and passing, turned, and coming to the window,
said, 'Will you kindly tell me the right address to Mr. Audley, in
Australia? Clement left it with me, but I have mislaid it.'
'The Rev. C.S. Audley, Carrigaboola, Albertstown, West Australia.'
And as he repeated it with thanks, she could not restrain herself from
stretching out a hand in entreaty, and saying, 'Oh! pray, pray tell me!
How is he? Mr. Travis?'
'Your eldest brother's letter has done him a great deal of good.'
'Please tell me about him,' implored Cherry, colouring. 'We have known
him for so long before. How does he bear it?'
Mr. Fulmort let himself into the carriage, and sat down by her, saying,
'He is bearing it as you could most wish.'
'I longed to know. I feared it would be very terrible. His is not an
English nature.'
'It has been a great struggle. That first night he never went home
at all, but wandered about till daylight. I found him at five in the
morning, sunk down on his knees in our porch, with his head against the
church door, in a sort of exhausted doze.'
'Oh, well that he knew the way!' sighed Cherry. 'No one ever was so
cruelly treated!' she added with frowning vehemence. 'And then?'
'I took him to my rooms, and made him rest, and I went to Brown's and
excused his non-attendance. By the time he went to your sister he had
quite mastered himself.'
'He must. She never told about it; but we are sure she was quite
overawed.'
'He came back quite calm, with a certain air of secresy, and has
gone on with a sort of stern quietness ever since,' said the Vicar,
lowering his voice. 'Only on Sunday--he is one of our collectors at
the Offertory--he brought up his alms-bag bursting with bracelets and
rings, and things of that sort.'
'Poor Fernan! how like him to do it in that way!'
'I think it relieved him. He is perfectly free of bitterness towards
your sister--allows no flaw in her; but he is striving hard not to
retain animosity against your uncle.'
'It is deserved by no one but her!' exclaimed Cherry; 'and there's
worse to come. I don't know whether I ought to mention it; but it will
be better for it to come to him from you.'
'It is true, then?' said Mr. Fulmort, understanding her directly. 'My
sister told me it was reported.'
'It was only settled yesterday evening. I am afraid this is worse for
him than if it had been any one else.'
'So am I. It seems to be the crisis of a long emulation. I begged
Aston--my brother-in-law--to ascertain what was thought about it in the
corps; and he said that though poor Travis had never got on well with
the other men, there was a general feeling that he was not handsomely
treated.'
'That wretched man betted--'
Mr. Fulmort kindly but decidedly checked her. 'You had better not
dwell on such reports. Things for which we are not responsible must be
made the best of when they bring us new connections. Our friend is not
unprepared, and I will take care he does not hear this casually.'
'Thank you--oh! thank you! Give him my--' she caught herself up
and blushed--'my very best remembrances; and tell him,' she added,
carried away in spite of herself, 'that he must always be like one of
ourselves.'
'It will be a great comfort to him. Nothing can exceed his affection
and gratitude to your family--indeed he said, with tears in his eyes,
that to your brothers he "owes his very self also." I hope nothing will
disturb that friendship.'
'What will he do? Set about some great work somewhere?'
Mr. Fulmort smiled sadly. 'It is not safe to rush into great works to
allay disappointment,' he said. 'I think he is wiser to keep steadily
to his occupation, at least for the present; but he is giving his whole
leisure to his district and the evening classes. I am glad to have met
you. Good-bye.'
It was lucky that Cherry had plenty of time to subside before the
return of Marilda and her father. The latter was much exalted by the
explanation he had had with Sir Adrian and his man of business. The
rent-roll was all that could be desired, and so were the proposed
settlements; nor was there any fear on the score of the family. The
lawyer privately told Mr. Underwood that the mother, Lady Mary Murray,
was a most gentle lady, without a spark of pride, and very anxious to
see her son married.
Nor did her letter belie this assurance. She expressed gladness that
her son's choice should be a clergyman's daughter, and warmly invited
Alda to come and visit her at the Rectory, and make herself at home
among the new brothers and sisters there.
It was gathered--partly from Sir Adrian, partly from gossip--that
Lady Mary, a scantily-portioned maiden, had been too timid and docile
to withstand the parental will, which devoted her to the wealthy old
baronet; but in her widowhood she had followed the inclination that
had been pooh-poohed by her family in her girlhood. As a country
clergyman's wife, her homely quiet existence had less and less
influence over her son; and there was no danger of Alda finding in
her an imperious mother-in-law, though, except as a connecting link,
she would be valueless as an introduction. She was absolutely foolish
enough to be romantically delighted at her son's marrying for love;
and Geraldine fell in love with her on the spot, on reading her
letter--one of the very few which Alda showed, for in general she kept
her correspondence to herself. She avoided Cherry, and only talked to
Marilda of externals.
Nothing was to be definitively arranged till Felix had come to London,
and given his approval to the draught of the settlements, of which he
and Mr. Murray were to be trustees. He was so much grieved and ashamed,
that much urging from Wilmet was needed to convince him that he ought
not to leave the whole to Tom Underwood; but as a counterpoise there
was Cherry to see--and oh! joy of joys! to fetch home. So he consented
to go up on a Saturday afternoon, and return on Tuesday; and thus
it was, that one evening in July Cherry was gathered into his arms,
murmuring 'Felicissimo mio, what an age it is since I have had you!'
Good-natured Mrs. Underwood had made it a family party, including
Robina and Angela, the worthy dame having little notion how slightly
they appreciated the honour, nor how curiosity, and love of Felix and
a holiday, contended with very tumultuous and angry sensations. That
Alda had never taken the smallest notice of Angela's confession, did
not render her cold kiss the pleasanter, nor the circle less awful as
the party sat round, awaiting the arrival of Sir Adrian. There they
were, nine uncomfortable people, sitting on gilded blue damask chairs,
too few and too far apart for a comfortable whisper; the two youngest
very conscious of their best white frocks; the two eldest--the one in
a flurry of anxiety and suspense, the other in a fret of impatience
and testiness; and Marilda--having announced her opinion that Sir
Adrian would shirk it, and not come at all--in a state of glumness.
Edgar, however--an exception both to the discomfort and the seat--threw
himself into the breach with the story of the mysterious disappearance
of a nun, (Cherry suspected it of being ben trovato for the nonce,)
and when that was worn out, and the master of the house insisted on
ringing for dinner, and the mistress was almost in tears at his hunger
and temper, and her own fear of rudeness, while Marilda only declared
that it was no more than the due of tardiness, it was Edgar alone who
had strength of mind to declare that patience ought to end, and to pull
the bell.
The guest arrived with the dinner, looking so sulky about the eyes,
that Cherry suspected him of having delayed while pitying himself for
the ante-nuptial infliction of this party. However, he proved to have
some justification, for a little stiffness of movement in giving his
arm to Mrs. Underwood elicited that he had bruised his shoulder in a
fall; and that good lady, pursuing the subject with less tact than
solicitude, drew from him that he had been mounting at his banker's
door, when his horse shied, and got its head away from the groom, but
was caught at once by a clerk sort of fellow. A showy brute, with an
uncertain temper. He should get rid of it.
Angela had been nudging Edgar all the time, to make him ask what horse
it was; and as he turned a deaf ear, her voice erected itself with the
shrill pert sound that is the misfortune of girlhood--'Was it Brown
Murad?'
Sir Adrian had to look to find out where the voice came from before he
answered in the affirmative.
'Then he isn't a brute at all!' said the same voice, with great
decision. 'He is as gentle as a lamb, and will eat bread out of your
hand if you know how to use him properly!'
Her cheeks were crimson, and she was greatly displeased that Edgar and
Geraldine should both begin talking of other things with all their
might.
Sir Adrian had more of the art of conversation than poor Ferdinand; and
as politics came up, Edgar declared himself to have become a voluntary
victim to unanimity between the three contracting powers, who had
harmoniously joined in rending his carcase. He left them, nearly as
soon as the ladies did, to discuss the business part of the affair,
and came to the aid of Cherry and Robina, who were vainly trying to
convince Angela of the inexpedience of her outbreak, and obtaining in
return the sentiment, 'I don't care what he does to Alda. It is her
choice, but not poor dear Brown Murad's, that he has got such a master!'
'You have done your best to make him fare worse.'
'Now, Edgar, you only want to frighten me.'
'No. If Vanderkist does not entirely forget the pertness of an enfant
terrible, it will just add another sting to his dislike of the poor
beast.'
Angela fairly burst into tears, and ran away to the school-room, whence
she returned with a bearing so magnanimous and desperate, that Cherry
and Robina dreaded lest she should be meditating an apology and an
appeal on behalf of the horse; so that they were much relieved when the
carriage came to take the young ladies home, before the consultation in
the dining-room broke up. Even then Angel did not wholly abstain, but
when Alda gave her mechanical kiss, she said, 'Alda, please don't let
Sir Adrian be unkind to that poor dear horse!'
'Silly child! What fancies you take into your head!' said Alda,
laughing, with a good-humoured superiority such as she had not shown
at home. 'You need not fear but that whatever belongs to him is made
happy.'
Angela returned an unfeigned look of astonishment, and exclaimed,
'After all, I do believe you are really in love with him!'
'Angel,' said Edgar, putting his hand on her shoulder, 'I called you an
enfant terrible just now; but you are too big for that indulgence,
unless you mean to be equally hateful to friend and foe.'
Angela shook off his hand, and tossed her head disrespectfully, but
went off in silence. Sir Adrian only came upstairs to say he had
promised to look in on Lady Somebody; and Alda bade good night as soon
as he was gone. She had evidently nothing to say to Felix that night,
nor the next morning, though he waited about after breakfast to give
her the opportunity; accompanied the family to their very dry church;
and then, announcing his intention of repairing to St Matthew's, was
seen no more--not even at dinner-time, when his absence was somewhat
resented by his hosts, and vexed Cherry a good deal.
However, he appeared before ten o'clock, made an apology about his
unexpected detention, and when the family circle broke up obeyed
Cherry's wistful look, and followed her to her room.
'Was it about Fernan?' she asked.
'The clerk sort of fellow who stopped the horse?'
'It did cross me, but I thought it too good to be true. How was it?'
'He had been sent on some business to the bank, and was almost at the
door when Sir Adrian came out. The groom may have been holding the
horse carelessly. Sir Adrian spoke angrily; the horse started, got his
head free, and reared, throwing him down with his foot in the stirrup,
so that he would have been dragged if Fernan had not got hold of the
bridle, and his voice quieted poor Brown Murad in a moment.'
'Dear good fellow! I hope Sir Adrian did not punish him.'
'He is too valuable for that, I hope; but Sir Adrian did not spare
abuse to man or beast, and threw a thank-you to Ferdinand as if he
did not recognise him. Most likely we should never have heard of the
adventure if it had not jarred the weak place in poor Fernan's back. He
did not find it out at first, and stayed at his work the rest of the
day; but it has been getting worse ever since, and I found him on the
sofa, lengthened out with a chair.'
'That most horrible of sofas--all bars and bumps! Poor Fernan!'
'He only told me he had got a sprain in catching a rearing horse; and
then I leapt to the conclusion, and made him tell me. He says he has
hurt himself in the same way before, and that the Life Guards' surgeon
told him there was nothing for it but rest.'
'Rest, indeed! like St. Lawrence's gridiron--all but the fire! What did
you do for him?'
'Wished for Wilmet, and remembered Lance's telling me that I was of no
use to myself nor any one else.'
'Fancy Lance saying that! But you didn't really do nothing?'
'Luckily Edgar came in search of me, and showed what resource is.
He had up the landlady, and as usual captivated her. She produced a
mattress, and Edgar routed out some air-cushions that Fernan had used
before, and they made him much more comfortable, I want to take him
home, but he does not think he can bear the journey.'
'No,' said Cherry; 'and he would be always in the way of hearing about
this; but it is dreadful to have him laid up in that dismal hole.'
'I ran round to the clergy-house, and they will look after him as much
as they can.'
'How is he looking?'
'As if he had not slept all night, but otherwise I believe this has
done him good; I fancy he never knew what the first impulse of the
ferocious old Mexican might be.'
'Did he say anything?'
'No, but the Vicar did. He has had a terrible time; but I hope the
worst is over. We read the Evening Service together; and he looked
so full of peace, that I thought of the contrast with that Christmas
morning when he opened his heart about the fire. There was all the
difference between blind feeling after truth and holding it in the
hand.'
'Was Edgar with you then?' asked Cherry, eagerly.
'No, he came later.'
'You Blunderbore!' said Cherry, rallying her playfulness to hide the
extinction of that moment's hope; 'how like the good Christian who gave
the wounded man the sermon first and the raspberry-vinegar after!'
'Come with me to-morrow, and give him the raspberry-vinegar then,
Cherry.'
'Nay,' said Cherry, feeling this impossible, but withholding the
reason; 'I am as bad--just as much demoralized by a Wilmet--and should
be no good.'
'The sight of you would be ever so much good. You needn't be shy. You
went with Clem.'
'Once too often,' faltered Cherry.
'Eh? Why W.W. said not a word against it!'
'I would go with all my heart, Felix,' said Cherry, earnestly, 'but
that I am afraid Alda gave him the--the same reason she did to Marilda.'
'What do you mean? You are all one blush! You can't mean that she
pretended jealousy?'
'I never meant you to know,' said Cherry. 'O Felix! nothing ever was so
dreadful! Marilda thought it so bad of me. I did so long for you!'
'You should have sent for me. I never thought of exposing you to such
an insult.'
'I tried to write, but my hand was too shaky; and then Edgar came, and
was so very dear! He said Alda only laid hold of this as a plea for
getting out of the affair; and you see he was right. Don't be vexed,
Felix; it is all over now, and I hope it has made me more of a woman
and less of a baby; but after this, I could not go to him.'
'No. I declare I can forgive Alda anything rather than this!'
'She does not know what she is saying when she is in an ill-used
mood--especially of me. Indeed, I believe I ought to have been more
guarded. Shall you tell her about the horse?'
'Certainly not.'
'And are you letting this go on without speaking to her?'
'I have written twice.'
'She never told me. What did you say?'
'A prose--I fear in the leader and heavy father style--which probably
she never read; and the answers were civil enough, but meant that she
would please herself.'
'You really do not mean to say anything?'
'If she asks my opinion, I must; but she does not. I am not here
to give my consent to the marriage, but to see fair play in the
settlements.'
'Do you think that right?'
'Remember, we know nothing against him, except his conduct to Fernan.'
'We know he has not much religion.'
'Cherry, I should put that objection forward decisively if she were
a younger one, for whom I am bound to judge; but she is only a year
younger than I am, and has seen more of the world. She must know more
about his principles than I can, and be able to judge whether she
chooses to trust to them. No argument of mine would make any difference
to her; and I have not the right to thrust in objections unasked.'
'O Felix!'
'What?'
'Is not that rather "Am I my brother's keeper?"'
'I hope not. You see, the sort of fatherly relation I bear to you all
has never existed towards her. She was given quite away; and where I do
not suppose even a father's remonstrance would avail, I do not feel
called upon to alienate her further by uplifting my testimony unsought.'
'No, it would hardly do her good; but it would clear your own
conscience.'
'It might bring dissension and harsh judgment on my conscience. Nothing
can be most conscientious that is not most for another's good; and I
do not think forcing an additional opposition or remonstrance, on mere
grounds of my own estimate of him, would be useful. You observe, too,
that our cool manner of treating this brilliant match is token enough
of our sentiments.'
'Then you won't go to the wedding?'
'Not if I can help it; and I don't think my company is desired.
Remember,' as he still saw her dissatisfied, 'it is not the same thing
to be an overt scamp as to be what you and I do not think a religious
man.'
With a sudden impulse Cherry burst out laughing. 'If the great Sir
Adrian could only see what the little country bookseller thinks of his
alliance?'
'Don't let pride peep out at the holes in our cloaks,' said Felix,
kissing her.
She could not refuse herself the satisfaction of letting Marilda hear
the real history of the accident; but she could extract nothing but
'Indeed.'
Altogether, Marilda disappointed Cherry. She went so entirely along
with the stream, only now and then remorselessly giving way to a
tremendous fit of crossness towards every one except her father, never
seeming scandalized by any doing of Alda's, and snubbing Cherry if she
showed any sort of disapprobation.
Felix stole the first hour of his busy day for Ferdinand, and then was
distressed to leave him outstretched in his dull, close, noisy den,
ill adapted for the daylight hours of anything but blue-bottle flies;
though neither heat nor idleness was quite so trying to him as they
would have been to an Underwood. He had a cigar and newspaper; but
when books were proposed to him, allowed that reading bored him. When
Felix shifted the cushions, however, under them was a deep devotional
mystical work; and colouring a little, he owned that nothing interested
him but reading and slowly digesting fragments of this kind. And Felix
felt that it would be unreasonable to regret the snapping of the tie
that bound him to Alda.
After some hours of business in the City, Felix came back, but was
amazed to hear that Mr. Travis was gone. The landlady seemingly rather
hurt at the slur on her attentions, said that an elderly lady had come
and taken him away, leaving an address. This led Felix into Finsbury
Square, where he was started to see waiting at the door a big carriage,
the panels and blinkers displaying the Underwood rood. On his asking
for Mr. Travis, a neat young maid took him to a downstairs room, where
Ferdinand was lying on a large sofa, accepting luncheon from a big
stout housekeeper-looking body, and--Marilda Underwood, her bonnet off,
as if quite at home!
'Felix!--Granny, have you never seen Felix Underwood!'
Mrs. Kedge turned round and held out her hand. 'I've never seen
Mr. Felix Hunderwood,' she said; 'but there's no gentleman I 'olds
in 'igher respect.--Sit down Mr. Felix, and take your bit of
noonchine.--Mary, give him some weal.--I could have had some soup if
I'd known I was to be so honoured; but I am a plain body, and likes a
cut from the servants' dinner--and so does Mary, for a change. So,'
before he could insert his civil reply, 'Vell, we've brought off your
friend; I 'ope you think him in good 'ands.'
'The kindest hands,' said Felix; though, as good Mrs. Kedge discoursed
on hopodeldoc and winegar as sovereign for a sprain, he began to think
the change a doubtful good, and was glad Ferdinand seemed chiefly
sensible of the motherly care of the old lady.
Marilda offered her cousin a seat in the carriage, when after the meal
she set forth to take her father home, there to hold conference with
Mr. Murray and the lawyer.
'This is your doing,' he said, gratefully, as they drove off. 'How very
kind!'
'Grandmamma always liked him,' said Marilda. 'He is so respectful, and
he plays backgammon.'
'It is much better for him than that doleful room, which was only made
endurable by its being near his friends the curates.'
'They will come to him there. Granny does not mind. She used to think
they starved Clement; but of late they have come to be great friends
with her, and come to her for rag, or broth, or hospital tickets.'
'Does she go to their church?'
'Oh no, she wouldn't to save her life--she thinks it quite shocking;
and there are two young merry ones who have regular quarrels with her,
teasing and making fun, and she scolding them, but so fond of them,
giving them quite large sums for their charities. She really delights
in them.'
Marilda spoke far more freely to Felix than she ever could to Cherry,
but still she steered clear of Alda and her affairs. Only she did ask
him earnestly to avert all additional care and anxiety from her father
in arranging for the settlements, and above all to hinder any question
over which he could become excited. Then, as he promised to do all in
his power, she asked him what he thought of her father's health and
looks. He could truly say that he thought he was much better since last
autumn, and she looked cheered; but the few words she whispered made
it known to him that she was all this time living in a watchful state
of continual anxiety--being in truth the only person, except perhaps
Edgar, who really understood what last year's attack had been, or the
dangers of another. If her mother and Alda knew, they did not realize;
and he could perceive both the burthen, and the manner in which it
rendered her almost passive, except in obviating discussion or alarm.
Of the former there was no danger at the conference. Mr. Murray was
just as anxious as Mr. Underwood and Felix could be, that the five
thousand pounds that had been promised to Alda should be settled upon
herself and the younger children, together with a fair proportion
charged upon the estate. He was a pleasing person, a perfect gentleman,
of mildly cordial manners, accepting his new connections with courtesy
and kindness. He was evidently charmed with Alda, whom he wanted to
take home with him to be introduced to Lady Mary, before returning to
choose her outfit. This was to be completed by the end of the month,
that the honeymoon might interfere as little as possible with the moon
fatal to partridges.
Felix was right. His presence was not desired. The father's part
naturally belonged to Thomas Underwood; and though an invitation was
not wanting, Alda did not remonstrate when Felix spoke of the assize
week requiring him to be at Minsterham, and of Charles Froggatt having
come home in such a broken state of health, that his father's presence
in Bexley could never be depended upon. She had no desire to display
the full dozen geschwister; but to Cherry she qualified things a
little: 'I suppose as Felix will not come, one of you will stay with
him?'
'Of course I shall! You know I'm wedded!' And she merrily held Lord
Gerald's ivory visage close to her own.
'I knew you would shrink from it. And those two children at
Brompton--it will be the middle of their holidays, and it will not be
worth while having them; besides, it would be encroaching, as Uncle Tom
gives all those dresses--and one never knows what that Angel might do.'
'Never,' said Cherry, in full acquiescence, and sure of the same from
Wilmet.
'But Wilmet and Stella must come. One of the little Murrays will pair
with Stella; and I want Adrian to see her. You will not feel slighted,
Cherry; I know you had rather not.'
'Much rather not,' said Cherry, for Alda was really speaking
considerately. Indeed, Alda was taking such a leap out of the same
sphere, that she could afford to be gracious to 'the little deformed
one,' as Sir Adrian most inappropriately termed Geraldine. She
graciously accepted for a wedding-present an intended portrait of
Stella, and rejoiced heartily at Cherry's prize for the life-study.
Never had Cherry, however, been happier than in getting home, away from
constraint, away from fine houses, away from half-comprehended people,
back to free affection and mutual understanding.
'One's own cobweb for ever! The black caterpillar is crawling home
again to the dear old nettle!' she cried.
'But you are not sorry to have gone,' said Felix.
'If only to get back again.'
'But they were kind.'
'I don't want people to be kind; I want them to be one with me.'
'My dear! you did not seem unhappy. We thought you enjoyed yourself.'
'I did. I was only unhappy once. I liked things very much and shall
more, now I have time. It was such a bustle and whirl; and I felt so
obliged to make the most of it, that it seemed to wear my senses. Don't
you see, it was like snatching at flowers; and now I can sit down to
make up my nosegay, and see what I have gained.'
Cherry almost expected Wilmet to decline, in her hatred of finery and
her general dissatisfaction; but Wilmet's love of Alda was too strong
for her not to long to be with her at such a crisis of her life, and
she was eager to accept the invitation, without fearing that the
effects of her absence would be as direful as in the previous year.
The party at home were not by any means disconsolate. Felix was very
busy, for Charles Froggatt had come home, a repentant prodigal, and
slowly sinking under the disease that had carried off his more worthy
brothers; and the father could seldom persuade himself to leave him for
long together, and besides, needed cheering and comfort from his young
friends. But Lance and young Lamb were working well and helpfully; and
William Harewood spent almost as much time at Bexley as his brother had
done.
He had passed his examination with flying colours, and had previously
matriculated at Oxford; and thus being emancipated from the choir,
which had kept him close at home, he seemed to think it liberty to be
always at Bexley. As a Harewood, Wilmet let him do as he would--sleep
in the barrack, and be like one of their own boys; and Lance's
neighbourhood seemed to be all he wanted, though little of Lance's
company was to be had, except in walking to see him bathe in early
morning, and in long walks after seven in the evening--and for these
the long July days gave ample verge. Robina, Angel, and Bernard often
benefited by these expeditions into the dewy fields, redolent of hay,
and came home to that delightful twilight that seems as if it would
never be darkness.
Bill professed perfect content in the day hours. He was a voracious
reader, and would remain for hours in the reading-room intent on some
pursuit; and what perhaps was a still greater attraction, he could
talk, and find listeners.
Cherry only now understood what Lance had always maintained--that that
shock-headed boy was full of thought, poetry, and ability. He had shed
his school-boy slough; and he had moreover adopted the Underwoods, and
for the first time learnt what an appreciative woman could be.
His poem of this year was so good, that Lance and Robin thought
Felix shockingly blind because he refused to put it bodily into the
Pursuivant, though allowing that it was much better than anything that
would appear instead; and short pieces that the lad was continually
striking off were only too good for the poet's corner, where, however,
they gave an infinity of pleasure and satisfaction to two households
at least. The poet--March Hare, as he signed himself--was an odd
mixture of his father's scholarly tastes with his mother's harum-scarum
forgetfulness; and the consequence was such abstraction at one moment,
such slap-dash action at another, that he was a continual good-natured
laughing-stock. To talk and read to Cherry seemed to be one of his
great objects in life. He began it with Robina; but gradually Cherry,
partly as critic and sub-editor of the Pursuivant, partly on her own
merits, became the recipient of ten thousand visions, reflections,
aspirations, that were crowding upon the young spirit, while she tried
to follow, understand, and answer, with a sense that her powers were
being stretched, and her eyes opened into new regions.
And then, if a stranger appeared, he sank into the red-headed lout; or
if he had a message or commission, he treated it senselessly. Lance
used to send Bernard up--as he said, to see him into the right train;
and in the home party in the evening, his wit and drollery were the
cause of inexhaustible mirth--Willie, as Robin and Angela agreed, was
better fun than all the weddings, and even all the sights that London
could give. Sometimes they were weary with laughing at him, sometimes
with the lift he gave their minds; for even Angel understood and
followed, and was more susceptible than her elders gave her credit for;
and certainly she had never been so good as she was this summer, though
it was still a flighty odd sort of goodness.
And all this time there was not a word between him and Robin of that
evening walk. Whether he thought of it or not she knew not; but with
her the recollection had a strength that the moment had not had. It
seemed to be growing up with her. It was a memory that went deeper--far
deeper than was good for her, poor child, since there was no surface
chatter to carry it off; but the maidenliness of fifteen shrank with
a sort of horror and dismay from the bare consciousness that she had
allowed herself to think that those words of his could be serious, even
while they had formed in her a fixed purpose of striving for him; and
every mark of kindness or of preference assumed a value unspeakable
and beyond her years, while her whole self was so entirely the good,
plodding, sensible, simple child, that no one detected the romance
beneath. Did the object of it, himself?
Meantime Wilmet had found Alda much gratified by her reception at the
Rectory, though confessing that she was glad that it was not in her
immediate neighbourhood. Lady Mary Murray belonged to a severe school
of religious opinions, and was antagonistic to gaiety and ornament,
both secular and ecclesiastic. What effect they and Clement might have
mutually had upon each other was not proved, for he had found a pupil,
and was far away; but as Alda herself owned, Wilmet would have been the
daughter-in-law to suit them.
Wilmet and Marilda were very congenial in their housewifely tastes and
absence of romance, and above all, in a warm and resolutely blind love
for Alda, never discussing the past, and occupied upon the trousseau,
without an arrire pense.
Sir Adrian was civil to Wilmet, but he never would acknowledge the
resemblance between the twin-sisters; and as Wilmet wore no earrings,
and kept her hair in the simple style that John Harewood had once
pronounced perfect, he had only once been confused between them, and
then was so annoyed, that Edgar said he was like a virtuoso, who having
secured some unique specimen, finds the charm of possession injured by
the existence of a duplicate.
Even in the Murray family there might be those who questioned
whether the beauty were equal. Either the smooth folds and plaits
of the rich brown hair pleased a homely taste better than fanciful
varieties, or housewifery and early hours were better preservatives
than London seasons; or maybe the stately sweetness of the original
mould was better and more congenially maintained in the life of
the true 'loaf-giver or lady' of the laborious thrifty home than
in the luxurious dependence of the alien house, and the schemes,
disappointments, and successes of the late campaign.
At any rate, at three-and-twenty the twins were less alike than of
old; and if Alda had the advantage in the graces of art and society,
Wilmet had a purity of bloom and nobleness of countenance that she
could not equal. If Wilmet were silent, and by no means so entertaining
as Geraldine, her little companion thoroughly compensated for any
deficiencies. Every one was taken by surprise by Stella's beauty, after
the three intermediate sisters, who had little pretensions to anything
remarkable in that line. The child was of the same small delicate frame
as Cherry and Lance; in fact, much what Cherry might have been with
more health and less genius to change those delicately-moulded features
and countenance. The colouring of the blue eyes and silken hair was
rather deeper than the prevailing tint, and the complexion was of the
most exquisite rosy fairness and delicacy, giving a sense of the most
delicate porcelain--the movements and gestures perfectly graceful, and
the innocent chatter delightful, from its eagerness and simplicity. She
was in every one's eyes an extraordinarily lovely and engaging child;
and she could have reigned supreme over the whole house if she had ever
perceived her power, or emancipated herself from her loyal submission
to 'Sister.'
Many a time did Wilmet's restrictions vex her hosts, and call forth
Edgar's epithets of dragon and Medusa. Luckily the child was of the
faithful spirit that honestly trusts its lawful authorities, fears
forbidden sweets, and feels full compensation in the pleasure of
obedience. One day, when a refusal to take her to the theatre had
caused great indignation, Sir Adrian, who was by no means insensible to
her charms, enlivened an idle moment by trying to excite her to rebel.
'I would not stand it, Stella--not I! Tell her stars have no business
to be hidden.'
'It's no use,' said Stella. 'Sister says when once she says No, it is
for always.'
'How very dreadful! She must be cured as soon as possible!'
Stella looked greatly perplexed; and Edgar, the only other person
present, looked on in great amusement.
'Let us organise a combination,' continued Sir Adrian. 'What should we
come to, if women were allowed to keep to a single No?'
'Which would be the greatest sufferers?' muttered Edgar.
'It would be very nasty if Sister didn't,' said Stella, understanding
him verbally more nearly than he had expected.
'Indeed!' said Sir Adrian.
'Yes. One would never know when to make up one's mind.'
'One's mind! You little china fairy, have you got the mind of a midge?'
'Yes, I have!' said Stella, with an emphasis that Edgar at least
understood as an allusion to the difference between herself and
Theodore; and a little in fear of what might come next, he said, 'Mind
enough to assert her woman's privilege, though how she may come to like
to be bound by it is another thing.'
'Look here, little one,' continued Sir Adrian, 'we'll not let Sister
alone till she comes round, and then I'll put you in my pocket and take
you.'
'No, thank you,' said Stella, retreating.
'I thought you wanted to see the fairies?'
'I did; but Sister knows best.'
'Come, now; I'd give something to know where, in her secret soul, this
little thing would like to send all the sisters that know best?'
'To the Neilgherry Hills,' said Stella, with surprising promptness;
'that's where Captain Jack is!'
'A capital location!' cried the baronet, laughing triumphantly. 'Well
done, little one! Send her off--and then we'll have pine-apple ice, and
smart frocks, and go to as many plays as we please! You know what it
means to have the cat away.'
'That was what Bernard said when Wilmet was away, and Alda at home,'
said Stella; 'but it was very miserable. It was the very horridest
portion in the whole course of our lives!'
'Long may it so continue, Stella,' said Edgar. 'You'll get no change
out of her, Vanderkist.'
'It's an odd little piece of goods. I can't make out if it is a
child at all,' said Sir Adrian. 'I can't believe it is more than
drilling.--Now, my little beauty--no one will tell--walls can't
hear--honour bright--which are you for in your heart of hearts--Sister
Wilmet and propriety, or Alda and--liberty?'
Edgar listened curiously; but Stella had that good genius of tact
and courtesy that sometimes inspires children; and she made answer,
'Wilmet is my own dear sister, and I am very glad it is Alda that you
have got.'
'Well said, you little ingenious morsel!' cried Edgar, laughing with
delight, and catching her up in his arms. 'What does nature design this
little being for, Adrian? To marry a great diplomat?'
'To do execution of some sort, I should say,' returned Sir Adrian;
'unless such alarming discretion cancels the effect of those eyes.
Never saw a pair more meant to make hearts ache,' and he sauntered out
of the room.
'Why, what now, you star of courtesy? has he kindled the spark of
vanity at last, that you are craning over to the big pier-glass--eh?'
said Edgar, with his little sister still in his arms.
'I only want to see what he means that is so horrid in my eyes,' said
Stella; 'please show me, Edgar. How can they hurt people so?'
'It's a way they have, Stella,' he gravely answered, 'when they are
clear, and blue, and big-pupilled, and have great long black lashes.'
And he looked with proud pleasure at the reflection of the sweet little
puzzled face beside his own brown beard.
'But your eyes are just like that, Edgar; and so are everybody's,
aren't they? Why do you laugh, Edgar? I wish I could go home, for I
don't understand any of you.'
'So much the better, Sister would say. I declare, I must risk it, and
see the effect. I say, Stella, don't you know that you're a little
beauty, that they are all raving about? There!'
'Oh yes,' said Stella composedly; 'I know people always do like things
for being little, and young, and pretty. And then they don't see Tedo,
and he is so much prettier than me, you know.'
'You impracticable child! What! have you no shade of a notion that it
is a fine thing to have such a phiz as that one? Did you never thank
your stars that you weren't as ugly as Martha?'
'Do you worship the stars, Edgar? For I heard Clem say you were very
little better than a heathen; and I suppose worshipping the stars is
better than worshipping idols.'
'Is that malice, or simplicity--eh? Never mind my creed. You are my
sister at this moment, and are to answer me truly. Do you know that you
are a beauty? and are you glad of it?'
'I shouldn't like to be ugly,' said Stella; 'not so ugly that I
couldn't bear to look at myself. But if I was, they wouldn't leave off
being kind to me at home.'
'Nor abroad either,' said Edgar, kissing her. 'You've got the tongue
that is nearly equal to the eyes, my Stella.'
Stella's simplicity might soon have been put in the way of further
trials, for there was a serious proposal of adopting her in Alda's
room, and promises of excellent education and an ample provision: and
when Felix's decided though grateful refusal arrived, Mr. and Mrs.
Underwood spoke angrily of his folly, as selfish, and almost undutiful
to his father, who had freely trusted them with the two elders; but
Edgar cut this short. 'No, no, my dear good governor. That won't do;
Felix knows that if my father could have seen the results, he would ten
times rather have let us fight it out in the Irish cabin at home.'
'I am sure,' exclaimed Mrs. Underwood, 'we have done everything for
you, Edgar! It is enough to cure one of offering to do anything for any
one!'
'Just what I say,' was Edgar's grave response; but he added, with his
natural sweetness, 'Not but that I believe, in the common herd, we
should have been, if anything, worse than we are now. We brought the
bad drop with us. You did not infuse it.'
'Speak for yourself, Edgar,' said Marilda, rushing to the defence, as
usual.
So the family was only represented by two sisters and one brother at
the wedding, which was solemnized by Mr. Murray at the parish church,
and was a regular common-place smart affair, with carriages, favours,
and crowds of spectators in much excitement to catch a sight of the
beautiful bride.
Murrays mustered in force, and Mrs. Underwood's felicity was complete;
for the titled uncle was so glad to see his Sister Mary happy about
her son, that he came in full state, and made a very gratifying
speech all about nothing. While Wilmet thought of her own soldier on
the Neilgherry hills, and felt how widely her path and that of her
twin-sister must diverge. And Mr. Underwood enjoyed the compliments to
the 'more than father,' and congratulated himself on having truly done
well by poor Edward's child.
'I only wish he were here to see her!' he cried with an effusion of
almost tearful delight, as he handed Lady Vanderkist to her carriage.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
STARS GRATIS.
'Back to the cell, and mean employ,
Resume the craftsman and the boy.'
Browning.
Three months later there was another family gathering, but it was for
Thomas Underwood's funeral.
It had come very suddenly. Spa had been given up in favour of Brighton;
and there what had seemed a slight casual ailment had been followed by
a recurrence of the disease, and a stroke came on which terminated life
in a few hours.
Mrs. Underwood was prostrated; but Marilda managed everything, with the
help of Spooner, the confidential clerk. She wrote to Felix that he was
joint executor with herself, and that as her father had wished to be
buried at Centry, he should give orders. Edgar had gone abroad, and no
one knew where to write to him.
The chosen burial-place was quite in accordance with poor Mr.
Underwood's desire to restore the family. Every year he had made an
effort to reside there, and been as regularly frustrated by his wife's
predilection for German baths, and dislike to the Bexley neighbourhood.
Hers had been the dominion of a noisy tongue, and of ready tears and
reclamations, but, poor woman, she was quite passive between the two
stronger spirits of her mother and her daughter, who brought her down
to Centry the day before the funeral. Mrs. Kedge led her away at once
to her room; but Marilda stood in the hall, excited, yet business-like,
discussing arrangements with Felix, in that prompt, lucid,
all-considering manner that sometimes springs out of the pressure of a
great affliction, settling every detail with eager peremptoriness--as,
for instance, finding that Felix had intended his brothers only to meet
the procession in the grave-yard, she vehemently stipulated that they
should come to the house, and be transported in carriages like the
rest. Her mother would not go, and would be left with Mrs. Kedge; but
she herself was resolved on being present, with Felix for her supporter.
'You will like to have Wilmet with you?' he asked.
'I thought Wilmet would have been here now,' she said, as if
disappointed.
'Alda is coming by the five o'clock train; and she thought you had
rather be together.'
'But you will stay?' she earnestly entreated.
Alda arrived, weeping so much that she had to be taken upstairs at
once. The occupation and excitement were perhaps good for Marilda, who
was in a restless tearless state, only eager to be doing something for
some one. She sat at the head of the dinner-table, Mr. Spooner at the
foot; but the conversation was chiefly due to the instinctive habits of
good breeding belonging to Sir Adrian, whose 'go through with it' air
was not unlike what he had worn at his wedding.
When the ladies went away, he inquired what was known about the
will; but Felix knew nothing, and if Mr. Spooner knew, he would not
say. Thereupon Sir Adrian became silent, and asked the way to the
smoking-room, whither Mr. Spooner deemed it needful to follow, while
Felix repaired to the drawing-room.
He thought it empty; but Alda's head looked round the tall back of an
easy-chair.
'Felix, is it you? I was nearly asleep.'
'Are you tired?'
'Yes, rather. It is such a shock--and my poor aunt's grief! It is
so frightful to see a large person give way; it makes me quite ill.
Where's Adrian?--smoking?'
'Yes.'
'That's man's way of getting out of trouble. If poor Marilda could
smoke, she would not be half so restless and wretched. She has been up
and down here four or five times in ten minutes. It wears one out!'
'She will be calmer when the bustle is over.'
'She tells me that you are executor with her.'
'I am afraid so.'
'Afraid! why?'
'Of the complication of business of which I have no experience, and
that must be thoroughly looked into.'
'Now, for my part,' said Lady Vanderkist, 'I should have expected you
to be gratified at such a mark of confidence.'
'So I am, Alda. It is not want of gratitude; it is only that I wish I
were better qualified.'
'You understand business.'
'Understanding my own business shows me how little I know of other
people's.'
'It would not be other people's, if you take this as it is meant. There
can be no doubt that he meant to pave the way. Don't look so senseless
and uncompromising, Felix; you must have heard Edgar say so!'
The colour glowed into Felix's face as he answered, 'You have not been
so silly as to take Edgar's nonsense in earnest?'
'It is absurd in you to pretend simplicity,' said Alda, sitting
upright, and looking at him earnestly. 'Here is such an opportunity
as you may never have again. This arrangement must have been made on
purpose to remove all scruples.'
'Nay, Alda,' interrupted Felix, in a tone of regret and shame
at the subject and the time. 'If there were no objection, this
arrangement would be the greatest in itself,' and as she looked at him
incredulously, 'don't you see that he has set me to do a brother's part
to her? anything to interfere with that would be both unfair and cruel.'
'She knows nothing of such ridiculous refinements as you work
yourselves up to. Besides no one wishes you to do anything at once;
only you ought to have it in your mind, and might be making way all
the time.--Felix,' as she saw his face and gesture, 'you don't mean
that you are so absurdly fastidious. I call that quite wrong--in your
position, too--and when she is the dearest best-hearted girl in the
world!' added Alda, with more genuine feeling.
'True, Alda; I esteem her goodness and generosity too highly to treat
her with the disrespect and insincerity such a course would imply.'
'Nonsense! as if it would not be the greatest kindness to save her from
fortune-hunters!'
Felix smiled. 'What should I be myself?' he said. 'I must speak
plainly, to put this out of your head. Nothing else would lead me to
this, and in me it would be especially abominable, because I am the
only man in the family able to be of any use to her; and besides, I am
not only poor, and in a lower grade, but I have so many dependent upon
me.--Don't you see?'
'I only see that you are obstinate and unreasonable, throwing away all
my pains to guard her for you!'
Felix could not but laugh a little ironically as he said, 'Thank you.'
'You think it mere fancy,' said Lady Vanderkist, nettled into proving
her words by an exposure of herself; 'but she would have had that young
Travis two years ago, if I had not managed to give him a hint before he
got involved.'
'Alda!' He started up, and stood over her, speaking low, but with pain
and horror inconceivable. 'Alda, if you had not told me this, I should
not have believed it. I do not believe you now.'
Alda had the grace to colour violently under the force of his
indignation. 'Well, well,' she said, 'of course it was not only that.
No one out of a novel would be so disinterested without a little bit of
infatuation besides; but it is of no use recollecting these things now,
when they are gone by.'
This was so incontrovertible that Felix made no answer, and was glad
that Marilda returned, trying to work off her restlessness by ringing
all the possibilities of Edgar's seeing the announcement in the
'Times,' and coming home.
Felix was still too much stunned to reply freely, and took his leave
as soon as possible. He walked home, finding no solace for his dismay
at the usage of Ferdinand, save in plans which his better sense knew
to be impracticable for bringing Ferdinand and Marilda together; but
the match which might have been easily accomplished as a veritable
mariage de convenance, could not be contemplated by an almost
penniless clerk. Moreover, the heart had been given away, and Felix
could not believe that it would be possible to turn to Marilda from
one of his own graceful sisters. Even though the essential vulgarity
of Alda's nature had been so painfully evident, the delicate contour
of her face, her refined intonation and pronunciation, and elegance of
appearance and manner, returned on him in contrast with poor Marilda's
heavy uncouthness, and the shock she inflicted on his taste by plain
speaking--worse in manner, if better in matter.
On his return home, he found that Edgar had arrived, having travelled
day and night ever since the tidings had met his eye. He was very much
tired, and genuinely grieved and overcome, too much even to battle with
the manifestation of his feelings. Always affectionate, he mourned for
one who had, as he said, been far kinder to him than he deserved, and
though often angered with him, had pardoned and overlooked his offences
with the partiality of a father. That their final farewell had been one
of sharp remonstrance on the one hand, and of gay defiant coolness on
the other, added poignancy to his regret; and there was so much more of
actual self-reproach than usually came from his tongue, that a gleam
of hope glanced through the minds of Felix and Cherry that this shock
might be the beginning of better things.
They certainly had never seen him so subdued as when he set out for
Centry the next morning with his brothers and Wilmet; and the meeting
with Marilda was like that of an orphan brother and sister. With all
her esteem and confidence for Felix, her affection for Edgar was a
much warmer and more instinctive feeling; and the sight of him brought
her tears freely and heartily, while she told him the history of her
father's last hours, and his gentle warmth of manner soothed and
comforted her.
He was sent for to her mother's dressing-room; and when he left it only
to join the funeral party, he looked pale, shaken, and overwhelmed by
grief he had shared as well as witnessed. The position of son of the
house seemed his right. It was he who led Marilda to the carriage, and
handed in first her, then Wilmet followed. Felix was just about to
step in, when another person thrust forward, and had his hand on the
door, when Edgar said, 'I believe my brother comes with us,' and 'Come
Felix,' was hastily murmured from under Marilda's veil. He obeyed, and
met a shrug and scowl of displeasure and amazement; but nothing could
be thought of except poor Marilda's choking sobs under her veil.
It is one curious effect of good breeding, that while in one class
publicity seems to stifle the expression of grief, in another it
enhances it; and when Marilda's excitement had once dissolved in
tears, her agitation became so excessive, that her cousins watched
her anxiously, Wilmet attempting all that salts and kind pressures of
the hand could do, and the brothers supporting her, when she clung to
Edgar's arm, as if resting her whole weight on him, when the movement
to the church began.
It was one of the regular conventional, and therefore most oppressive
of funerals, with a great array of pall-bearers, friends from London,
and a train of persons with whom Thomas Underwood had been associated;
and after all was over, most of them came to a great cold luncheon,
which was to occupy them till the next train.
There they trooped, a black multitude, into the dreary big dining-room;
and Felix, knowing nobody, and unwilling to take the lead, was much
relieved when Edgar returned from taking Marilda upstairs and went
round with greetings and replies to every one. When he came to the
gentleman who would have entered the carriage, he said, 'Good morning,
Fulbert. Here--my eldest brother.'
Felix held out his hand, but met an ungracious bend. 'You muster strong
here,' were the words, chiefly addressed to Edgar.
'I am sorry not to show you any more of us,' said Edgar, with a spice
of malice; 'the others have walked home.'
Then Felix made some courteous inquiry for the elder Fulbert, and was
answered in the coldest and haughtiest of tones, and the Vicar of Vale
Leston turned away. In this company, all in mourning, he would not
have been taken for a clergyman, chiefly from a sort of free-and-easy
air about his dress, and his unclerical cast of countenance, which was
wearied, bored and supercilious.
'Take the other end of the table,' indicated Edgar; but Felix would
have abstained, had not Mr. Harford summoned him by a look; and another
scowl from the Reverend Fulbert was the consequence.
Before long that gentleman was examining the lawyer as to when the
will was to be read; and hearing in return that so few were concerned
that there was to be no public opening. Did Miss Underwood know that
he--Fulbert--was here?--Yes, certainly.--He should like to see her and
her mother. Mr. Harford applied to Edgar, who undertook to ascertain
whether they would wish it.
'What can it be for?' said Marilda, who was sitting between the twin
sisters, calm, though spent with weeping, and unusually gentle.
'To warn you against us,' said Edgar. 'He is ready every moment to
insult Felix; but if you can bear it, you had better face him, or he
will say we beset you, and let no one have access to you.'
'That would be better than his teasing her,' said Wilmet.
'No, I don't mind whom I see now,' said Marilda. 'I must stand alone.
Send him to me in the library, Edgar.'
This left Wilmet for the first time alone with Alda, longing to enter
fully into her sister's new life, and hearing that Ironbeam Park was
delightful; beautiful house, splendid drawing-rooms, beautiful grounds,
sheet of water, swans, deer, good neighbourhood, people calling, dinner
invitations without number, guests who had had to be put off. There was
a little attempt at complaint at being overwhelmed by the welcome, but
pleasure and exultation were visible enough; only it seemed to Wilmet
that there was more of the splendour and less of the Adrian, than she
would have expected. Marilda soon came back.
'Well, was it as Edgar said?' asked Alda.
'He offers his wife to come and stay with me.'
'I dare say!'
'I shouldn't wonder if he meant to be kind!'
'Now, Marilda, you aren't going to let yourself be talked over!' cried
Alda.
'He is my relation,' said Marilda, bluffly, in a tone that showed she
meant to be mistress of her own actions. 'I came back to say that there
are things to be done. There are Felix and Edgar walking in the garden;
I want them in the library.'
She was going to ring to have them summoned; but Wilmet undertook to
fetch them, going through an ante-room with a glass door; which she was
just unfastening, when she heard a voice behind her--'Holloa, where are
you going now?' She perceived her brother-in-law, lounging on a sofa
with a newspaper.
'I am looking for my brothers.'
'I say, haven't I told you that I'll not have you eternally running
after that concern?'
She faced about, and looked full at him with her grave eyes, and neck
held like a stag's.
'I beg your pardon,' he stammered. 'This confounded mourning makes
everybody alike.'
She did not wait to hear more, but was gone as soon as the bolt had
yielded.
The Tartar had shown himself without a scratch. Were these his domestic
manners to his three months' bride?
She said nothing to her brothers, but brought them to the library,
where Marilda was awaiting them, with the lawyer, Harford, and the
manager, Spooner, to settle about the will.
Alda's five thousand pounds had been made over to her at her marriage,
so that she was not mentioned. A large share in the mercantile house
already belonged to Mrs. Underwood, and to her was bequeathed the
lease of the Kensington house, with the furniture; but Centry Park was
absolutely left to Mary Alda, the daughter, with all the property in
the funds, or embarked in the business, coupled with a request that
in case of her marriage she should carry with her the name and arms
of Underwood. Among the legacies were fifteen hundred pounds to Felix
Chester Underwood, and one thousand pounds apiece to Thomas Edgar,
Theodore Benjamin, and Stella Eudora--Felix and Mr. Harford trustees
for these last, with liberty to use the interest for their benefit, or
let it accumulate, as might be best.
No one made any remark; and the lawyer was beginning to tell the two
executors what immediate steps they must take, when Edgar rose, saying,
'I suppose I'm not wanted!'
Marilda jumped up. 'Edgar, you ain't vexed! Poor Papa thought the
executorship might take time, trouble, and expense, that ought to be
made up for.'
'Now, Polly,' said Edgar, with his sweet candid smile, 'you are not
thinking me grudging dear old Fee anything man could give him! I only
wish he had mine. He'd do some good with it;' and he fondly laid his
hand on the shoulder of Felix, who, not being used, like him, to view
Harford and Spooner as tame cats, had rather have had this more in
private.
'You'll leave it in our hands, and let us make the most of it for you,
Edgar,' said warm-hearted Marilda; 'that Pampas railway is never less
than seven per cent., you know.'
'All very well, Poll, if the item could be suppressed when the will is
blazoned abroad. It is not ingratitude, dear old girl. It is more than
I deserve or expected, and will give me a hoist.'
'I hope--' began Marilda eagerly.
'Never mind me. The best part of it is that nest-egg for those babies.'
'It is indeed,' said Felix; 'I cannot express how thankful I am,
especially for poor Theodore's sake.'
'It will not do much in the funds,' said Marilda, gratified; 'but leave
it in our hands, and little Stella shall have quite a fortune. You will
judge of our security when you look into our books.'
Marilda's habit of identifying herself with the firm had begun half
in play years ago; and in fact, the house now chiefly consisted of
herself, her mother, and grandmother, with Spooner, who had shares
enough to give him a personal interest in the transactions.
'You do not mean to go on with the business?' asked Felix.
'Why not? I have worked at it, and like it much better than the piano
or bead-work--and I can, can't I, Mr. Spooner?'
'We all know your competence, Miss Underwood. I would not wish for a
more sagacious head, if--'
'Yes, if,' said Marilda more sadly; 'but you see, Felix, you may trust
me. Let me keep your own and the twins, for you.'
'For the twins, I do not know how the law stands. Mr. Harford will tell
me; but for myself, it may make a great difference to have this capital
just now,' said Felix, who had already perceived what it might do for
him.
Charles Froggatt had been dead about a month, and with him his father
had lost all personal hope or interest in the business, and the few
times he had come into the town, had shrunk from meetings even with
old friends, and crept upstairs to talk to Geraldine. He wished to
retire, and he would have liked to have put Felix Underwood, who had
for nearly nine years been as a dutiful son, into a son's place; but he
had relations to whom he must do justice, and he was unwilling to bring
in a new partner, who might, as a moneyed man, lord it over Felix;
while if he left things in their present condition till his death,
the succession would pass to a family whom he knew to be uncongenial.
All this had been discussed, but without seeing any way out of the
difficulty, until in this legacy Felix saw the means of making himself
master of the house and stock, and thus would obtain a footing as a
citizen, by which he could profit as he gained in age and standing. The
available income of the family would hardly be increased, since the
absolute possession of the house involved expenses that had hitherto
been paid over his head; but the security and independence were worth
more than the pounds, shillings and pence that might otherwise have
been brought in. The certain provision for the helpless Theodore also
made Felix more free. The lawyer, his fellow trustee, greatly to
Wilmet's satisfaction, would not allow the sum in trust to be invested
in anything but government security, and as nothing was needed at
present for the child, the interest might there accumulate in case of
need.
Edgar showed himself much subdued by the change in the household. He
never spoke plainly about his doings, and direct questions drove him
to his retreat in the ludicrous. However, it could be inferred that in
the recklessness induced by Alice Knevett's desertion, he had gone far
enough to alarm himself, and behold some abyss of exposure and disgrace
whence the legacy would retrieve him, and that he was resolved to pull
up and begin upon a different course.
He talked eagerly and edifyingly of setting about a picture for
exhibition, the proceeds of which might take him to Italy, to begin a
course of study at Rome, where he might make a home for Cherry to come
and work with him; and they built up a Chteau en Espagne, the more
fervently in proportion to Cherry's want of faith therein. Hours were
spent in devising and sketching subjects for the picture, or rather
pictures, for Mr. Renville was very anxious that Geraldine should make
a venture in water-colours, such as might at least make her known as a
possible illustrator. Edgar's eye and advice were very useful to her;
and she decided on one ideal subject--the faithful little acolyte, who
while the priest slept on the cold morning,
'Turned and sought the choir,
Touched the Altar tapers
With a flake of fire.'
And likewise the sketches of Stella in different attitudes, which she
had made with a view to Alda's picture, were worth working at with her
utmost power.
For Edgar's own part, he had resolved on a scene which Cherry thought
wild and impracticable, till he had dashed in his sketch of Brynhild
asleep in the circle of fire, with Sigurd about to break through. There
was something so bright and fiery, so expressive and powerful, in the
hastily-designed and partly-coloured bauche that Cherry gazed at it
like something of weird and magical beauty, only longing for her master
to see it, and own Edgar's genius.
Brynhild's model was Wilmet, who, much against the grain, was induced
to let down all her mass of hair, and let Edgar pose her on the
sofa squab with bare arms. In his mischief, however, he produced a
counter pen-and-ink outline of Marilda in the same position, with
all the pointed flames labelled with the names of various stocks and
securities; while Sigurd's helmet disclosed Felix, armed with the
Pursuivant, and hesitating to plunge in. He might with equal propriety
have drawn himself, his sister Alda thought, for on failing with Felix,
she had actually whispered the same hint to him, but was met with the
reply, 'Oh no, I am not bad enough for that.'
She was spending a week longer at Centry, that Sir Adrian might
massacre the pheasants, which, however, he considered to be so
disgracefully preserved, that he spent much time and eloquence in
explaining to Miss Underwood how she might render her game a source of
profit.
One November day, the last of the Vanderkists' stay at Centry, when the
sisters had been sent for in the afternoon, and he and Lance were to
follow for the evening, Felix, returning into his office, was amazed to
see a figure standing at the fire.
'Ferdinand! what good wind brings you here?'
'I am come to say good-bye.'
'What? Mr. Brown sends you out to America?'
'No, it is on my own account. His correspondent at Oswego has
telegraphed to him to find me, and let me know of my uncle's death.'
'Death!'
'Yes, I know no particulars.'
'And are you his heir?'
'That I do not know. Probably. I cannot bring myself to care.'
'How much is it?'
'Brown knows of fifty thousand in stock that he can lay his hand upon;
but there must be more than as much again afloat in the States, in
goodness knows what speculations, and I shall have to deal with it all!'
'It is well you have had an apprenticeship. The Life Guardsman would
have known less about it. When do you start?'
'I go back to town by the mail train to-night, to Liverpool to-morrow.
I could not go without telling you; and when I tried to write, I felt I
must see you and this place again. But you are going out.'
'We were, but we shall be glad to get off.'
'To Centry? Is she there?'
'Yes. Going early to-morrow.'
Before Ferdinand had done more than stare into the fire, Lance opened
the door. 'Mr. Flowerdew wants--Holloa! Fernan dropped from the skies!'
'Is Mr Flowerdew there?' said Felix, about to pass him.
'No; he only wants you to write up to Novello's.--Do you hear, Fernan?
we are to have such a concert in the town hall, for a real good
organ. Edgar will bring down no end of stars for it. You'll come down
for it?'
'Fernan will be in the utmost parts of America by that time, Lance.'
'Look here, Lance,' said Fernan--that dark sad countenance lighting as
it sometimes did--'just you wait a fortnight, and I can all but promise
you--'
'An organ by Atlantic cable, eh?' said Felix, laughing. 'Look at Lance,
Fernan; he'd hardly thank you. It is the concert they want; the organ
is the excuse.'
'Now, Felix, you are as much set on the concert as I am. He is to sing,
"Return, blest days,"' rattled on Lance, too eager on his own hobby to
draw the inference as to Fernan's fortunes; 'and Mr. Miles has promised
to come himself with all our own fellows; and so we can have the sacred
part something respectable. It is a horrid pity you can't come!'
'He will be better employed, Lance; he believes he is come into his
fortune.'
'And if so, Felix, nothing can hinder me from my greatest possible
pleasure, the giving this organ to St Oswald's--the church of my
baptism.'
'Well, Fernan, the bear is not caught yet, remember; but when it is,
I'm not the man to hinder you from making up the deficit I strongly
anticipate after this same concert of ours.'
'Felix! A hundred and sixty reserved seats at a guinea, and--'
Felix put up his hands to his ears. 'Meantime, Lance, find little
Lightfoot, and tell him to get ready to take a note into the country.'
Ferdinand of course rose up, insisting on starting by the five o'clock
train, but was withheld while Felix wrote a note to Marilda, in which
he communicated the tidings, leaving it to her and to Wilmet to inform
Lady Vanderkist.
The note was delivered in the expectant time before dinner, when
Marilda, without any preliminary but 'Bless me! what does Felix write
to me for?' read--
MY DEAR COUSIN,
You must have the kindness to excuse Lance and myself from
joining your party to-night. We are unexpectedly prevented by
the arrival of Mr. Travis, who has come down to take leave,
having been telegraphed for to Oswego on his uncle's death. He
must go back by to-night's mail train; and perhaps you would
kindly send my sisters home a little earlier, as I think they
would wish to see him.
Your affectionate cousin
F.C. UNDERWOOD.
'His uncle dead without a will! If we had but known!' said Mrs.
Underwood, unguardedly.
'Insolvent, depend on it,' growled Sir Adrian, fitting on the
consequence so that Cherry felt an uncontrollable impulse to giggle,
and was glad to be sunk in the depths of a huge chair.
She was startled by Alda's answering rather fretfully, 'I don't see
why--he was very rich.'
'The more reason. It is always the way with those Yankees.'
Mrs. Underwood took on herself to defend the solidity of the Travis
interest as an article of her husband's belief; Wilmet and Cherry
longed to change the conversation, but neither knew how; and it was Sir
Adrian who found a fresh subject at last, on which the others willingly
rode off.
They begged to have the carriage ordered at nine, and bade good-bye to
Lady Vanderkist, who had good taste enough not to make another remark
after the first into which she had been betrayed.
Marilda, however, did. 'Tell him I hope it is all right, and that I
congratulate him with all my heart,' she said; and she looked as if she
could have said more.
Perhaps Wilmet and Cherry were not sorry that Stella's being seated
between them prevented discussion on the difference patience and
constancy might have made. Wilmet, with her love for her sister, and
recollection of that conjugal interpellation, might regret; while
Geraldine, less prejudiced, felt that Ferdinand could hardly be pitied
for the test that had spared him a wife with whom he could have so
little in common; but both felt the contrast when they were met by
Ferdinand, whose countenance, though not intellectual, was singularly
noble, and full of a grand melancholy sweetness according with the
regular outline and dark olive colouring, while the gentleness of his
tone was not the conventional politeness of society, but somewhat of
the old Spaniard enhanced by Christian grace.
For all that had come and gone, they were more comfortable with him now
than when he had been Alda's exclusive property, and what was wanting
in love had been made up in jealousy; but he was very low and sad; he
had not come to the point of ceasing to regret Alda, and his native
inertness shrank from the trouble and turmoil before him, when he
had nothing to make riches valuable to him, and could not bear to be
wrenched from the shadow of St. Matthew's, and tossed he knew not where
in the West, among strangers and worse than strangers. But after all,
the home party were soon caring most of all about their concert.
The St Oswald's Choral Society did in fact give a concert every year,
but in a very quiet way, aiming only at covering their own expenses,
and seeking for no extraneous aid; but this was to be an affair on
a very different scale. It had grown up no one knew how, under the
influence of Mr. Flowerdew, and of two Miss Birkets, daughters of
a gentleman who lived out of the town but in the parish. They were
enthusiastic young ladies, about thirty years old, who had been enough
at Minsterham to have known 'little Underwood' in his glory there, and
to take him up with all their might when they found him with renovated
powers in the choral society.
He was 'little Underwood' still, and perhaps would always be so, for
in spite of the start of growth he had so eagerly hailed, he would
never be tall, but the slenderness of his bones, hands, feet, and
general frame, made him look neatly and well made; and he was what
every one called, very gentleman-like in appearance. His face had
not the beauty of some of the others, the colouring was pale, and
there was nothing to catch the eye, till it lighted up into mirth or
sweetness; and his manners, from their perfect simplicity and absence
of self-consciousness, were always engaging. He was either a cypher, or
else he had an inexpressible charm about him. When his violin-playing
powers were discovered, the ladies made a point of getting up a piece
on the piano in which he was to accompany them, and a prodigious
quantity of practice it took. Lance had to walk over to them at least
two afternoons in a week. Felix looked on it as patronage, and could
not think how he could bear it; but Lance was too simple to perceive
patronizing--a petticoat was always a petticoat to him, and a little
lingering chatter in their drawing-room was his delight, a few friendly
words over the counter enslaved him.
Those holidays came, as Felix well knew, much too often; and if he
tried to keep the balance true by tenders of the like liberty to Ernest
Lamb, Lance proved to have left his head behind him, and made mistakes,
or still worse was guilty of neglects. When called to account, partly
from pre-occupation, partly from easiness of temper, he really seemed
incapable of taking a reproof, or understanding the enormity of his
errors. Had these been the days of Redstone, there must have been an
explosion; but young Lamb was one of those whom Lance unconsciously
fascinated, and being used to sparing him in the early days when he
was scarcely more than a convalescent, the good plodding lad took it
for granted that the unmusical should set the musical free, toiled
quietly after him to rectify his mistakes, was absolutely amazed when
Mr. Underwood apologized to him for the unequal weight resting on his
honest shoulders, and was by far the most shocked and distressed when
at last the value of some careless piece of damage was imposed as a
fine. Indeed, Lance viewed this as expiation, troubled his head no more
about the matter, and was in far too transcendent a state to perceive
that he was Felix's daily worry, provocation, and disappointment.
There was the hope that it would be only for a time, and that it
would blow over the sooner that nothing was heard of Edgar or his
stars. Lance was indeed so radiantly happy, that it was only when he
was doing something very provoking indeed that it was possible to be
displeased with him, and not even to Geraldine would Felix whisper the
heart-sickening misgivings that came over him when he found himself
experiencing exactly what Kedge and Underwood had gone through from
Edgar.
The concert was to be just within the Christmas vacations, so that the
performers would include Clement, and the audience Robina and Angela,
besides William Harewood, who was to bring his sisters over. It was
delicious to hear Lance's demands upon Wilmet, in his ecstasy at being
once more with his own beloved Minsterham choir. And Wilmet's soft spot
was Minsterham, as the rogue knew.
'Train comes in at five eleven. I say, Mettie, our fellows must come
here before they go to tune up.'
'My dear Lance, there are five-and-thirty of them at least! It is quite
impossible! Why they couldn't sit down!'
Lance whistled. 'I must have little Graeme, Mettie, the little chap has
never been here.'
'Poor little Dick! Well I don't mind him.'
'And if he comes, he must bring little George Lee--he's only seven, and
not fit to knock about with men and all.'
'Very well.'
'No more is his fellow--that mite of a Bennett that is come instead of
Harewood. His brother was an uncommon good friend to me when I was a
little squeaking treble.'
Wilmet swallowed the mite of a Bennett.
'And Poulter! You remember Poulter, surely, Wilmet.'
'Who used to come twice a day to ask after you. Yes, we must have him.'
'Then there's Oliver--our big bass! Oh! you must remember old Oliver
with that grizzly beard, coming in and carrying me out like a baby the
first day I went into the avenue.'
'That good-natured old man--only I should think he would be happier
among his friends.'
'And Mr. Miles--'
'Really, Lance, I don't think Mr. Miles would wish to come.'
'Oh, you're afraid Jack will be jealous!--You know, Cherry, Miles was
almost caught, he had the slyest little flirtation with Mettie when
they thought I was asleep or delirious or something--'
'Delirious indeed to think so,' interrupted Wilmet indignantly; but
Lance went on unheeding,
'And if the engineer hadn't been the sharpest, who knows if she
wouldn't have got permanent lodgings in the organ gallery? and now you
see she thinks poor Miles's heart is in such a state that she can't
venture to let him come!'
'Ah!' said Cherry, gravely taking up the cue, and much amused at
Wilmet's indignant blushes and innocent amazement. 'I've always
understood that things go very deep with those sort of misogynists,
when once they begin.'
'Now, Cherry, I didn't expect such nonsense in you!' exclaimed Wilmet.
'Mr. Miles is extremely welcome--just as any of Lance's friends are.'
'There, Lance,' laughed Cherry, 'there goes the wedge! Dick Graeme was
the small end, then came the two little trebles, then the two basses,
and now Mr. Miles himself and any of your friends. And I imagine all
the five-and-thirty are your particular friends.'
'Why, all that are coming--except Rooke and Higgins, and they always
were disgusting little cads, only one couldn't leave them out by
themselves, as they would be eating dirt some way and getting not fit
to sing; Rooke's got my part now--I always used to be the lady when
there was any spooning going on out of an opera! and if we don't take
them in hand they'll go and stuff themselves with pastry, and wash it
down with cherry brandy, and won't be good for anything.'
'But there must be some senior to keep them in order.'
'Oh! there's Black, but he will go to his cousin's in Long Street, and
Charlie Harris, but he was next to me. If any one comes, Charlie must.'
'My dear, how many are there to come?'
'Well! four of the little chaps will be away for the holidays, and it
is only six of the lay-vicars that ever do come out, and two of them
have friends here, so it is only two more of them besides Mr. Miles,
and but five more boys. Really, Wilmet, I know Mr. Miles and the
Precentor would be for ever obliged, there's nothing they hate so much
for us as knocking about hotels, and that's why we hardly ever went to
any but private concerts.'
'Well, every one was so very kind last year, we do owe some return. I
will see what Felix thinks.'
Felix, so far as he had time to think at all, was sure to be on the
hospitable side, so that ended by a provision of cold meat and tea and
coffee on the back-room table, and permission to Lance to bring in and
feed whomsoever he pleased. After the concert, a regular supper was
provided in the school for all the performers, and Wilmet was released
from all concern except with stray womankind who might want shelter
till the mail train.
The excitement went on increasing. To use Lance's expression, the
tickets went off like wild-fire; Marilda took a large allowance for her
servants and dependants.
The type of the programmes was all set up, and Lance had proudly
carried the proof round the house, when a note arrived from Edgar.
'Prebels consent to come and give three National Magyar airs,
expenses being paid. Engage rooms for them at the F.A. I trust
this is in time to draw. I shall come down with them.'
T.E.U.
Here were the stars, after all! Lance crushed up his proof and played
at ball with it in his ecstasy; and Felix--for all the trouble it gave
him--was carried along and not much less delighted, as he sent Clement
up to Mr. Flowerdew with the intelligence.
The brother and sister M. Stanislas and Mlle. Zoraya Prebel were not
exactly in the first ranks of public singers, but were rated highly,
and their fame, when making the round of the provinces with a company
who performed varieties of characteristic national music, had been
quite enough to fire the souls of Bexley with ardour; nor did Felix
murmur, although he had to stay away from the final choral society's
rehearsal to provide for the programmes and hand-bills, without which
the attraction of Mlle. Zoraya would remain unknown to the public. Time
to put it into the Pursuivant would have made all the difference!
But on that last supreme day, the excitement was such, that anybody was
willing to do anything. Felix could do little but explain to people
where their seats would be on the map of the town hall spread on the
counter, and answer their questions about the Zoraya; Wilmet was over
head and ears on her preparations for her entertainment, and would
have been unable to get any help in laying out her table but Cherry's
if Marilda had not come in to see what was going on, thrown herself
into the business with zeal and promptitude, sent back to Centry for a
supply of flowers, knives and forks, and done the work of half a dozen
parlour-maids. Stella was obediently keeping Theodore out of mischief;
and the other two girls were, with Bill Harewood, assisting a select
party in decorating the town hall with evergreens; and Clement, who had
to his dismay found a whole part made over to him by a young Bruce, who
had an inopportune cold, was practising hard at the old piano (which,
by-the-by, Lance had learned to tune); Mr. Flowerdew and the manager
were catching the doubtful and putting them through their performances;
and little Lightfoot was only preserved by his natural stolidity from
utter distraction among the hundred different ways he was ordered at
once. As for Lance, he tried to help every one, was too excited to keep
at anything, and was usually scolded off from whatever he attempted
till at last he shut himself up in the barrack with his violin, and
practised till he was so desperate at the sense of his failures,
that when Bill Harewood came in search of him, he was, as he mildly
expressed it, hesitating whether to hang himself like Dirk Hatteraick
on the beam.
'Well, come down, here's Miles as savage as a bear with a sore
head--vows that he was very near turning back again when he saw your
rose-coloured placard of the Zoraya at the station.'
'If he's sulky, that is a go!' exclaimed Lance, with a look of
consternation, utterly overpowering his stage fright. 'Do you remember
his putting us all out at the Deanery, because Miss Evans affronted
him?'
'Well do I remember it! He boxed my ears for it so that they sung for a
week!'
And the two ex-choristers went down, feeling much as when an anthem had
gone wrong. The room was pretty well filled with their old comrades,
but Lance only went from one to the other quietly shaking hands, and
quaking for the future as he heard the organist thundering away to
Wilmet and Cherry.
He hated singing women some degrees more than the rest of their sex,
and above all Italian singing women, who never appreciated Handel.
Cherry ventured to suggest that the lady was not Italian, but, if
anything, Hungarian.
'Madam,' he answered in Johnsonian wrath, 'she is cosmopolitan, that is
to say a half breed or quarter breed of everything, with neither home,
nation, nor faith!'
'Do you know anything against her?' gravely asked Wilmet, with a view
to the possible contingency of being desired to call upon her.
'I know enough in knowing her to be a second-rate prima donna. Faugh!
Now and then comes a first-rate one who can't help it, and is as meek
and simple as you might be; but when this sort of woman comes down as a
favour, I know what that means! Who is to pay the debt you'll have?'
'They come for their expenses.'
He held up his hands. 'I'd ten times rather she came at a hundred
guineas a night! Then you'd know what to be at! Whose doing is it?'
'My brother Edgar's.'
'Then I hope he is prepared to pay for it. That is, if she comes at
all. You'll have a telegram to say she has a cold, and who is to
announce it to an indignant audience?'
'I think you had better, Mr. Miles,' said Cherry daringly, 'for you
will congratulate them upon it.'
'Isn't his face a caution?' whispered Bill to Lance. 'He never got such
sauce before.'
'He likes it,' returned Lance, triumphantly rubbing his hands. 'Cherry
could come over Pluto himself!'
And in effect, the lively gracious tongue of the one sister, and the
calm beauty of the other, were producing a wonderful placability and
good-humour; the lads who were feeding by relays in the back room
ventured to talk and laugh above their breath, and the only fear was
of a relapse when Marilda's carriage, with Mr. and Mrs. Spooner in it,
called for Cherry, and the fascination had to be removed.
Lance was as much delighted to walk down with the choir, though he
sorely missed his cap and gown, as was Will to go, as he said, like
a gentleman, the only one except little Bernard available to escort
the ladies. Robin was quite content, as he took to himself all the
honour and glory of representing his brother, and giving an arm to
the belle of the room, as he persisted in declaring Wilmet, though to
well accustomed Bexley eyes, she was much more likely to appear as the
school teacher.
They were a merry little snug party, those four sisters behind, with
the three Harewoods; only Wilmet was rather scandalised by the titter
of Grace and Lucy in their delight at being relieved from Mr. Miles's
presence; and their excitement about Edgar, whom they viewed as the
most beautiful vision that had ever dawned on them. Vain were Wilmet's
endeavours to keep them in order by stern repressions of her own
comparatively unoffending sisters, who had little attention to spare
for nonsense, since Robina's whole soul was set on Lance's enjoying and
distinguishing himself, and Angela was in an absolutely painful state
of tension with expectation and anxiety for the star's appearance and
Mr. Miles's temper.
Presently, after long waiting, there was a look of sensation and
eagerness, and Felix, who had been detained to the last moment, came
edging himself through the lines of chairs, his whiskers in their best
curl, and his hair shining, to exchange a word with his outermost
sister, who chanced to be Robin.
'All right, if the train is not late. Edgar has telegraphed. Is Cherry
comfortable? I couldn't get away before. There's not a ticket left.'
Happy those that caught the whisper as Felix made his way up the lane,
and was admitted through the orchestra; but there was still delay
enough to allow some impatient stamping of feet to begin before the
revolution in the programme could be settled which was to give these
erratic meteors time to appear. Then at last came the overture, and
the concert took its course. There was no doubt that Mr. Miles was
accompanying in his best style; Angela was soon far too blissful for
personal anxieties; but it was a great comfort to the sisters to be
secure that all was right, when not only the three brothers--of whom
they had seen and heard their share in the sacred part--but Edgar came
forward. Any sisters might be proud of four such brothers--so bright,
so straight, so strong and fair; Edgar, with his fine robust figure and
silky beard, giving them altogether a distinguished look and character,
though Clement's head was a little the highest, and Lance's voice was
the sweetest and most remarkable in power and expression; but all were
in wonderful accord and harmony. Any other audience would have encored
the performance as something rare and exquisite; but the Underwood
brothers and their glees were rather stock pieces at Bexley, and people
wanted something new.
Lance's performance with the Miss Birkets was very correct, but not
of the style calculated to produce any very lively sentiments among
the uninitiated audience, who were on the tip-toe of expectation of
the lady whose arrival had been notified in whispers, and hardly fully
appreciating the best that either their own powers or the Minsterham
choir could produce. The first part went by without her; and in the
interval came hope in the shape of Lance, who made an incursion to
ask his sisters how they liked it, and to impart that the Zoraya was
safe come, but was supposed to be dressing. 'Mr. Miles said she would
be dressing till midnight, and would be less worth hearing then than
a decently trained choir-boy. But he's not sulky, after all; yet,'
added Lance, with a look of brightness in his face, 'fancy his telling
Fee that I played that remarkably well just now--truth and taste, he
said--the old villain--only that the ladies would spoil my time if I
didn't take care. And there's a sallow-faced fellow come down with
Mademoiselle, who said it wasn't bad either!'
No wonder Lance was exalted; and he required equal admiration for all
his favourites, until he had to hurry back again.
A little of what seemed to the excited commonplace--then came the event
of the evening. The glistening silken lady, with a flashing emerald
spray in her dark hair, lustrous eyes of a colour respecting which no
two persons in the room agreed, and a face of brilliant beauty, was
led bowing forward, and her notes, birdlike, fresh, and clear, rang
through the room, her brother accompanying her. It was a strong clear
voice, and the language and air being alike new, entranced every one;
the applause was vehement, the encoring almost passionate; but the
lady would not be encored, she gave them two songs alone, one with her
brother, accompanied this time by Lance's 'sallow-faced fellow;' and
though she smiled and curtsied graciously, was not to be induced to
repeat herself.
It seemed to Robina as if the lady herself and the whole public had
taken a great deal of trouble for a very brief matter; but she found it
was rank treason to say so, when at the conclusion of the whole, those
faithful brothers hurried down each to pick up a sister and bestow her
safely at home before repairing to the Fortinbras Arms for the great
supper to the Minsterham choir. The Bexley public had been favoured
beyond all desert or reason; the newness of the airs had been a perfect
revelation to Lance's ears, and he was very angry with Clement for
being disappointed, and repeating Mr. Miles's judgment that there was
lack both of science in the singing and of sweetness in the voice.
Altogether the evening had been a great success; every one was
delighted with every one else, and the supper was not the least
charming part, preceded as it was by Lance's bringing the little seven
years old choir boy, half asleep, ready to cry and quite worn out, and
putting him under Wilmet's care. He had half his night's rest out on
the sofa before he was picked up in the kindly arms of the big bass and
carried off to the mail train. Lance seemed much disposed to go with
them by mistake; indeed, he was only withheld from accompanying them to
the station by Felix reminding him rather sharply that someone must be
kept sitting up for him.
It was over, and the morning began with Felix standing straight up in
the office, master now rather than brother, and gravely saying, 'Now,
Lance, that this excitement is at an end, I shall expect attention and
punctuality, and shall excuse no more neglects. Take this invoice, and
overlook the unpacking of those goods.'
'Yes, sir.' Lance wriggled his shoulders feeling intensely weary of
such tasks; and as he stood, paper in hand, still he partly whistled,
partly hummed the Hungarian air, till the foreman came out of the
printing-house, saying, 'Mr. Lancelot, I should be much obliged if you
would desist. It distracts the young men.'
Of course Lance bothered the young men, but desisted whenever he
recollected it, and then inly bemoaned the having passed a light-house
of anticipation, and having before him only a dreary irksome twilight
waste.
Edgar had not been seen that morning, except to leave word that he
meant to breakfast with his friends at the Fortinbras Arms; but at
the dinner hour he looked into the office, and saying, 'You are at
liberty, Lance, I want you,' carried him off, Felix knew not why nor
where, and had no time to ask, even when Lance came back, and this was
not till past two, with the shop overflowing, and customers waiting
to be attended to. It was one of those times when gossipry was rife,
and the master had to stand talking, talking, while his assistants had
more than enough on their hands with the real purchasers, a division of
labour that usually came naturally, but to which Lance was evidently
not conforming himself as usual; and at last Felix heard him absolutely
denying that certain blotting-blocks ever had been, would, or could be
made, and had to turn hastily to the rescue and undertake that they
should be forthcoming by the next week. Also two orders proved to have
been left not entered, and therefore not attended to, and Felix was
thoroughly roused into vexation and anger. As soon as the last hurried
customers had come and gone, while Stubbs and Lightfoot were closing
the shutters, he again summoned Lance with, 'This will not do, Lance.
Your ignorance and laziness are not to be the limit of people's wants,
and I will not have my customers neglected. I have had patience with
you all through this business, and that good fellow Lamb has shown
forbearance that amazes me, but it must go on no longer. Things cannot
be done by halves. Either you must turn over a new leaf, and give your
mind to the business, or you must give it up, and look out for some
other employment.'
'You wish me to give it up?' mumbled Lance, in a voice that sounded
sullen.
'You are going the way to make me do so.'
'You don't want me? Very well.'
'Stay, Lance,' said Felix, whose reproofs had never before been
received by Lance in this manner, 'I wish you to understand. You
offered your services under a generous impulse last year, when I was
overdone and perplexed; but I doubted then if it were not a mistake.
You had come to be very valuable, more so than any mere hireling could
be, and I am very thankful to you; but if you are to be like what you
have been for a month past, you are doing some harm to the business and
a great deal to yourself; and you had better choose some line that you
can be hearty in.'
'Could you afford it, Felix?'
'I must afford it! Such work as yours has been of late is the most
expensive of all. Eh!' rather startled; 'have you anything in your
head?'
'I hardly know.'
A message came in at the moment, and by the time Felix had answered it,
Lance had vanished, rather to his vexation and uneasiness. He went up
to supper, the first family meeting where there had been time to talk
over the humours of the day before. Edgar was full of fun; and the
report Cherry had been writing for the Pursuivant was read aloud in the
family conclave, and freely canvassed, but Lance, though he put in a
word or two here and there, was much quieter than usual; and when all
the others moved back into the drawing-room, he touched Robina's arm,
and kept her with him in the dark room.
'What should you say, Bob, if I got out of it all?' was his first word.
'Out of it all!'
'Ay. Felix thinks me no loss, and I've got a chance.'
'Oh!' a long interrogative not well pleased sound it was, not answered
at once; and Robina added, 'Does Mr. Miles want an assistant?'
''Tisn't that sort. You saw the gentleman that came down with Edgar and
the Hungarians?'
'Yes, his name is Allen, he is manager of the National Minstrelsy,'
Edgar said.
'Just so. He has got a lease of a concert-room in town, and he would
give me five pounds a week to sing two nights a week through the
season!'
'Lance!' Robina could only stand breathless.
'I'll tell you all about it. You know Edgar came and called me just at
dinner-time.'
'I know, and Felix got no dinner at all except a sandwich that Wilmet
sent down.'
'Well, that was his own fault. However, there they were at the
Fortinbras Arms, in the best blue room, just come down to breakfast.'
'Who? The Hungarians?'
'Yes. Mr. Allen and M. Prebel were waiting for the lady, to ring and
have the hot things up. What a stunner she is, to be sure! the finest
woman I ever saw in my life, and such pretty ways when she can't find
an English word, I should think a queen must be just like her.'
'Yes, if she is waited for in that way. Did you get anything to eat,
then, Lance?'
'Didn't we, though? Why, they had asked us to breakfast; and such a
breakfast I never set eyes on--devilled kidneys, and pie with truffles
in it, and pine-apple jam--and wine! They asked for wines that Reid the
waiter had never heard of--nor, it is my belief, Mr. Jones either.'
'But is this all to come out of their expenses that are paid for them?'
'You're getting like W.W., I declare, Bobbie. I never thought of that;
but I'll go up to Reid, and find out the worth of my own share, and
wipe that out. Well, they were uncommonly kind and civil. Edgar's quite
at home with them, you know; talks French like a house on fire, or
German--I don't know which it was, but she made it sound as pretty as
could be, and I should soon pick it up. I had no notion what they were
at, but Edgar said she wanted to hear me sing that song of Sullivan's
again, and I could not help doing it; and then she smiled and bowed and
thanked, and Mr. Allen made remarks, about my wanting lightness and
style, said it came of singing too much cathedral music.'
'O Lance, wasn't that like the Little Master saying Montjoie St.
Denis?'
'Nonsense! He's no more like the Little Master than you are; Edgar says
he's as respectable as Old Time, and has got a little mouse of a wife
as good as gold. But he does want a high tenor to sing his English
ballads, and he'll give me this, with chances to sing at private
concerts, and opportunities of getting lessons on the violin. Think of
that, you solemn bird, you.'
'Where would you live?'
'With Edgar. Then I could make up the difference to Fee; and what I
could save, with Edgar's picture, will take us to Italy. And there I
could get finished up first-rate.'
'You've not settled it so?'
'Why, no. The first thing that struck me was that it was awfully cool
by Felix, to say all this without notice to him, and I told them as
much; but then they said they didn't want to inconvenience Felix, and
wouldn't want me till March.'
'Just as if you were his servant.'
'In that light, so I am.'
'You don't really think of doing it, Lance?'
'I don't mean one thing or the other yet, Robin! Here's Felix one side
telling us that he's very much obliged to me, but I am worse than no
use at all; and Edgar and this Allen on the other, saying that here's
the line that I am cut out for.'
'But Felix can only mean when you are gone mad after the concert.'
'And who is to help getting mad, when their life is all dulness and
botheration? Edgar told me it would be so--and now Felix himself
declares it was a mistake my ever working here.'
'Felix must have been terribly displeased, to say so.'
'I believe he was indeed! but I couldn't help it. How can one mind
foolscap and satin wove, and all the rest of it, when there are such
glorious things beyond?'
'O Lance, I never heard you say "couldn't help it" before!'
'Now, Robin, say in three words. Do you want me to be a mere
counter-jumper all my life?'
'O Lance--don't.'
'There, you see what you really feel about it. Now--without coming to
such a point as Sims Reeves, or Joachim, or--' (and Lance's face was
full of infinite possibility), 'I could with the most ordinary luck
get up high enough to have a handsome maintenance; and at any rate, I
should live with what is life to me--have time to study the science--be
a composer, maybe--and get into a society that is not all inferior. I
hate the isolation we live in here--not a real lady out of one's own
family to be friendly with one.'
'But I don't think ladies are so with musical people.'
'Maybe not, but they are a strong, cultivated, refined society of their
own, able to take care of themselves. What now, Robin, can't you speak?
What is it now?'
'I was only thinking of what you said last time Edgar asked you.'
'I hadn't seen London then, I knew nothing about it. The very Sundays
there are different things from what they are in this deadly lively
place.'
'That's as you make them. Besides, that makes no difference as to that
other thing you said.'
'What?' (A little crossly.)
'About the cathedral and the stage,' whispered Robina, hanging her head.
'One doesn't want all that one ever said when one was a high-flown ass
to be thrown in one's teeth,' said Lance, angrily.
'Oh!' but otherwise Robina held her tongue.
Presently Lance began again persuasively. 'You see this is only
training, after all, Bobbie; I may take to sacred music, oratorios or
anything else, when once I have got thoroughly taught; and I can only
do that by living on my own voice. I must lay by enough to take me to
Italy, and when I have learnt there, then I can turn to anything.'
'Do you think you ever would lay by?'
That was rather a cutting question, for Lance, though never in debt,
never could keep a sixpence in his pocket.
'I could if I had a real object.'
'Only I don't think it would wholly depend on yourself,' said sensible
Robina. 'I suppose they don't pay by the week; and then if the concern
should not answer?
'That's sheer impossibility. There isn't a safer man in London than
Allen. It is a much more profitable investment than old Pur.'
'Then if you lived with Edgar, you don't know how much you might have
to go shares for.'
Thereupon Lance broke out into absolute anger against Robina for her
unkindness to Edgar, talking much of the want of charity of people who
lived at home, and thought everything beyond their ken must be wicked.
She ventured to ask what Felix thought of it, and was told in return
that Felix was not only not his father, but though the best fellow in
the world, had no more knowledge of it than a child in petticoats. It
was for the good of Felix, and everyone else, that they should not all
hang about at home in the stodge and mire.
How long this might have gone on there is no saying, but Felix's voice
was heard calling to them in preparation for evening prayers. When
Robina heard Lance's voice rise in all its sweetness in the Evening
Hymn, her heart was so full of yearning pain and disappointment, that
she could hardly hold back her tears till she could kneel and hide her
face in her hands.
She had this comfort. She did not understand from Lance that he had
accepted, and he certainly did not join Edgar that night in the
kitchen, but, saying he was tired out, he went at once to bed.
On Saturday she had not one private moment with him, but on the other
hand, neither she hoped had Edgar; for the work both of the press and
of the shop happened to be unusually heavy, and neither he nor Felix
had a moment to spare; and Edgar spent the evening with some friends in
the town.
Sunday afternoon, the family hour for walks and talks, poured with
rain, and thereby was favourable to letters to Fulbert. Indeed,
Angela's commencement of some sacred music was stopped, by the general
voice entreating her to wait till the letters were finished. Lance, who
never wrote to anybody but Fulbert, had resumed the practice ever since
he had received an affectionate letter called forth by his illness, and
was now busy with his little blotty portfolio; while Robina, having no
Sunday correspondent, was half reading, half watching Stella explaining
pictures to Theodore.
Presently Lance stretched across, and silently put a sheet of
note-paper into her lap, hushing her by a sign. It had been begun in
his best hand, and it must be confessed that that hand was at present a
scratchy one, and there were various erasures.
DEAR SIR,
I have done my best to consider your kind and flattering
proposal, and have come to the conclusion that for the present
it will be better for me to continue where I am. There will
thus be no need to apply to my eldest brother.
With my respectful thanks,
Yours faithfully,
LANCELOT O. UNDERWOOD.
Robina made a little pantomime of clapping her hands, for which
Lance did not appear to thank her, but still in dumb show required
her judgment on the choice of several words. She mutely marked her
preference, and he returned to his place and copied it. Still he had
not addressed the letter. He put it into his pocket, with a significant
smile at his sister. Evening came, late service, supper; still it was
in his pocket till the moment of bed-time, and then it was that Robina
saw him linger with Edgar, and went to her room with a heart full of
trembling prayer.
'Edgar,' as his brother arrived in the kitchen, and prepared his pipe,
'how shall I address this?'
'Eh! you needn't be in too great a haste. We had better break it to
poor old Blunderbore first.'
'There's no breaking in the case. I'm not going.'
'Ah! I knew how it would be when you began running about to all the
womankind in the house.'
'I've not spoken to a soul but Bobbie,' said Lance rather hotly, as
Edgar laughed.
'Then one was enough to do your business?'
'I only spoke to her to clear my own mind.'
'Ay, to get someone to contemplate Hercules between Vice and Virtue;
but it won't do, my boy. Little Allen is as virtuous as Felix himself,
and the choice is simply between the thing you can do and the thing you
can't.'
'I can do my duty here,' said Lance bluntly.
'You've tried, my boy; you made a gallant effort, and I let you alone
while you had a head to be spared, but 'tis no good trying to force the
course of the stream, and you had better break loose, before you get
too old for the real thing that you are made for.'
'No, Edgar, I've thought it over, and found out how things stand. Here
will Felix begin now to have more on his hands, and can manage to shell
out less than ever while he had Froggy to fall back on. Now, not only
is my nominal salary much less than he could offer a stranger, but half
of it goes back into the housekeeping, while I'm done for at home,
and I don't see how he could meet the difference just now.'
'Whew! that's the blind way you all go on, putting the present before
the future. If Felix had a grain of spirit, he would revolt at preying
on your flesh and blood. Flesh and blood--why, its genius and spirit
crushed up in this hole!'
'It is no more than all of us have done by him, ever since he was of my
size.'
'But it is so short-sighted, Lance. You could make it up to him so
soon. Five pounds for certain the week--and possibilities, remember.
You'll lodge with me--that's nothing; and for the rest, you'll soon
live as we do--like the birds of the air.'
'I couldn't make it up to him, and save for Italy; besides I should be
earning nothing there.'
'But I should! Copying is a certain trade. Come now, Lance, you've
taken some panic. Tell me what is at the bottom of it! Have they been
warning you against us wicked Bohemians?'
'They? Nonsense!'
'She, then?'
'It is nothing at all that Robina said.'
'Come, make a clean breast. What lies at the bottom of this absurd
rejection of the best offer you'll ever have in your life?'
Edgar took the pipe out of his mouth, that the smoke might not obscure
his view of the young face whose brow was resting on an arm leant on
the mantel-piece, and the eyes far away. 'What's the bugbear? and I'll
clear it up.'
'No bugbear.'
'You don't trust me. Eh? Is that it? Have they told you I mean to prey
on your innocence?'
'No, indeed, Edgar!'
'Are you afraid of the great and wicked world? I thought you'd more
spirit than that; and I've always told you, you might run after as many
churches as you chose. I'd never hinder you. Come, have it out, Lance,
you think me a corrupter of your artless youth?'
'No!'
'Come, out with it. What has turned you?'
The answer came at last in his low clear voice, speaking more into the
fire than to Edgar, the eyes still fixed and far away--'"And here we
offer and present unto Thee ourselves, our souls and bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice."'
'What do you mean? what's that?' said Edgar, half startled, half angry.
'It comes after the Holy Communion,' said Lance, quite as much shocked
by the novelty with which the familiar sound struck on his brother's
ears.
'Oh! a pious utterance that only a tte exalte takes literally.'
'I should not join in it if I didn't mean it,' muttered Lance, in the
most brief matter-of-fact way.
'Then why aren't you living barefoot on bread and water in a hermitage?'
'Because that's not my duty. It would not be reasonable.'
'There's great force in that word,' began Edgar, with a little scoff in
his tone, but altering it into one of more earnestness. 'Now, Lance,
I want to understand your point of view. How does that formula hinder
you?'
'Because,' said Lance, much against his will, 'it wouldn't be making my
soul and body a reasonable sacrifice, to turn the training I had for
God's praise into singing love songs to get money and fame.'
'Why do you assume that beauty and delight of any sort is not just as
pleasing to God as your chants and anthems?'
'No. One is offered to Him, the other is mere entertainment.'
'So is the first to most folks. Now, you boy, honestly, do you mean
that it is not much of a muchness with sacred and profane, so far as
motive goes?'
'It is what I am always trying that it should be,' said Lance.
'Only trying?'
'Only trying.'
'And you consider yourself to be this sacrifice, this victim, by
singing in a surplice for ladies to whisper about, instead of getting
trained to interpret--nay, what I do say! maybe, compose--the grandest
human music. You've got it in you, my boy.'
'You may say what you please,' said Lance, turning away to the fire.
'I don't want to vex you, boy, I only want to make it out. I see the
sacrifice.'
'It was my own fault for saying a word about it to you,' muttered Lance.
'But I don't see the sense of it,' proceeded Edgar, 'or what it is but
your own fancy that puts the one thing up in the heights, the other
down in the depths.'
'You must know that,' said Lance, 'the fever and transport that comes
of one kind of music has nothing good in it.'
'That's the question.'
'I know it has not for me.'
'And has the other?'
'Of course it has! Besides, I don't do it for myself. Come, Edgar, tell
me how to direct that letter, and let me go.'
'You may leave it till I go to town.'
'That would not be fair. He will want to look out for someone else.
Tell me!'
'Not I! I'm not going to let you make a fool of yourself in a fit of
religious excitement.'
Lance smiled. 'Much excitement in a cold dark church in a wet morning,
with not twenty people there.'
'That's as you work yourself up. Here, sit down and take the other
pipe.'
'I can't; I can hardly stand yours, my head is raging!'
'Oh! that accounts for it! Go off to bed, and wake in week-day senses.'
'I wish you'd let me have done with it,' sighed Lance; but Edgar shook
his head with, 'All for your good, my dear fellow!'
'If Balak's messengers will stay the night, it is not my doing,' said
Lance to himself, as he wearily mounted the stairs to his sleepless bed
in the barrack; for though his headaches had become much less frequent
and disabling, still his constitution was so sensitive, that a course
of disturbed nights always followed any excitement; and thus the morrow
found him dull and confused enough to render his attempts at diligence
so far from successful, that he was more than once sharply called to
order; and Felix came in at dinner-time, exclaiming, 'I can't think
what's the matter with that boy. He seems as if he would never do any
good again!'
'Prcisment!' muttered Edgar. 'You had better give him up with a
good grace, as I told you before.'
And being at the moment alone in the room with Felix and Geraldine, he
not only detailed his plans for Lance, but eagerly counselled Felix
to invest at least half Thomas Underwood's legacy in the National
Minstrelsy.
'Really!' said Felix, in a tone of irony, 'this is nearly coming to the
old plan of setting up a family circus! Then it is this that has so
entirely unsettled him?'
'That the old must pass away is not sufficiently appreciated here.'
Then Edgar appealed to Cherry for the charms of artist society, and the
confutation of the delusions respecting it held by Philistines at home,
a conversation only interrupted by the arrival of dinner, and the rest
of the population.
Felix as usual had to go down after a few mouthfuls; Edgar followed him
to say on the stairs, 'I've one piece of advice to give. Remember that
you are an old Philistine giant, and act with due humility.'
'Is he set upon it?'
'I cannot say heart and soul, for heart and what he thinks soul are
pulling opposite ways. I say, Felix, you should take into consideration
the effect on me. I haven't sat still to listen to so much piety since
my father's time; it is a caution to see a little chap so simply
literal.'
Felix could wait no longer. He found Lance alone in the office, resting
his head on his desk. 'You'll be in time for dinner, Lance!'
'Thank you, I'd rather not. Send Stubbs home.'
'Head-ache?'
'Not much now!'
'I'm sorry I was sharp with you this morning, Lance. You should have
told me!'
'It was not worth while, but I did mean to have done better to-day,
Felix!'
'I believe you did. If you think it will set you to rights, I would let
you off this afternoon.'
'No, thank you; it is getting better.'
Felix looked at him a moment or two, then said, 'Edgar tells me he has
been talking to you.'
'Yes. I hope you have given him a settler, Felix.'
'Have you?'
'I tried, but he would not take it. He thought it was only Sunday.'
'Only Sunday!'
'That made me sure it would not do.'
'You are quite right, Lance. So far as it depends on me, I should have
done all in my power to keep you from what cannot but be a life of much
temptation, and I am thankful that you have decided it for yourself.
You are really content to stay here with me?'
'Content--well, not just now; but I shall be again when all the remains
of the bear-fight have subsided,' said Lance. 'I ought and I must, and
that's enough.'
With which words he ran out as some one was heard entering the shop;
and Felix stood for a few moments over the fire, musing on the brave
way in which his young brother had met the enticement, and on the
danger into which his own reproofs, however well-merited, had driven
him.
Lance's other occupation that evening did not make him better pleased
with Edgar's friends. Wilmet had decreed--and he had submitted half
ruefully, half-merrily--that what remained of his salary after his
contribution to the house expenses, should be guarded by her for his
wardrobe, only half-a-crown a week being put into his own hands; and
as this always managed to disappear without much to show for it, she
viewed it as quite enough for waste; and indeed, out of what was in her
keeping she had managed to provide him with a watch.
With his Monday half-crown, and sixpence besides, he repaired to the
Fortinbras Arms to pay for his share of the notable breakfast; but he
found some demur; Mr. Jones was aghast at his own bill, and really
unwilling to send it in. The private supper, the next day's breakfast,
and all that the party had called for, amounted to what would make a
terrible hole in the receipts of the concert.
As to Lance's paying the fifth part of the djener, the landlord
thought it was impossible, and though his three shillings might perhaps
represent the cost of what he had individually consumed, to offer or
accept that was not according to rules. Mr. Jones would gladly have
made this bill his subscription to the organ, if he could but have
afforded the loss; but this, as he told Lance, he could not do. He
listened, however, with a smile of some pity, when Lance assured him
that his own and his brother's shares should be made up; and Lance
picked out the charge, and carried it off to Edgar.
There again he met with no success. Edgar laughed at him, and told
him he did not know the privileges of the artiste; and when Lance
waxed hot, and declared that if the concert paid the expenses of the
two stars themselves, it was a wicked exaction to make it defray the
expenses of either Mr. Allen or their guests, he was answered coolly
that expensive articles must be taken on their own terms, and that
spoiling the Philistines was always fair.
'Then don't you mean to pay, Edgar?'
Edgar gave his foreign shrug, and made a gesture of incapability. He
was vexed with Lance, and at no pains to soften matters.
'Now,' said Lance, with a sort of grave simplicity, 'I understand what
living like birds of the air means.'
Lance went back to Mr. Jones, and told him that the two-fifths of the
breakfast should be paid. And in twelve weeks it was done, But by this
specimen it may be guessed that the new organ was not exactly purchased
by the concert.
CHAPTER XXIX.
BRYNHILD.
'Oft with anxious straining eyes
We watch the coming of some joy long hoped for;
And now 'tis near. But at its side a dark
And stealthy thing, that we should fly like death
Did we but see it, is advancing on us,
Yes, step by step with those of its bright compeer.'
King Henry II., a Drama.
(Quoted in Helps' Casimir Maremma.)
'Which is to have the precedence, Alda's child or ours?'
'Alda's child is not likely to be ready for inspection as early as
ours.'
'Oh! I thought you would vote it treason to babydom not to begin with
Lowndes Square.'
'My maternal feelings draw me the other way, you see.'
'You won't confess it to Wilmet!'
'It is of no use to go to Alda before twelve,' put in Marilda. 'Cherry
had better go to the Royal Academy before it gets full.'
It was May, and the catalogue of the Royal Academy bore--
No. 260.--Brynhild. . . . . . . . . . . .  T.E. Underwood.
and a good way further on, among the water-colours,
{The Lesson        }
No. 601.--Four studies, {Hearing a Story   }   Geraldine
{With the Kitten   }   Underwood.
{Listening to Music}
No. 615.--The Faithful Acolyte . . . Geraldine Underwood.
'But abruptly turning,
Hied he to the choir,
Touched the Altar tapers
With a flake of fire.'
(The Three Crowns.)
So, these having been accepted, Geraldine had come up to town to see
them in their place. The undertaking was far less formidable than it
had been a year ago, for Cherry was now much more at home with her
cousins.
She understood Marilda better now, and reproached herself for having
taken for worldliness what was really acquiescence rather than cause
any disturbance in the family such as could worry her father, of whose
state she had been aware all that last summer. Cherry respected her
now, though they had little in common. Marilda had become too much
acclimatized to London to like country life. She made some awkward
attempts at squiress duty, but was far more in her element in her
office, where she took on herself to attend to business so vigorously,
that no one would have known there had been any change but by the
initials. Felix had been of much use to her, and had certainly gained a
good deal in consideration by the manifest reliance placed on him; and
his position among the citizens of Bexley was now a fixed and settled
thing.
Mrs. Underwood, in the inertness of grief, did not move from Centry
until she was carried up to town by her strong desire to preside at
Lady Vanderkist's confinement. She was, however, disappointed, for Lady
Mary undertook the care of her daughter-in-law; but she made up for it
as well as she could by permitting all the assiduities from the good
lady that Alda would endure, and being herself extremely friendly and
good-natured.
The first proposal had been that Cherry should go up with them and
see the pictures on the private day, but the east wind and flying
threats of rheumatism had prevented this, till Marilda, running down to
inspect her works at Centry, carried her off, undertaking, with better
knowledge than before, that she should be well cared for.
So here was the carriage at the door, and Edgar come to escort her
to the realization of the almost incredible fact that she, as well
as himself, was an artist and exhibitor. She had heard favourable
opinions, but none the less did her heart palpitate with far more of
distress than of exultation as at a strange presumptuous unnatural
position--she, who, while striving to be satisfied with faithfully
doing her best, had so much wished for success as to make it a
continual prayer, that the works of their hands might be prospered upon
both, and to feel it an effort honestly to add the clause, 'If it be
thy will--if Thou see it good for us.'
She had not seen Edgar's picture, nor himself since the concert, and
there had been some breaths of rumour which took form in the saying
that the absence of the family from Kensington Palace Gardens had been
a sad thing for him.
However that might be, he was as much at his 'Chrie's' service as
ever, though with something of the forced manner she had known in him
at moments of crisis, and which betrayed much anxiety. He repeated
to her many times on the way that Brynhild had been unfairly dealt
with in the hanging, and related anecdotes of injustice suffered
by whoever did not belong to favoured cliques, all which made her
uneasy. Of hers he said little. She knew that water-colours at the
Royal Academy exhibition received little notice, but had obediently
followed some crotchet of Mr. Renville's which had taken her thither.
Trafalgar Square was then still the locality, and when the steps had
been surmounted, and they stood between the two doors leading to the
water-colours, it was straight on that they went, for the sight of
Brynhild was the triumph and delight that Geraldine had figured to
herself for months past.
It was, as she already knew, in the second room, rather below the
privileged line; and at this early hour, the numbers of visitors were
so scanty that she could see the cocoon shaped glow of yellow flame
across the room.
'Oh! there she is! She is smaller than I thought.'
'Just what Polly said. All ladies go in for 'igh hart on the Zam zummin
scale.'
She must have hurt his feelings, she saw, or he would not have compared
her criticism with Marilda's; and as she felt that he was watching her
countenance as he led her forward and lodged her opposite. From eager
expectation her look became constrained, as it shot through her that
this was not the Brynhild of the sketch and of her imagination. She was
disappointed!
'Well, what?' asked Edgar impatiently, reading the countenance in spite
of all endeavours.
'How like Marilda!'
'What, Brynhild, the toad! So she would be. I suppose the caricature
demoralized me, and the family features are the same.'
'And Sigurd is Ferdinand.'
'Nature created him for a model.'
It was not the likeness to Marilda which gave Cherry the sense of
unfulfilled expectation and dissatisfaction. The lofty expression, the
deep awe, the weird cloud-land grandeur that she had connected either
with the sketch or her memory of it, had passed away from the finished
oil-painting; and when she had called it small, it was not because it
was cabinet sized, but because it was wanting in the sense of majesty
that can be conveyed in a gem as well as in a colossus. What was to
have been a wild scene of terror in the world of mists would look
extravagant, and neither the pose of Brynhild's limbs nor the position
of Sigurd's sword, approved themselves to her eye as correct drawing.
Brother and sister were both far too acute, and too well used to read
each other's looks and tones, for fencing or disguise to be possible.
'You don't like it.'
'O Edgar!' much distressed, 'indeed there is a great deal very
beautiful, but somehow I had imagined it different.'
'Oh, if you came with a preconceived notion.'
'Perhaps that's it,' said Cherry, peeping through her eye-lashes, as
long ago at the great Achilles, and making them a sieve to divest the
image before her of all that her eye would condemn in spite of herself.
'I see a great deal of beauty, but somehow I thought the whole would
have been more finished,' she said.
'Not possible. A rude half developed myth is not in keeping with the
precision of a miniature. Besides, the finish of Sigurd's armour throws
back the vague beyond.'
Her feeling had been that the Pre-Raphaelitism of the hauberk was too
like worsted stockings, and not in keeping with the Turneresque whirl
of flame and smoke around the sleeping Valkyr; but the disloyalty of
not admiring Edgar's picture was impossible to her loving spirit; she
listened and looked through her eye-lashes, till though Brynhild's
limbs were to her unassisted sense almost as uncomfortable as those
of Achilles had been, he imparted a glamour, so that she thought she
beheld it as it ought to have been, and believed it to be so great and
deep a work of art that study alone could appreciate it.
'Yes, I see--I see it now--I could not before--but that is all the
better!'
The room was filling and they were jostled by a group diligently
working their way with their catalogue from No. 1 to No. 1200.
'What's that glaring red and yellow thing?'
'260, Brynhild. Who was she, Flo?'
'Don't you know, Mamma? That French queen who was torn to pieces by
wild horses.'
'I don't see any horses. She is all on fire.'
'I suppose she was burnt afterwards. And that's the king who did it.'
'What a horrid picture!'
'There's the intelligent public one works for,' said Edgar. 'Come and
try your luck.'
He paused, however, to show her the difference a foot's elevation
would have made to his painting; and she, with a mind more at leisure
from itself, waited not only to sympathize but to be fascinated with
the loveliness or power of more than one picture past which he would
have hurried her, with murmurs at the R.A. who had secured the best
situation.
Here they were in the water-colour room, obliged to wait, to penetrate
the throng round the lesser ones, which were so close together that
there was no distinct appropriation of the remarks.
'What a dear little thing!' 'Is it all the same child?' 'It can't be
portrait, she is so pretty.'
Edgar smiled at her, and she whispered, with great inconsistency, 'No,
it can't be that. Besides, childish prettiness always pleases more
people than anything high and ideal.'
She tried to turn to the Acolyte, and two or three gentlemen yielded
place to the lame girl. 'Geraldine Underwood,' said one, making her
start, till she saw he was reading from his catalogue. 'I don't
remember her name before.'
'No, and there's so much power as well as good drawing and expression,
that I should not have thought it a woman's work.'
This, the most ambitioned praise a woman can receive, made her indeed
Cherry-red, and Edgar's beaming glance of congratulation was most
delightful.
Certainly, whatever his faults, among them was neither jealousy nor
want of affectionateness; and Cherry's success gave him unqualified
pleasure, both agreeing in the belief that she was on a level with the
public taste, while he soared too high beyond it.
Her paintings had a strength of colouring unusual in inexperienced
artists, perhaps owing to the depth of hue she had grown accustomed to
when painting for her old woman, and thus they asserted themselves,
and were not killed by their neighbours, but rather, as Edgar said,
committed slaughter all round.
Yet 'The Acolyte' was on the whole a dark picture: the Church was in
a brown dim shade, within which, however, its perspective vaultings,
arches, and tracery, were perfectly drawn, knowing where they were
going and what they meant, yet not obtruded; and the Altar hangings,
richly patterned in olive green and brown gold, were kept back in
spite of all their detail, throwing out the 'flake of fire' and the
glitter reflected on the gold ornaments, which had been drawn with due
deference to Clement's minute information, while in the fragment of the
east window just seen above, glittered a few jewels of stained glass
touched by the rising sun, and to which the subdued colouring of the
rest gave wonderful glory; and the server himself was so tinted with
grey that even his white dress did not glare, while his face was the
face of Lance, as it had been a few years back, boyish and mirthful
through all its dutiful reverence. Of course it was not new to Edgar,
but he owned that he was always struck by it whenever he came that way;
and Cherry heaved a little sigh of parental pride and delight as she
owned that her little 'server' did look better than she had expected.
Then Edgar elbowed her to what was called at home her 'Constellation,'
where she had caught Stella's sweet little head four times over--in the
seriousness of lesson-learning, with eager parted smiling lips with
which she listened to a story, with her tender caressing expression
towards the kitten she was nursing, and with the rapt dreamy gaze that
her brother's music would bring over her countenance. All had the merit
of being caught--in the first sketch--entirely without consciousness
on Stella's part; and though she had been nailed to the positions
afterwards, it had been possible to preserve the unstudied expression
that was one great charm of the drawings, much more sketchy and
suggestive than was their companion.
It was not easy to maintain a stand before the frame that held the
four, for people must have told one another of it, and squeezed their
way to it; till the poor little artist, growing nervous at the press,
was grasping her brother tight to make him take her away. Just then
there was a kind eager greeting, 'Good morning; I am delighted to meet
you here. You must allow me to congratulate you.'
It was Mr. Grinstead, too considerate to utter a name that would
instantly have brought all eyes upon the little lame girl, whom the
gazers were almost sweeping away. He was full of that gracious fatherly
kindness that elderly men were prone to show her, and solicitously
asked where she was staying, and whether he might call upon her; and
then, taking advantage of an interval of people, he brought her again
in front of her pictures. With him on Lord Gerald's side of her,
and Edgar on the other, she felt safe enough to enter into his kind
critique, so discriminating as to gratify, improve, and stimulate her
far more than if it had been all compliment. By the time this was over,
Cherry could stand no longer, and it was time for her visit to her
sister, so the sculptor did Ferdinand's old part by taking care of her
while Edgar hunted up their cousin's brougham.
'O Edgar, aren't you coming?'
'Well! I can't say the Mynheer's mnage likes me better than I like
it.'
'Oh, Eddie, dear, do. How shall I ever get in among all those
dreadful strange servants?'
'What, the crack exhibitor, whose pictures transcend woman's genius,
afraid of a flunky or two!'
Nevertheless, he let her pull him into the carriage, laughing, and
demanding whether she could not have opposed coachman and footman to
their congeners; but he recollected the stair-case, and was all the
more amenable that in her he had the only perfectly willing auditor of
all his whys and wherefores of all Brynhild's characteristics, all his
hopes of purchasers and plans built upon her, and (now that Brynhild
was out of sight) the most profound believer in her beauties and
sublimities.
The arrival was impressive. The vista of liveries, flowers, and marble,
was so alarming, that Cherry could hardly have found courage to make
her way through them with no support but Lord Gerald's; but when she
entered the drawing-room the grandeur was instantly mitigated by the
plainly attired, gentle, motherly lady who came forward to greet her
with a kiss. 'So you are Geraldine, the only sister I have never seen.
Alda will be delighted.'
Lady Mary Murray must have been rather surprised by the sight of 'the
little deformed one,' with her sweet pensive face of sunshine and
shade, and the small slender form, as shapely as that of her sister,
though leaning a little forward when walking. So kind was she, that
Cherry felt that she could quite spare Edgar when he made his retreat,
and never observed that he was not pressed to stay to see Alda, who had
a dress-maker with her, and would send down when ready.
This gave Cherry time to become at home with Lady Mary, and to receive
some gratifying compliments upon her Constellation, united with a
little caution on the danger of making the little girl vain. 'I hope
not,' said Cherry much in earnest; 'indeed, I think Edgar and I are
mere terrors to all our pretty ones, we tease them so with sitting.'
'The little boy in a surplice is another brother, I think I heard.'
'Yes, my brother Lance. He is gone into the business now. He was in the
Cathedral choir at Minsterham.'
'Oh! I understood that it was a portrait of the one who was in the St.
Matthew's brotherhood, in his ornaments.'
'Oh no. That was Clement; and I am sure neither of them wore anything
like that! I made out the ornaments from a book.'
'I am glad to hear it,' said Lady Mary, a little less cordially; and
when Cherry, recollecting her views, proceeded to lead away by speaking
of Brynhild, it was to be met with a kind smile and avowal that Mr.
Underwood's picture was not so easy to understand.
Then came the summons to Lady Vanderkist's room. It seemed chiefly
addressed to her mother-in-law, who, however, extended it to Cherry,
and proffered a soft, comfortable, substantial arm to help her up the
stairs.
There sat Alda, beautiful to behold in white and bright blue ribbons,
thinner than formerly, but exquisitely and delicately pretty, and so
eager in her conference with her milliner, that she could only give
Geraldine a hasty kiss, and sign her to a seat, before appealing to
Lady Mary on some point of clashing taste respecting her court dress,
which was the present subject of engrossing interest to the younger
lady, while the elder evidently did not feel greatly at home or
interested in a subject which she said had not come before her since
the maiden days of Queen Victoria. Indeed, when Alda became excited
in maintaining her own opinion, she put an end to it with gentle but
irresistible authority, dismissed the milliner, and insisted upon the
repose that Alda was inclined to laugh to scorn.
After an exhibition of the little four weeks daughter, a pretty
creature, in whom mother as well as grandmother showed plenty of pride,
the two sisters were left to a tte  tte, Cherry feeling almost
hypocritical when Lady Mary supposed them to be so eager for it.
Rather languidly Alda inquired after everyone at home, chiefly after
Wilmet and Captain Harewood, where he was, and what chance there was of
his return. Then Cherry talked of the great home subject of interest,
namely that the organ was actually ordered; but Lady Vanderkist
attended little, and it was safer as well as more entertaining to let
her talk of herself; and she seemed to have had a very gay winter, to
have been recognized as the great lady of her neighbourhood as well as
bride and beauty, and to have had much sporting society at home and
abroad, while now she looked forward to a season among the circles
which had always been the object of her ambition. No wonder that the
cares and joys of Bexley occupied her but little, and that it was not
much to her whether Felix was to be a town-councillor. However, she
was now among people who considered it an honour to have a sister
exhibiting at the Academy, and she professed much eagerness to see
the Constellation. 'But what could have induced Edgar to send such a
picture?' she added; 'Adrian says it is the maddest thing he ever saw
in his life.'
'It takes some study,' said Cherry, subduing her indignation.
'I should think it had taken very little study.'
'You have not seen it?'
'No of course not yet. I shall go as soon as I can, it is so stupid
not to be able to talk of the Exhibition; but I don't look forward
to Edgar's picture at all, I hear the drawing and painting are so
disgraceful.'
'There is an apparent carelessness that enhances effect.'
'Standing up for Edgar as usual, Cherry! But if you still have any
influence with him, this is the time to use it. Adrian hears that he
has taken up with a lot of tremendous scamps. Indeed, he saw him on
the Derby day betting away with all his might. Now he cannot stand
that long, and Adrian says I must let him know that when he gets into
difficulties, he need not expect to fall back upon us.'
'The last thing he is likely to do,' said Cherry, burning with
suppressed wrath.
'Well, give him a warning, and tell him to be careful how he comes in
Adrian's way. It upsets me so when he comes in and asks where I think
he has met my precious brother.'
'I don't see,' cried Geraldine, breaking out, 'why a place should be
worse for one than for the other.'
Alda drew up her head with a little contempt, but instead of flying out
as when they were on an equality, she merely said, 'Don't you?'
Then Geraldine recollected herself, and tried to say meekly something
about the difference made by being able to afford it; but though Alda
was kinder than usual, and changed the subject, there was no more
real comfort throughout the visit, and she went home to be unhappy.
Here it was as hard as ever to behave properly to Alda. Her presence
seemed always to rouse the spitfire propensities, of which Cherry
would otherwise have been unconscious; and what was far worse was the
misgiving that she had only spoken too truly. Cherry's heart sank,
scold it as she would for sinking. Her will might adore Brynhild,
but her sense assured her of grievous carelessness in the execution;
and when she recalled Edgar himself, she knew there was something
indefinable about him that confirmed Alda's suspicions.
Her own success had been real and brilliant, but through it all her
heart ached with apprehension as she became more conscious of the
difference with which her doings and his were regarded, and could not
always succeed in attributing everything to personal politeness to
herself. She was staying on to take a few more studies, and to collect
materials for the illustrations of a serial tale, an order for which
Mr. Renville had procured her; and she found herself quite at home
at those pleasant little parties at his house, treated as one of the
confraternity who had won her standing, and with new comers begging to
be introduced. Mr. Grinstead was always there, and a real friend and
protector among strangers; and all was delightful except the reserve
about Brynhild, and the frequent absence of Edgar, who used once to be
always welcome, and like a son of the house.
Even at Lady Vanderkist's, Geraldine found herself a mild sort of lion,
when Alda came out into the world and found that her sister was viewed
as having done something remarkable.
Not that there was much intercourse. There was an invitation to the
christening, extended even to Edgar and the school girls; but Lady Mary
was more the mover in this than Alda herself. Edgar excused himself,
and it was not a very brilliant festivity. Indeed, one anxiety on
Geraldine's part was lest Lady Mary's engaging kindness should embolden
Angela to break out aloud in the wrath and indignation that stiffened
her neck and shone in her eyes at the bare dull christening on a
week-day--standing all alone--in an ugly 'pewy' church. A luncheon, at
which the health of Mary Alda Vanderkist was drunk, was the only honour
to the occasion; and Sir Adrian, though not actually uncivil, looked as
usual bored, and left the amiable and gracious to his wife and mother.
Mrs. Underwood was indignant, and abused him all the way home. All
Lady Mary's kindness had not hidden from her the fact that Alda was
ready to spurn aside the scaffolding by which she had mounted to her
present elevation, and was only withheld from so doing in consideration
of Marilda's wealth; while Marilda, with her unfailing good nature
and instinct of defence towards Alda, declared that all arose out
of anxiety lest Sir Adrian should be wearied with them, and bluntly
declared, 'You know, Mamma, we are very tiresome people; not like
Cherry here, who always has something to say.'
'Oh! Cherry is a genius, but without that people needn't be tiresome,
as you call it, to those that brought them up, and made them what they
are.'
'We didn't bring up Sir Adrian, Mamma.'
'I'm not talking of Sir Adrian. One expects nothing from a fine young
man about town; but, Alda, that was like my own child to me, never so
much as asking us to see her in her court dress!'
'She ought to have done that,' said Cherry, who had been reckoning the
quantity of pleasure that could have been so cheaply given.
'Now depend on it, Sir Adrian doesn't like his wife to make a show of
herself,' cried Marilda, hitting on a subtly delicate motive rather
than have no weapon of defence for this favourite cousin. Certainly
there never had been a fuller adoption as sister and brother than
hers had been of Alda and Edgar from the moment they had been given
to her. She respected and trusted Felix, and was free and kind with
Cherry and all the rest; but her affection for these two was quite a
different thing, and resolutely blind; and this--just as last year with
Wilmet--made her comfortable to Cherry, since she too ignored all that
could be against Edgar, and fought his battles fiercely when mother or
grandmother picked up reports of his idleness, of the ill success of
the National Minstrelsy, in which he was somehow concerned, and of the
unsatisfactory habits into which he was falling.
Very dull were the evenings when he did not come, and only worn through
by reading aloud. No doubt the house in its quiet widowed condition
was far less attractive than of old, and that the lively young man
should neglect it, even with his favourite sister there, was more to be
regretted than wondered at; but whenever he did come, he was greeted
with delight, petted and made much of, as if with the desire to secure
that presence, though it was not always as much of a sunbeam as of old.
One afternoon, however, he hurried in in a state of ecstasy. A wealthy
manufacturer, noted as a purchaser of modern pictures, was in treaty
for Brynhild; and Edgar looked on his fame and fortune as made.
Three days ago the taste of the cotton-spinner had been denounced as
dependant on fashion and notoriety. Now his discernment had gone up to
the skies, and Edgar was wandering about the room in his exultation,
talking to Cherry of a winter trip to Rome, and ready to promise
everything to everybody. Only the next day, however, came out the
principal art journal, containing the long expected mention of Brynhild.
Alas! No. 260 was disposed of in two lines as 'the flaming production
of a tyro in suspense between the Pre-Raphaelite and the Turneresque,
who in the meantime had better study the primary rules of drawing.'
Poor Geraldine! She shed a great many bitter tears over the cruel
verdict, while Marilda characterised it as wicked, ill-natured, and
spiteful; and when Edgar came to them they received him with tenderness
and sympathy that would have befitted his sentence in his own proper
person.
He was crushed as he had never been before. He did not abuse his
critic. Indeed, he had candour enough to tell Cherry that her editorial
experience might have taught her the need of shedding a little
life-blood now and then for the public to slake their thirst upon, but
this very charitableness almost proved it to be his life-blood.
The intended purchaser had not gone so far but that he could draw back,
and this breath of hostility had effectually blown him away. He had
broken off his treaty and declined Brynhild.
'I don't blame him,' dejectedly said Edgar; 'all the other critics
will yelp in suit, and he would be the laughing-stock of his fellow
cotton-lords; but he has done for me. The very sight of "Sold" upon my
picture would have saved me.'
'Shall you be worse off than before?' asked Marilda.
'Of course one is, for having been led to make engagements under a
deception. But there--never mind. Don't vex yourselves about me. I'm
the most miserable dog in the world, and that's all about it.'
'Dear Edgar,' said Cherry, smoothing his hand, 'maybe the opposition
paper will take up another line.'
'Not a hope, Cherry. That demolished me long ago, only they were all
too merciful to show it to you. This was my last chance.'
He lay back in a sort of collapse of complete depression.
Marilda, meanwhile, sat writing at her davenport, and presently
rising, came towards him with a closed envelope. 'There, Edgar,' she
said. 'Now put "Sold" on your picture.'
'Polly, Polly, you're a girl of gold!' cried Edgar, starting to his
feet. 'You've made a man of me. I must give you a kiss.'
To Cherry's amazement, a little to her horror, the kiss was given;
Marilda only bluntly and gruffly saying, 'There then, only take
warning, and don't be a fool again.'
'Your warning comes sweetened, my dear,' said Edgar, 'and it ought to
save me. I don't mind confessing that I was in a most awful fix. Well,
you have Brynhild, and we'll hang her over the drawing-room door for a
scare-crow, only don't let in any Sigurds who won't be as good as you
are to art out at elbows!--Good-bye, my Cherry ripe. I must betake me
to shaking off the toils of the hunter, now that this good mouse has
nibbled them through.'
Cherry had not spirit to rally him on his quiet assumption of the
lion's part. And her acceptance of his embrace was not warm. To
the delicate sense nurtured under Felix, the whole proceeding was
as painful as it was strange; and she was longing to have sold her
pictures so as to relieve him herself. True, she had many visions, but
she would much have preferred freeing her brother herself to seeing
Marilda make a purchase to which she was indifferent, palpably for the
sake of assisting him.
Maybe he saw the questioning look in her face, and therefore hurried
away so fast that Marilda broke out in regret at having failed to
secure him for an intended visit to Sydenham the next day, when part
of the day would be spent with friends and the rest in the Crystal
Palace. It was the sort of expedition Edgar hated, and Cherry's pride
rose enough against the notion of his being purchased to be dragged at
Marilda's chariot wheels to prevent her from seconding the proposal to
write and ask for his company.
She would have been glad enough of his arm through the long galleries.
The heartless glare and plaster showiness tired her to death; nor were
Mrs. Underwood's friends particularly restful.
When she came home late in the evening, she had hardly energy to open a
note that lay on the table; but when she had wearily unfolded it, she
screamed with amazement and delight. Mr. Renville wrote to tell her of
an offer for the Acolyte, and to propose to her to meet the intending
purchaser at his studio on the second day ensuing, at twelve o'clock,
to consult about an order for a companion water-colour, the subject
likewise taken from the Silver Store, the price of the two together
to be 150. Here opened the fulfilment of the longing of her heart,
the lightening of Felix's burthen! Her dreams were a strange maze of
beautiful forms to be drawn, and of benefits to be heaped on all the
world; and her first measure in the morning was to write a dispatch to
Edgar, begging him to come and support her at the interview, and almost
laying her gains at his feet.
All day she expected him to show himself, full of advice, joy, and
congratulation; but he came not. Her note must have missed him, she
supposed; and she had to experience the lack of sympathy, for Spooner
had come almost before breakfast was over, and Marilda had immediately
gone back with him into the City; and Mrs. Underwood was not sure
whether it were comifo to be elated about selling a picture, and had
no council to give between Cherry's sketches of the robin with the
wheat-ear, the monk and his olive tree, the blessing of the swallows,
or the widow Euphrasia and her straw.
When Marilda did come home, she was more glum than Cherry had ever seen
her. She would not even guess why Edgar made no answer, but advised
that no one should think about it. Man could not be always dancing
after woman. She was in no better humour in the morning, when Cherry
expressed her security that though he might have come home too late to
answer her note, he would not fail her at the appointment.
No such thing, he did not come for her; nor did she find him at the
studio, where Mr. Renville was however a perfectly kind and sufficient
protector, in the arrangements with the courteous and gracious old
nobleman who viewed it as a duty to encourage art, and intended the
pictures to adorn his daughter's drawing-room. The choice fell on
Cherry's favourite, the red-breast, and altogether the interview would
have filled her with transport if only Edgar had been there to share
it. She could not believe him to be so changed as to neglect her out
of mortification at the contrast between her success and his own; but
the bare idea poisoned the laudatory critique in the Times of her two
productions.
It was Mrs Kedge's birthday, when her family always dined with her at
her old-fashioned hour of five. When they set off, Cherry faltered
an entreaty that they might call and inquire for her brother at his
lodgings, but this was so curtly, almost harshly, negatived, that she
feared that she had unwittingly proposed something improper. Still
there remained the chance of his coming to the festival, where he was
certain of a welcome. It would be so like his good nature, that Cherry
never relinquished the hope through the hot stuffy dinner, when, after
the two elder ladies had sighed, shed a few natural tears, but wiped
them soon, over the absence of poor Mr. Underwood, they took to City
gossip, occasionally rallying the two young ladies on their silence
and abstraction; Mrs. Kedge contriving to joke at her grand-daughter's
supposed loss of her 'eart, and at Cherry for having made such a
conquest with her hart.
Just as dessert came in, and Geraldine was reflecting with a sort of
dreamy despair that it was the hour for driving in the park, there
came a thundering knock, and Cherry bounded on her chair, exclaiming,
'There's Edgar!' while Mrs. Kedge cried out, laughing, 'Just like him!
I knew he'd be in time for my preserved ginger. Ah! Mr. Hedgar, trust
to--What! isn't it him? Who is it, Mary?' handing the card to her.
'Mr. Travis!' Marilda and the maid exclaimed at the same time; and
the next moment he stood before the quartette, receiving a cordial
welcome from all; for though Mrs. Underwood might bridle a little,
she remembered that Alda was safely disposed of, and that he was now
an undoubted millionaire depending on no one's good-will. Geraldine
was flushed, and quivering between pleasure, shame, and the moment's
disappointment; and Marilda's broad face flashed for a moment with a
look of indescribable illumination and relief, then subsided into its
usual almost stolid calm.
For himself, he looked more like what he had been as Peter Brown's
clerk than the Life-guardsman, for he had outgrown the boyish display
of ornament, though he had never lost the fine military bearing that
so well became his figure; but he now had a grand black beard, which
made him more romantic-looking than ever. His countenance was as usual
grave, but not so depressed or languid as formerly, and indeed it
lighted into glad animation at the unexpected sight of Geraldine,
as he wrung her hand with the fervour of a brother. He sat down; but
except to drink Mrs. Kedge's health he accepted none of the eager
offers of hospitality, but said he was to dine with Mr. Brown at eight
o'clock. He had come home on business, and not being able to wind up
his uncle's affairs quickly, thought he should have to spend his time
between England and America for a good while to come; but he hoped to
run down and see Felix, 'and to hear about the organ.' Cherry had so
much to tell him about the building of it, and of Lance's delight in
the prospect, that she forgot her anxieties for the moment, till he
asked after the success of the concert, and she had to tell him of
Edgar and his stars. He looked at his watch, and said he should have
time to see after Edgar before dinner. 'Ah, do!' said Cherry; 'and find
out whether he got my note, I haven't seen him these four days!'
There was a break-up from the dining-room; and Ferdinand, smiling a
sort of apology to Mrs. Kedge, offered his arm to Cherry to take her up
to the drawing-room, where except on these great occasions no one ever
sat; Marilda managed to linger on the stairs, so as to intercept him on
his way down.
'Mr. Travis,' she said, 'you will do me a great favour, if you will
call on me at our office between ten and twelve to-morrow. Can you?'
'Certainly,' he replied, much surprised; but she flew up the stairs
before any more could be said.
She was at her counting-house in full time, sitting at the
library-table in the private room, just like her father, opening
letters and jotting on them the replies to be made by her clerks,
without often needing to take counsel with Spooner.
At ten o'clock a clerk brought up Mr. Travis, and he was soon seated
opposite to her, not quite so unprepared as on the previous day.
'Thank you for coming,' she said; 'I knew you were the only person whom
I could trust in for help.'
'I shall be very happy,' he began. 'Is it about Edgar Underwood?'
'Do you know anything?'
'Only that no one at his rooms seems to know where he is.'
'Ah!' (as if expecting this). 'Now, I know you would do anything for
Felix Underwood and the rest, and can keep silence. To speak would be
worse than anything.' He bent his head: and she went on, 'Read that.
No, you won't understand it;' then collecting herself, 'Poor Edgar! you
know what he is, and how he can't help running into debt. We gave him
his tastes, and it is our fault. This year he managed to do a picture,
an odd red and yellow looking thing, but very fine, with a lady fast
asleep in the middle of a fire. Well, he thought he had sold it, and
made sure of the price, when some spiteful newspaper abused it, and
the shabby man was off his bargain, and left the picture on his hands.
He was so frightfully downcast, and I had reason to think him so hard
up, that I thought I'd take the picture off his hands; and so I popped
a cheque for a hundred, done up in an envelope, into his hand, not
telling him what it was--more's the pity. We were out all the next
day, and he called and wanted to find out where we were gone, but the
footman is stupidity itself, and could not tell him. He came three
times; but we were racketting at that miserable Sydenham, and did not
get home till eleven. If he had only come in and waited! The next day
came Spooner to me in a terrible rage. Now, promise, Mr. Travis, that
this is never mentioned. On your honour!'
'On my honour. Never!'
'My cheque had been presented with the one hundred changed into four.
The clerk at the bank doubted it, and had come here, and Spooner came
to Kensington about it. I believe I went nearer to a lie than ever I
did before; I said it was all right, and stood to it so that they both
had to be pacified. You see,' as she saw how shocked Ferdinand was, 'he
was in great difficulties, and he only meant it for a trick which would
have been explained directly, if only I had not been so unfortunately
out of reach.'
'You don't mean that you would overlook it?'
'Well, it seems that I was altogether wrong about the value, as
pictures go. Of course I thought it rather too bad, and meant to give
him a piece of my mind and frighten him thoroughly; but ever since poor
Cherry has been pining, and wondering at his not coming; and yesterday
I got this--addressed here, no doubt that Cherry might not see it, but
marked private to keep Spooner's hands off.'
She thrust a sheet of paper into his hand.
DEAR MARILDA,
Had I seen you yesterday, I should not be in my present plight.
I rehearse continually in my own ears the assault I had in
readiness for you for your ignorance of the market price of
art. Brynhild may be worthless, but if she be worth a penny,
she is worth 250, which was what that gay deceiver was to
have given. I had liabilities which I had staved off; indeed,
my villain of a landlord only refrained from seizing my goods
and chattels on the promise of the cash instanter. Other debts
I durst not face. All that was left of your father's bequest
is gone in the smash of the National Minstrelsy. County
courts yawned on me, and only promptitude could save me. But
verily I would not have taken a sheep when a lamb would have
sufficed the first wolf, if one would have lent itself to
transformation into anything but a cool four. Your round hand
has been the ruin of me, Polly. It must have been the loop of
your e that undid me. Nevertheless, I had the odd 150 in my
pocket to hand over as your rightful change, (and maybe have
begged of you,) when thrice I failed in finding you; and as I
was coming this very morning--or was it yesterday? I'm all in
a maze--I saw Spooner dash by in a cab, and knew it was all up
with me!
Don't believe so badly of me as he has told you, dear old Poll.
I have put myself out of his reach that he may have the less
chance to break Felix's heart. For myself, I don't care a rap
what becomes of me; but if it be not too late, I implore you to
screen him and poor little Geraldine from the knowledge. Let
them think it a simple flight from creditors--true enough in
all conscience, as I fear they will soon find.
If it have got wind, I need not beg you to spare them and
let Lance know that I am thankful to the 'early piety' or
whatever it was that kept him out of the scrape. Some day all
shall be repaid; but until then you have seen and heard the
last of--your not ungrateful in heart, however ungrateful in
deed--the most miserable and unlucky of dogs,
T.E.U.
'Where was this posted?' asked Ferdinand.
'At Ostend. Here's the post-mark.'
'Has he sent back the 150?'
'Oh no; of course he must have that to go on with.'
'It would have been more like repentance if he had sent it.'
'No, no; he couldn't. He would have had nothing to live on. Besides, it
makes no real difference. Don't you turn against him, Mr. Travis, for I
have no one else to trust to. I can't tell Felix; for it might do him
serious harm in his business, and he might not consent to hush it up.
Then Clement is a formal prig; and Lance is a boy, and couldn't get
away. Nobody but you can do any good.'
'And what is it that you wish me to do?'
'I wanted your advice, first of all; I had no one I could venture to
talk to, lest he might think some dreadful thing his duty, and go and
tell!'
'There can be no palliating the criminality of the act,' said Ferdinand
gravely; 'but for the sake of the--the innocent--' (his lip quivered
at the word,) 'it may well be concealed, since you are so generous.
Vanderkist might make a cruel use of it.'
'And I think it would kill Cherry. What I wished was--since one can't
write with no address--if any one could go after him, and tell him
that not a soul knows. I do believe now, after this shock, he might be
sobered and make a new start; not here perhaps--'
'I'll go!' cried Ferdinand. 'I'll do my business with Brown, and start
by to-night's steamer. Do you know where he is likely to be?'
'His wish has always been for Italy, but it is hardly the season; and
my dread is of his going to Hesse Homburg, or Baden, or some of those
places, hoping to retrieve this money.'
'I'll look, I'll make every inquiry. I'll never rest till I have
found him!' said Ferdinand, with the earnestness of one delighted to
have found the means of rendering an important service to his dearest
friends.
'I felt sure that you could and would, from the moment I saw you,' said
Marilda, 'When your card came in, there seemed to open a way out of
this dreadful black misery.'
'Remember,' said Ferdinand, 'it would not be right to bring him home
at once on the former terms. You forgive him, and for the sake of his
family you do not expose him; but he ought not to be reinstated.'
'Not only for his family's sake--for his own!' cried Marilda. 'He is
just like my brother--it was only between brother and sister. But you
are right,' she added, as the man's grave look of severity recalled
her from her sisterly championship; 'it would only be running him into
danger again. He had much better go and study in Italy; and he can be
helped there, if he will only keep out of mischief.'
She then mentioned all the haunts of his she knew of in Belgium and
Germany; Geraldine might know more, but how was she to be told?
Marilda had a perfect terror of renewing the condition into which she
had last year been thrown, and besides feared her quickness of eye
might discover the secret. She hoped to keep her in ignorance till
Ferdinand could send home tidings, and make Edgar write what would be
some comfort after the suspense; but when the time that, at the lowest
computation, must elapse before anything could be heard was reckoned,
they both felt that it was cruelty to keep Cherry in her present state.
A week more would be enough to destroy her.
But Marilda, though a strong-minded woman enough ordinarily, shrunk
with dismay from telling her. Should Felix be written to? There was no
doubt that so soon as he heard the tidings from Cherry, or otherwise,
he would hurry up to investigate and to take her home; so that to ask
him to come and break it to her was hardly giving him unreasonable
trouble. Besides the secret might be safer, so managed. Thus, the
two generous spirits who sat in council first destroyed poor Edgar's
letter, lest it should ever serve as evidence against him; and then
Marilda wrote--
MY DEAR FELIX,
Geraldine will have told you that we have not seen Edgar for
some time. From a note received from him, I have reason to
believe that debts are the cause of his flight. Mr. Travis is
kind enough to follow and see what can be done; but I do not
know how to tell poor Cherry, and if you will come up I will
meet you at the station at 11.30.
Your affectionate cousin,
M.A. UNDERWOOD.
CHAPTER XXX.
THE SCULPTOR.
'Her heart, her life, her future,
Her genius, only meant
Another thing to give him,
And be therewith content.'
A. A. Proctor.
By the time Felix could obey Marilda's missive, and entered Cherry's
sitting-room, she had come to such a state of mind, that not even his
pale, fixed, mournful face was needed to make her lie back in her
chair, gazing piteously up at him, murmuring, 'O Felix, what can it be?
What has become of him?'
'Marilda has heard from him,' said Felix, kneeling down by her, and
holding her hands.
'Heard! Oh, why did she not tell me?'
'She feared to pain you. My poor Cherry, nothing has happened to
him; but his debts have come to a crisis, and he is gone off to the
Continent. That good fellow, Fernan, is gone after him, to see what can
be done for him.'
'And he wrote to Marilda?' asked Cherry, greatly bewildered.
'Yes; from Ostend.'
'He wrote to her! Did you see the letter?'
'No, she had made away with it. She was so shy and short about it,
that, Cherry, I suspect that distress had brought poor Edgar, as a last
resource, to try whether she would accept him.'
'Oh!' cried Cherry, starting forward with conviction, 'that would
account for it all!' And she told of all that had passed about
Brynhild, now ten days ago--Edgar's despair, Marilda's ready
assistance, and the manner of acknowledging it; and both agreed
that there was strong presumption that he had taken her kindness as
encouragement to venture on a proposal. This would fully account for
her silence and ill humour; and the delusion, perfectly unsuspected
by her, was the best possible auxiliary in guarding her secret, by
preventing the brother and sister from pushing her hard with inquiries,
and sufficiently explaining whatever was mysterious. Indeed, if Edgar
had had the face to make the proposal, there was some grace in the
shame that had caused his disappearance; and luckily for Marilda,
Cherry was far too modest and shame-faced to allude to her own
suspicions. She only longed exceedingly for home, and yet could not
bear to leave the readiest place for receiving intelligence.
Felix could not of course rest without doing his part towards
inquiring, and went off to Edgar's lodgings, and also in quest of the
National Minstrelsy people, whom Lance had assured him to be the most
likely to give him information. He came back depressed and jaded, and
went straight to his sister's room. She could see in a moment that he
had found out nothing.
'Nothing! The National Minstrelsy shut up a month ago. Allen and his
family had left their lodgings, and given no address. I tried the
post-office, but they grinned at me, and said many gentlemen came
inquiring. I went to two or three music-shops, and asked after him and
after the Hungarians, but with no better success; no one knew anything
about them. Then I found my way to his lodgings.'
'Ah! I wanted so much to have called there, but Marilda would not let
me.'
'As well you did not. Did you know that he had his rooms in
partnership?'
'No--never!'
'Nor heard him speak of a man--an artist, named Malone?'
'Yes. I have heard of him. He has got two pictures in the British
Institution. Poor Edgar wanted me to admire them, but I couldn't;
they are Scripture subjects--Ruth and Rachel--made coarse and vulgar
by being treated with vile reality--looking like Jewish women out of
fruit-shops. He always said Tony Malone was the best fellow in the
world, but he never told me he lived with him.'
'I was quite taken by surprise. The poor little miserable looking maid
said Mr. Underwood had not been there for ten days; and when I said
I was his brother and wanted to ask some questions, she fetched her
mistress, who said he had paid up just before he went away, but that
he had given no notice, so there was this ten days. Of course this was
reasonable; besides, I wanted to bring home his things; so she took
me up to his rooms while she went to make out his bill, and I thought
entirely that I had come wrong, for I found myself in such a den as
you can hardly conceive--light enough of course, but with the most
wonderful medley of things imaginable, and in the midst a table with
breakfast, and a brandy bottle; a great brawny sailor, half stripped,
lying on the floor, a model for Samson, or Hercules, or somebody; and
this man with a palette on his thumb, a tremendous red beard, and black
elf locks sticking out all manner of ways. And that was the place he
wanted to take Lance to!'
'He wouldn't have let it get bad if Lance had been with him. Besides,
you old bachelor, don't you know that an artist must live in a mess and
have models?'
'Of course, I know that, Cherry. I did not expect things to be what
your friend Renville makes them for his young ladies; but the odour of
spirits, the whole air and aspect of the place, had something that gave
me a sense of hopelessness and dissipation, when I found that those
really were Edgar's quarters, and that he had concealed his sharing
them with this Malone ever since he left Renville. The man behaved
very well to me, I will say that for him, as soon as we had made each
other out, and seemed very fond and rather proud of Tom, as he chose to
call Edgar; but he is a prodigious talker, and a rough coarse kind of
fellow, exactly what I couldn't have fancied Edgar putting up with.'
'I dare say it was out of good nature.'
'Half of it, no doubt; indeed, he gave me to understand as much. Edgar
can't but be kind wherever he goes; even that wretched little slavey
cried when I gave her a shilling for helping his things into a cab, and
she found he was never coming back! I should think he had spoken the
only kind words she had ever heard in her life.'
'But this man must have told you something! Had he no notion where he
is gone?'
'None at all! He knew thus much, that Edgar came into his room about
ten o'clock in the morning--he couldn't tell what day, but we made it
out it must have been on Thursday the 3rd--'
'The day after we went to Sydenham. Well!'
'--Looking pale and scared, and saying, "I'm done for, old fellow--I'm
off!" That is all he is clear of, for he was just waked and fast asleep
again directly.'
'At ten o'clock in the morning!'
'Well, Cherry, I'm afraid there had been a carouse the night before.
Edgar had sold his picture, you see, and had cleared off old scores--a
few of them, at least. He was restless--Malone said in and out--all the
day before; he could not make him out. I fancy he had sent his letter
to Marilda, and was awaiting a reply, which she must have sent, or he
have called for, early the next morning; and after holding off all
day from the jollification in honour of the sale of his picture, and
deputing Malone and his other friends to hold it without him, he joined
them at the theatre towards ten o'clock, and went to a cider cellar
with them afterwards, where I should gather that he was in a state of
reckless merriment, but quite sober--yes, Malone eagerly assured me of
that, as if that were a merit to be proud of in my father's son! Well,
poor fellow!' added Felix, his bitter tone changing to sorrow, 'he
seems only to have thrown himself down on his bed without undressing;
but Malone, who made no secret of having been "screwed" himself, only
knew of his looking in in the morning. He had driven up, it seems, in
a cab, which he kept waiting--not ten minutes, the landlady says--and
he carried off his violin case and about as many clothes, I should
imagine, as he could stuff into his portmanteau in the time--not by any
means all; but one thing at least you will be glad to hear of, Cherry,
the photograph of my father! Yes, I am quite certain of it; for when
Malone was helping me to collect the other little matters out of his
little hole of a bed-room, he said, when we came to the mantel-piece,
"Yes, that's the only thing he has taken--the photo that stood there;
a parson far gone in decline, the very moral of himself--your father,
wasn't it?"'
'At least that is a comfort! Poor Edgar, I am sure he will soon write,
even if Ferdinand misses him. You have brought his things?'
'Only his clothes, his sketches, and a book or two. His jewellery--he
used to have a good deal, I think.'
'Never so much as Fernan, but in better taste.'
'That was gone. I thought it right to take an inventory of what I took
away, and get it attested by the landlady and Malone; and I left it
with them, in case the creditors should think I had taken anything of
value.'
'The creditors, ah!'
'Yes. I have brought a carpet-bag stuffed choke full of bills, as heavy
as I could carry, though of course many are the same over again. Time
enough to look them over at home.'
'And paying?'
'No. I am not liable for them.'
'But, Felix, you cannot let his name be dishonoured!'
'My dear Cherry, that is talk out of books. I have no right to give
away what barely suffices for maintaining and educating the younger
ones, for the luxury of satisfying these claims and clearing Edgar's
name. It would be robbing the innocent for the sake of the guilty.'
'O Felix, how can you?'
'Guilty at least of extravagance and recklessness, Cherry, though in
a generous way. He had paid up, as I told you, for the lodging--all
for Malone as well as himself; and when the landlady brought up an
exorbitant bill, charging my country innocence three months in advance,
Malone fought her with such vehemence, that I never came in for such a
battle royal, and was ready to cut and run, only to be quit of the pair
of them; and after all she subsided, and was content and civil with
only a fortnight in advance!'
'I think a great deal must have been the fault of those musical people.
I know Edgar risked some of Mr. Underwood's money with them.'
'All, I believe, that he did not owe, or was not forced to pay
immediately, and that was a regular smash; but I do not think he was
liable for any of their debts. These looked to me more like personal
luxuries.'
'Well, Felix, if you will not pay them, I will, as I can, and when I
can.'
'Do not say I will not, Cherry, but ask yourself whether I ought
either to incur a debt myself, to trench on the capital of the
business, or take home the children from school. You know, for we have
tried, that stinting more than we do already becomes privation; such
as, though we elder ones might willingly endure it for our feelings'
sake, exacerbates the younger ones, and really would be unjust towards
them.'
Cherry hung her head, with tears in her eyes. 'And is that just to the
creditors?' she said.
'Well, Cherry, I cannot say I have much pity for the tradesmen who
trust such a young gentleman as Edgar. If it be their system, depend
upon it, they have means of compensation. Chrie, sweet, indeed I am
not hard-hearted, I would cut off my right hand to bring that dear
boy back a free man. When we hear from him--and I have looked over
those miserable bills--I may find some means of compounding with
the creditors; but I cannot despoil Angel and Bernard and Stella of
education or comfort for what he has done.'
'But I can--I will--I may,' cried Cherry, with excitement; 'I shall be
able to do it all; Mr. Renville said I might make 300 a year, and that
would soon do it! You will not hinder me, Felix?'
'No,' he said, kissing her; 'it's not the way in which your earnings
ought to go, my Cherry; but you are quite free, and it will make you
happier, I know.'
'And you will not let Marilda help?'
'No, not if it can be helped without wounding her too much. You see she
is taking her own measures through Travis.'
'I could not endure her doing it,' said Cherry, glowing with a sort of
pride. 'And I am the one who ought. My drawing would have been worth
just nothing at all but for him; and all this success is through him,
and it is so cruel he can't have it, when it signifies so much more.'
'So Sir Bors always thinks,' said Felix, fondling her; but true to his
own faith, he continued, 'But Edgar is not past the age for success
yet. Only three-and-twenty, remember, and this grievous lesson may
be just the making of him. We know he has a warm heart and plenty of
power; and though we must make up our minds not to see him for a good
while, he will come home from Italy some day a made man.'
'Oh yes, his sketch of Brynhild showed that he could do anything. Do
you know, I think that having such a companion as that Mr. Malone
almost accounts for his having gone wrong. If he can only fall in with
some real nice companions! If he would board at Munich with some family
like the dear Frau Renville's. What a letter we will write to cheer the
poor dear fellow up!'
Felix and Geraldine never failed one another in that cardinal article
of theirs, trust in Edgar's genius, and in the love that hoped all
things, believed all things, and endured all things from him--all
things personal, namely, for Felix never entirely overlooked the having
tried to tempt away Lance into the life of which one passing glimpse
was enough for his fastidious home-bred spirit, unable to appreciate
the fascination of freedom and unconventionality. Altogether they had
talked themselves into hope and consolation that surprised Marilda,
when, after waiting till her patience could endure no longer, she
knocked at the door, to ask whether Felix had discovered any clue by
which Edgar could be traced.
It was one of those requitals of generosity that are felt inadequate
because the generosity is really unsuspected. Felix and Cherry could
not be as unreserved with her as if they had felt her a sister and one
of themselves, and not as one whose bounty Edgar had abused. They did
not--nor was it in the nature of things that they could--understand
that Marilda's feelings towards him were as fraternal as their own,
nay, had the force of exclusiveness, and the tenderness of protection;
and so, though Felix replied to her inquiries, it was not with the
detail and confidence he had shown towards his sister; and the more she
questioned and remarked, the more they both felt inclined to shrink
into themselves. In fact, they knew so little worse of him than before,
that after the ten days' agony there was a sort of reaction, without
much visible weight on their spirits. Felix had business which made it
needful to stay another day; and as he was going out Cherry begged him
to take charge of a small box containing a cast which Mr. Grinstead had
lent her to copy, and she did not like to entrust to any chance hand.
'If you would send in your name,' she said, 'I think he would let
you see his studio, and I do so want you to see his figure of Mercy
knocking at the wicket-gate.'
'I thought he never did admit strangers.'
'Oh! Geraldine is favoured,' said Mrs. Underwood, with a laugh. 'Depend
upon it, anyone belonging to her will have the entray. But go, go by
all means. They say his house is a perfect little bijou.--Isn't it,
Geraldine? She went to a party there, you know, chaperoned by Mrs.
Renville, and met Lord de Vigny.'
Felix knew all about it, much better than did Mrs. Underwood--that
little select dinner of the lite of the world of art and genius,
to which Mr. Grinstead had asked Cherry about a fortnight ago, and
which she had described with such delight. He had not much heart for
strangers and works of art at that moment, but he could not refuse
Cherry's commission, nor vex her by omitting to ask to see the studio;
so there, in the course of the morning, he found himself, alone at
first among the statues and casts--grave and graceful creations--more
from the world of Christian than of classic poetry, and if less
sthetically beautiful, more solemn and more real.
He had gone in meaning only to fulfil his duty to Cherry, but he found
himself attracted and enchained, and was standing before Cherry's
favourite figure of Mercy, drinking in, as it were, the beseeching
wistful spirit of faint hope that breathed from the whole figure, when
a crimson curtain was lifted, and a gentleman of about five-and-forty
or fifty, but grey-haired and looking older, came with a soft tread
towards him.
'Mr. Underwood, I believe.'
Felix bowed.
'I am very glad to have the pleasure of making your acquaintance.'
'I am very much obliged for my admission. I should not have ventured,
but that my sister was so anxious that I should see what she enjoys so
much.'
Mr. Grinstead smiled, and quietly did the honours, while Felix--though,
of course, untrained--modestly showed himself full enough of taste and
intelligence to be worthy of an artist sister; Mr. Grinstead treating
him all along like an honoured guest, and taking him farther into his
private rooms, to see some favourite old German paintings, and to offer
luncheon.
The house did indeed deserve Mrs. Underwood's term, fitted up with
all that carved wood and well-chosen simple colour could do; and with
wondrous gems of art--all the refinement and beauty that a bachelor,
when he does choose, can bring together even better than a lady can.
'How long shall you be in town?' had been an early question, answered
by, 'I take my sister home to-morrow;' and then, when it had struck
Felix that his host was becoming increasingly thoughtful and absent,
and he was trying to take leave, but was always prevented, Mr.
Grinstead asked, 'Should I be likely to find your sister at home if I
called this afternoon?'
'Not early,' said Felix; 'I think she has some commissions to finish. I
am to meet her at five. I am afraid I must wish you good morning.'
'A few minutes longer. Mr. Underwood, I must begin by making you a
confession, and asking you a question. Do you think there is any chance
for me with that sweet little sister of yours?'
'With Geraldine!' Felix laid hold of the back of a chair, feeling as if
his senses almost reeled, though whether consternation or exultation
came uppermost, he could not have told.
'Yes,' was the reply. 'I am speaking abruptly, but I am taken by
surprise at finding that you intend so soon to take her away. Indeed, I
believe these are matters on which long consideration often ends in a
sudden plunge,' he added, smiling a little, as if he wondered a little
to find himself in a situation that seemed to reverse their ages;
indeed, Felix was by far the most embarrassed.
'I do not think she is at all prepared,' was all that occurred to him
to throw into the gulf of silence.
'Perhaps not,' said Mr. Grinstead, rather wistfully. 'I see you
think the notion a preposterous one,' he continued, with something
unconsciously of the elder's tone towards inexperienced youth, though
there was pleading in it too; and he put a chair in his visitor's way,
and speaking quietly though eagerly, as Felix tried to utter some
polite disclaimer: 'I see the disparity myself, though perhaps less
strongly than you do. Forty-six does not feel itself so vast an age
as five-and-twenty may think it. The truth is this. I was made a fool
of, as befalls most of us' (Felix looked more assenting than he knew,
poor fellow!), 'and was hit harder than some, I believe. At any rate,
the distaste it gave me was invincible, till I met with that wonderful
compound of brightness and tenderness--spirit and sensitiveness--I
cannot help it. She has haunted me ever since I first met her last
year; and if there be nothing in the way on her side, I believe I could
make her happy.'
'There is nothing in the way,' repeated Felix, as an honest man, but
with a sense of a jewel being dragged from him, and relieved to have
something to say that was not all consent. 'It is a very great honour
for our little Geraldine to be so thought of, but I think you should be
aware that she has nothing of her own, and--poor child--is sadly frail
and feeble in health.'
'For that,' said Mr. Grinstead, 'I think you may trust her to my care;'
and he spoke eagerly, as if longing to be taking care of her. 'And
though I am a self-made man, I have had prosperity enough to be able to
secure a comfortable provision for her.'
'Thank you--yes,' hastily said Felix. 'It was not that I was thinking
of.'
'I see you are against me,' said the sculptor, perhaps anticipating the
answer that actually came--'Selfishly, sir; only selfishly. Geraldine
is so much our life and light at home, that your--your proposal was a
shock to me; but I see the very great advantage it would be to her, and
I could not desire anything better for her.' There were tears in his
eyes, and the last words came with a choking utterance.
'I see,' said Mr. Grinstead, 'that I am doing a hard thing by you, and
that to hold out the idea of her becoming even more to you sounds like
mockery. Besides, I am too far from secure to begin to spare any pity
for you. Now tell me, can I see her this evening? Where are you to meet
her?'
'I am afraid I cannot propose your joining us then,' said Felix, more
cordially, 'for it is to be at the Baker Street Bazaar, about some very
domestic shopping; but I believe we shall come home between six and
seven o'clock.'
'Very well; you will find me there. You will use your own judgment as
to preparing her.'
Very domestic shopping indeed it was. The ancient coal-scuttle, a
Froggatt legacy, had three decided holes in it, and Wilmet had a vision
of one glimpsed in Baker Street. She would not trust either Felix or
Cherry to choose it separately, but conjointly she thought they might
counterbalance one another, and combine taste, discretion, and economy;
and they were both afraid of failing her.
The very contrast of that commission, and the importance ascribed to
it, with the ease and luxuriousness in Mr. Grinstead's house, served
to bring before Felix the sense of the promotion for Geraldine that he
was so ungratefully accepting. Little tender being, the first to wither
under the blight of penury, how could he grudge her the sunshine of
ease and wealth, cherishing care, prosperity, beauty, society--all that
was congenial to her? No, indeed--he rejoiced. Yet how rejoice--when
every time he came in from his work, he felt it a fresh blank when he
did not meet her responsive look of welcome, or hear the half-quaint,
half-pathetic tones that made much of the tiniest adventure of the day.
His heart was sore enough at Edgar's evasion, and to lose Cherry from
his hearth would quench its most cherished spark. He had been so secure
of her, too. She had seemed so set apart from marriage, so peculiarly
dependent on him, that it had been to her that he had turned with a
sort of certainty as his companion in the life of self-sacrifice that
he knew to lie before him. It was no small part of that sacrifice,
that as he went to and fro on foot and by omnibus in the busy streets,
he was schooling his spirit to look on the change not as desertion of
himself, but as a brilliant and happy prospect for the little sister,
who had powers and tastes such as ought not to be buried in the room
over the shop at Bexley. He must keep the regret well out of mind, or
he could never persuade her naturally, or avoid poisoning her happiness.
Should he prepare her? That must be left to chance. And chance was
not favourable, for when he had found his way into the pit at the
Baker Street Bazaar, appropriated to ornamental ironmongery, he
saw her accompanied by Robina and Angela, whom Mrs. Underwood had
good-naturedly sent for to spend her last afternoon with her. There
was a sort of pang when Cherry's face greeted him, and her hand
nestled into its accustomed hold on his arm just where it had leant
by preference these sixteen years; and as she said in her low playful
tones, 'Is it not a curious study to see invention expended on making
an intrinsically hideous thing beautiful by force of japan, gilding,
and painting? You see the only original design nature provided for a
coal-scuttle is the nautilus shell, and unluckily that is grotesquely
inappropriate! Just look at the row of ungainly things craning out
their chins like overdressed dwarfs. I am decidedly for the simplest
and least disguised, though Robin is for the snail, and Angel, I
believe, for that highly suitable Watteau scene. Which do you vote for?'
'The most likely to satisfy Wilmet,' said Felix absently, knowing he
should hate whichever it might be, and wondering who would ever again
put so much interest into common things.
'The scuttle of Mettie's dreams appears to be no more,' said Cherry;
'but as Robin always seems to me guided by her spirit, I am inclined to
think it safest to go by her judgment.'
'Robin represent Wilmet?' repeated Felix, scanning the plump, honest,
sensible face, as that of his destined housewife; and not a bad
prospect either practically, though without the charms that specially
endeared Cherry.
She thought him absent, feared he had heard some fresh ill tidings of
Edgar, and though reassured on that head, lost the zest she had caught
up, and the selection was pretty well left to Robina.
There was no opportunity of confidential talk; the children were with
them all the rest of the drive, and were to return with them to dinner;
and that Angela was much shocked and subdued by the tidings of Edgar's
flight did not conduce to privacy, since it silenced the tongue that
generally sheltered any conversation! Nor could Felix succeed in
hurrying his three ladies: they had a great deal still to do, and awe
of Wilmet made them very particular in the doing of it, so that it
was not till perilously near dinner-time that he brought them home,
and there, on a hurried excursion to the drawing-room to notify the
arrival, was Mr. Grinstead discovered. He had called, avowedly to wish
Miss Underwood good-bye; and the mistress of the house, with perhaps an
inkling of the state of affairs, had asked him to stay and dine. She
could not help it, as she said, in excuse to her daughter, who always
hated clever men, especially associated the sculptor with all the
misery of the day of Alda's rupture with Ferdinand, and also wanted to
have had Felix to herself this evening.
So she favoured the party with as little of her civility or
conversation as possible; not that it was much missed, for Cherry
was perfectly unsuspecting, and expanded into wit and animation as
usual; and Mr. Grinstead, to Felix's surprise, was not rendered either
silent or distrait by his suspense; and Felix himself had learnt
conversation as a mechanical art in his trade, and could do his part,
with cares and anxieties packed away.
After the ladies were gone, there only passed the words--
'Can I speak to her?'
'I will fetch her.'
'You have not prepared her?'
'I had not a moment.'
'Better so, perhaps.'
Felix led the way to her painting-room, having luckily delayed just
long enough not to encounter the two children fetching the purchases
for a great display. From this discussion, so dear to the female heart,
he snatched the unsuspicious Cherry, with the few brief words that Mr.
Grinstead wished to speak to her in her sitting room.
'An order! oh, it must be an order!' echoed among the sisters; and
as Angela skipped up after them to fetch some further article to be
shown off, there was no opportunity of even a hint except from Felix's
agitated face, and the unconsciously convulsive squeeze of the little
fingers between his arm and his side. He put her in a chair, and
hurried off, disregarding the 'O Felix, are you going?' but shutting
the door, and returning to the dining-room to keep a restless watch.
It lasted--what must have been a shorter time than he expected,
terribly long as it seemed. Mr. Grinstead came downstairs, and Felix's
heart bounded at the first footfall.
The kind, far-seeing, thoughtful face did not betray much. He held
out his hand. 'Thank you, Mr. Underwood,' he said; 'I hope I did not
distress her much. I have only one entreaty to make to you. If you
should find that there is any allowance to be made for the surprise and
shock, and newness of the idea, you will be a true friend, and not let
pride or delicacy prevent you from letting me know.'
'I will not,' said Felix, ready to promise anything to comfort a man
who had lost the Cherry he retained.
'It is nonsense, though,' added the sculptor; 'she is much too sincere
and transparent a creature to trifle with feelings. Those innocent
things are not to be won so late in life. Go up to her. She will want
you. What a rival you are! I will make my excuses to the ladies.'
Felix held out his hand, too sorry for him now to know what to say; and
after a strong grasp, they went their different ways.
Felix found Geraldine cowering down in her chair, with her hands
clasped together over her forehead. She looked up at him, as if
startled by his entrance. 'O Felix, how could you?' broke from her.
'My dear, I could not help it. Has it been so very distressing?'
'Oh!' with a great gasp, 'I'm sure to refuse a man is the most horrible
thing in the world--except to accept him! And such a man too--so great
and good and kind. You shouldn't have let him do it, Felix.'
'Don't scold me, Cherry; how was I to know you would not like it?'
'Felix! an old man like that!'
'Well, that's decisive,' said Felix, laughing at the tone; 'but,
indeed, I did think you admired him very much.'
'So I do--but not in that way--not so as to bear to see him lower
himself--and--and have to grieve him--' and the tears started from her
eyes. 'But you know, he only could have done it because he saw a poor
little lame thing and wanted to take care of her.'
'I think it goes a good deal deeper than that, Cherry.'
'I'm very sorry,' said Cherry. 'How very disagreeable it is that such
things will happen; I thought, at any rate, that I was safe from them;
and he was such an old man, and such a kind friend, that I was so proud
of; and now I have vexed him so--and it is all over.'
'Do you really regret it? are you sure you did not speak only in the
first surprise?'
'Felix! you! you to be against me!'
'Not against you, Chrie.'
She interrupted with a cry of pain. 'Oh! don't let anybody call me that
till Edgar comes home again!'
'My poor Cherry!'
Then there was a silence; her head was on his shoulder, and she was
crying silently, but so profusely that he could not tell whether her
tears were all for Edgar or for new feelings stirred in her heart.
'Cherry dear, don't you think we ought to look at it reasonably? If you
do not feel as if you cared for him--like a novel--yet still--'
'Hush, Felix! he is much too good to be accepted any other way.'
'I am not sure that he thinks so.'
'I do, then!' said Cherry, raising her head up indignantly. 'I should
be ashamed to marry any man without! A lame, sickly, fretful thing like
me ought to bring real love at least, to make up to a man for being
bothered with her. Come, Felix, have done talking sensible nonsense! I
know you don't wish it, so don't pretend.'
'I am making no pretence. It would be a dreadful business for me; but
all the more I think I ought to make you consider.'
'Consider! Oh! I'll consider fast enough; that beautiful drawing-room,
with the statues, and the conservatory--and a carriage--and going to
Italy! Do you think I am going to be bribed by things like that?'
'No; but to have one so fatherly, kind, and tender--'
'As if one wanted one's husband to be fatherly!'
'--And the safe position--'
'I declare you are talking just like Alda!'
'But if you don't like him, there's an end of it.'
'I like him, I tell you; but not so much as the tip of your little
finger!'
'Perhaps not, now; but--'
'Felix! You don't want to get rid of me? I know you were right to argue
with Wilmet, and persuade her, because she had let her heart go, and
only was afraid to acknowledge it; but mine isn't gone, and couldn't
go. If I had not learnt to work, and had not a work to do, I might try
to think of freeing you from a burthen; but now that I have, why should
I upset it all, and wrench myself away from you? When I lean against
you, I have got my home, and my rest, and all I want here. I never go
away from you but I feel that I do want you so; and when one feels
that, what's the use of looking out for somebody else?'
'Dear little Sweetheart! Yes!' as she lay contentedly against him, with
his arm round her; 'it only makes me tremble, that you should give up a
home like that, and risk so much upon my one life. The other boys love
you dearly, but they are more likely to make ties for themselves! and
if--'
'I should love you better dead than any other man alive!' cried
Cherry impetuously. 'I won't do it, Felix! so spare your dutiful
remonstrances! I do hate them so, and I know you don't mean them.'
'Mean is not the word, Cherry. The more I hated making them, the more I
felt bound to do so.'
'There, then! You've done.'
'Yes, I've done. My Cherry, my Cherry! you don't know how much lighter
the world seems to me than it did half an hour ago!'
'O you foolish old Giant! And there come those irrepressible children!
Oh! I hope and trust they have not found it out!' cried Cherry,
bounding up from her sentimental attitude, as Angela was heard
galloping up the stairs.
But there was this benefit in dealing with a veteran, that he knew how
to keep his own counsel and other people's. Angela came dashing in.
'Oh! here you both are! Mr. Grinstead said he had forgotten, after
all, to give you this letter. He said you had better write to the lady
herself. It is a capital order, he said--you've been settling about it,
haven't you? What are you going to do?'
'I don't quite know, Angel,' said Cherry, seeing the letter was
addressed in a strange hand to the sculptor; and thereupon venturing
to open it, and finding it contained a request to obtain from Miss
Underwood an engagement for a set of studies similar to those in the
exhibition, if it were true that these were not for sale. It was from a
lady of wealth and taste, whose name was well known as a patroness in
the artist world; and Cherry could quite understand that Mr. Grinstead
had kept it back, with the feeling that were she his, no toil should be
hers for the future.
That was little recommendation. Her first rise out of uselessness gave
her more exultation in its novelty than did even the exercise of her
art or the evidence of its success. There was something exquisite in
the sense of power. She had made up her mind to give Wilmet quarterly
the same amount as was charged for Lance, to set aside just enough
besides to clothe herself, and that the remainder of her earnings
should liquidate Edgar's debts; so that some day she should write to
him to come home a free and unburthened man. Viewed in this aspect,
that huge carpet-bag, stuffed to bursting with bills, had not so
frightful an aspect, but rather seemed to her a dragon to be conquered
for Edgar's sake; and Felix laughed at her for tendering him the cheque
for her Acolyte, and asking him just to pay off a few of them before
leaving town. He had to explain to her that equity and custom required
that no one should have the preference, and that she must wait till she
could either pay off the whole, or else make payments of so much in the
pound.
'Like a bankruptcy! That can't be worth while. Those are your business
ways!'
'I fear you little know what you have undertaken. Remember, there is no
call to pay any of it.'
'Indeed! Oh! why does not that tiresome Ferdinand write?'
'There has not been time.'
'He could have telegraphed!'
Marilda was likewise much disappointed at hearing nothing; but
discussion was trying to her, and she dreaded her cousins' sharp
eyes so much, that it was a relief to her to escape them. Nor could
they linger, for Wilmet was anxious about Lance, who was exceedingly
miserable; and in his anxiety hardly knew what he was about, scarcely
what he said.
If Wilmet wished him to feel what a narrow escape his had been, he
broke into despair that he had not been with Edgar. The room and
the room-mate that had seemed so disgusting to home-bred Felix, had
fascinated him by their charming disregard of wearisome propriety, and
their congenial eccentric liberty; and the picture of Edgar coming
home in his distress to his sleepy, half-conscious comrade made
him wretched. He treated regret like censure, and alarmed as much
as scandalised Wilmet by longings to have been there to share the
wanderings, which, even if they amounted to starvation, could not, he
averred, be 'half so hateful as standing behind a counter.'
Perhaps he had never before been so near showing temper as in
his arguments with Wilmet, and his determination to defend Edgar
through thick and thin; and she was almost relieved when after the
disappointment of finding that there was no news from Ferdinand, he
collapsed into one of his attacks of headache. Nay, for weeks, though
about again and at work, the lad was not well nor thoroughly himself;
he seemed, like Cherry, to be always watching for tidings that never
came, and unlike her, he made light of whatever could be construed into
censure of any taste of Edgar's.
Felix, though unwilling to pain him, thought it might be wholesome to
let him see for himself the facts of Edgar's life, and accepted his
assistance in sorting the bagful of revelations of self-indulgence and
dissipation, which he knew Lance's lips might defend, but never his
conscience.
Judging as well as they could by the dates and charges, there had
not been much amiss except carelessness of expenditure before Alice
Knevett's defection, eighteen months back; but this had been succeeded
by a launch into every sort of excitement, so increasingly painful
and disgraceful, that Felix declared at times that it was profanation
to let the proceeds of Geraldine's pure and high-minded art be spent
in discharging such obligations. There were traces of an endeavour to
pull up after Tom Underwood's legacy, which would have far more than
cleared Edgar, if he had been satisfied to do more than merely pay
'on account,' and stave off difficulties, until the main body of the
bequest had vanished between gambling and the crash of the National
Minstrelsy.
Meantime the weeks of Edgar's silence and absence were running on to
months, and nothing was known. Ferdinand Travis's quest had been an
utter failure. Baden, Homburg, Spa, Munich, Paris, Florence, Rome,
Monaco, had been searched in vain; ingenious advertisements in the
second column of the 'Times' were unnoticed; and though there was no
outward difference in the manner of the two who loved him best, each
bore about a heavy yearning heartache and foreboding--the one, that
there must be something, worse than was known, to lead so affectionate
a person thus utterly to efface himself; the other, that some terrible
unknown accident, lake-storm or glacier-crevasse, could alone account
for such pitiless disregard of home suspense. His relics had been
hidden away like those of the dead, with sad reverence; and his
name was never mentioned except now and then in low sad tones in a
tte--tte.
CHAPTER XXXI.
THE BARBE BLONDE.
'"And neither toil nor time could mar
Those features, so I saw the last
Of Waring." "You! O never star
Was lost here, but it rose afar.
Look east, where old new thousands are."'
Browning.
The first thing that really cheered Lance was an enforced holiday of
the organist, when he was asked to undertake the church music in the
interregnum. He threw himself into the work, consulted Dr. Miles,
who lent him books, and gave him lessons; and the whole current of
his thoughts became so soothed and changed, that Felix attended to
no remonstrance on the danger of unsettling him, but truly declared
that the few hours he weekly gave to scientific music was more than
compensated by his increased power of attention, and steadiness of
concentration on his business, as if he there found the balance needed
by his sensitive nature.
His head too, instead of aching more, as Wilmet had feared, suffered
less; but there was a change in him. He had experienced the bitterness
of sin, as nearly and as bitterly as was possible to one yet intact.
He had looked down an abyss, and been forced to recognise that had
he followed Edgar into what he had tried to believe merely exciting,
artistic, or free, he could hardly have been spared a flaw in his life.
It was when wrapt in the grandeurs of sacred harmony that this sense
dawned on him. It was most true of him that 'the joy of the Lord was
his strength.' Respectability had no power over him, he had a liking
for the disreputable; but his reverence and delight for the glory and
beauty of praise seemed, as it were, to force him into guarding his
purity of life and innocence of mind, which might otherwise have been
perilled by his geniality and love of enterprise. At any rate, after
the first shock to health and spirits had passed off, he retained
a more staid manner, entirely abstained from his former plentiful
admixture of slang, caught more of Felix's demeanour, and ceased from
those kinds of sayings and doings which used only not to give his
sisters an impression of recklessness because they knew he always did
rectify his balance in time.
Meantime another interest arose; for John Harewood had got his
promotion, and had obtained leave to come home and try for an
appointment. Wilmet had reason to believe him actually on his journey,
when one morning, early in October, Lance, who was waiting in the
office, was startled by Will's entrance, asking, 'Have you had a
telegram?' in a scarcely audible voice.
'No! What is it, Bill?' said Lance, dismayed at his countenance.
'That dear Jack!' and thrusting two telegraph papers into his hand,
Will threw himself down on the high desk, hiding his face, with
long-drawn gasps of anguished grief, to which he could only now venture
to give way; nor did Lance marvel, as he read--
Rameses, Egypt, October 3rd, 2.30 p.m.
Major Harewood to Rev. Christopher Harewood, the Bailey,
Minsterham, England.
Boiler explosion. Severe scald. No pain; probably will be none.
Dearest love to W.W. and all. Poor Frank Stone killed.
The other, which had arrived at the same time, was dated,
6 p.m.
Charles Chenu, Surgeon, to Christopher Harewood.
Injuries not necessarily mortal, unless from extent. Wanted,
good nurse, water-bed, linen, and all comforts.
'There's more hope in that!' said Lance.
'I have none! Don't you remember poor Tom the stoker?
'Twas just what they said of him,' said Will, raising his face for a
moment. 'And here they've sent me to tell Wilmet! I--O Lance, I just
cannot do it. 'Tis bad enough at home!' and he lay over the desk again,
almost convulsed with grief.
'I will go and tell Wilmet,' said Felix, who had come in unperceived by
him, and received the telegrams from Lance. 'She is at Miss Pearson's.
Is any one going to him, Will?'
'My poor father!' gasped William. 'I don't believe it is any good! But
I shall go with him, unless--He sent me on to see whether she--Wilmet
would go. You won't let her, Felix? I must go on to see whether I can
get a nurse at St. Faith's.'
'I believe Wilmet will wish to go,' said Felix.
'And be the best nurse,' added Lance.
'If there were any nursing to do,' said William, looking at them in
amaze. 'I haven't the least hope he can last till we can come out! But
my father will hope--that's the worst--and wants to have her rather
than me. Don't tell her so, though; I don't know what I am saying. Only
she should not be persuaded to go! Oh, that it should come to this!'
'I will leave him to you, poor fellow!' said Felix, beckoning Lance to
the door, as William again flung himself across the desk. 'I think she
will go, and that it will be better for her.'
He was interrupted by the arrival of a telegraph boy with a message to
him in his editorial capacity, which threw more light on the accident.
Telegram from Alexandria, October 4th, 7 a.m.
Serious explosion of locomotive engine at Rameses, on the
Suez and Alexandria line. Engineer and stoker killed. English
officer injured, without hope of recovery.
Felix gave it to his brother, and went on his melancholy way--seeing
Miss Pearson first in her parlour, and then sending for his sister.
Wilmet was just what those who knew her best expected. While there was
scope for action, she would never break down. She inferred at once
that the surgeon expected the comforts he sent for to be of use, and
dwelt upon Mr. Harewood's kindness in allowing her to accompany him.
As soon as she arrived at home, she scolded William, and made him
find sense and hope, which in truth he had only lost when, instead
of having to support and comfort his impulsive mother and sisters, he
could afford to give way himself. He could now give a coherent account
of his father's plans. Mr. Harewood was hastily arranging matters at
home, and would be on his way to Southampton by the last train. If
Wilmet would go with him, she was to meet him at the station--either
with or without a nurse, as she might judge needful. Her decision was
against the nurse. She reminded Will that his brother had with him a
Christian Hindoo servant, who had already proved an efficient attendant
in an attack of fever; and she herself had some experience of scalds,
through Felix's accident, and one that had befallen a servant of Miss
Pearson's. Expense, the prostrate despair of the family at home, and
his own college duties, had alike decided that if she went out, William
must remain in England; but he was despatched to St Faith's, where the
needful appliances were always kept, and could be made over in such an
emergency.
Meantime Wilmet, grave but steadily calm, made her preparations. She
devised means of providing a substitute at Miss Pearson's, bethought
herself of everything requisite; and when Geraldine pursued her,
trying to help, but panting and sobbing nervously, it was only to be
put down on a chair, and warned not to knock herself up. The keys were
made over to her, but without directions or injunctions; only one soft
whisper--'Dear Cherry! after all, you have made me able to do this.'
Felix would not be denied going to Southampton with her. Mr. Harewood
was looking out for her at the station, with the resolute mask of
indifference that both must assume for the journey. He took both her
hands, and said, 'Thank you, my dear; I knew I should see you.' And she
said, 'Thank you, for letting me come.' Then she took charge of his
plaid and umbrella, and it was plain that thenceforth she would be his
guardian daughter.
When Felix and William left the two on board the Havre boat, they knew
that the Wilmet of old was gone for ever. She must come back with a
great change upon her; but who could guess whether that change would be
for weal or woe?
On went Mr. Harewood and Wilmet by steamer and by rail, unable to
obtain intelligence, and maintaining absolute silence on the one
thought that filled their minds, each solicitously tender of the
other's comfort and fatigue, though both tacitly agreed that nothing
was so trying as a halt.
When they reached Marseilles, they found the P. and O. agency certain
that if Major Harewood were not living it would be known; and they
likewise learnt that Rameses was a sort of little French colony
around a station that the works for the Suez Canal were raising to an
importance it could hardly have enjoyed since it was a treasure city
of Pharaoh; and, while obliged to await their steamer, they obtained
counsel on the articles likely to be most needful for their patient,
and hence they telegraphed an announcement of their coming, and were
replied to by the Hindoo servant, Zadok Krishnu--'Not worse.'
At Alexandria they found themselves expected and welcomed. Interested
countenances and sympathising greetings were ready for the father
and supposed sister at both consulate and hotel; and from the name
of the engine-driver, Frank Stone, who had been killed, Mr. Harewood
perceived that John must have recognised in him a clever Minsterham
boy, and this accounted for his having joined him on his engine, where
indeed it was suspected that he had been trying to help him obviate
the dangers caused by Oriental indifference and fatalism. The injuries
were regarded as hopeless, from the great extent of surface; and there
was a kind preparatory intimation that all that could be hoped for was
to find life not extinct, for that opiates were required to such a
degree that there was no consciousness. M. Charles Chenu was a clever
young French doctor; and a deaconess from the Alexandrian branch from
Kaiserswerth was in attendance, as well as an Englishman who had been
in the train, and all the alleviation possible had been given.
That was all the comfort to be had while waiting for one of the few and
tardy trains, which at length set the travellers down at the strange
little town of European houses and Arab hovels in the midst of the
sand, distinguished by a boulevard and line of palm trees. At the
station stood a short brown-faced figure, in white turban and trousers,
and scarlet tassel, sash, and jacket, who with a salute half military,
half Oriental, inquired in good English for their luggage, and in reply
to their anxious questions, told them that the Sahib was lying in the
same state of unconsciousness produced by opiates.
The goods, so needful to the sufferer, were all identified, and
extracted at a great cost of patience, and the travellers were
escorted, amid incomprehensible Arab clamours, across a place
ankle-deep in sand, to a one-storied building of such unburnt bricks
as the Israelites might have made, covering a good deal of ground, and
combining the caravanserai and the French hotel. A Greek landlord and
his French wife came forth, and the one talking all languages, the
other only her mother tongue, but both warmly welcoming the arrivals,
and assuring them that le pauvre Monsieur had had every care lavished
on him--Dr. Chenu was there night and day.
A slender, moustached, brisk young man appeared, asking in French, in a
kindly tone, whether they--especially Mademoiselle--could be prepared
for so sad a sight as awaited them, but assuring them that the mere
fact of life having so long continued had begun to inspire him with a
sort of hope.
Mr. Harewood's French was not very available, but Wilmet made reply;
and they were admitted into a low empty room, with windows shaded
by screens of reed, through which came a dim light, showing a still
figure, covered with light linen rags steeped in oil and spirit, which
a little square figure in dark blue, with a neat net cap, was changing
and renewing as fast as they dried.
All the preparation could not prevent the father from being
overwhelmed, and having to turn away to grapple with the shock; but
Wilmet, who had all along sustained herself with the recollection of
John's reference to her awakening Lance from his deadly lethargy,
without pause or shyness bent down, kissed his forehead, and called
him by his name; and perhaps the full sense of his entire prostration
only broke upon her when there was not the slightest token that she
was heard, but the torpor continued unbroken by the faintest movement
of the half-closed eyes or lips. Even then she only looked up with a
piteous appealing glance to the doctor, who told her that the only
chances of consciousness were in the intervals between the passing off
of one anodyne and the administration of another, but that hitherto
these had been spent in a sort of delirium of anguish, that made the
renewal of the opiate immediately necessary.
Hope that at least the familiar voices might penetrate through the
cloud still buoyed the new-comers up; but when the moans, restlessness,
and half-utterances of dire suffering set in, the eyes opened to dim
glassiness, the ears seemed neither to hear nor understand, and there
was as much relief as disappointment when the slumberous potion had
again brought back the senselessness. Nothing could be done but to
moisten the lips and change the rags, and these seemed to dry up on
one part as fast as another was renewed. The face had indeed escaped,
and so had the back, and for the most part the right side, but the
neck, chest, both shoulders, and the whole length of the left side were
fearfully scalded, with white sodden-looking spaces, the most fatal
appearance of all, worse than even a deep laceration by a splinter
above the hip. Day and night Wilmet, the deaconess, and the Hindoo
were changing the rags, and fanning, or keeping off the flies; and
soon there was a great affection between Sister Hedwige and the young
Englishwoman, who shared the same desolate room close adjoining--or
rather, lay down there by turns. Wilmet spoke German enough to explain
that she was not the patient's sister, but his Verlobte, and that in
a matter-of-fact, dreamy kind of way, submitting passively to be kissed
and cried over by the puffy little elderly German.
Poor Mr. Harewood could give no active assistance, and was in a sad
state of isolation, unable to exchange a sentence with anybody except
Wilmet and Krishnu. He tried Latin and French with the doctor; but
the diversities of accent foiled him in both, and Wilmet had to be
interpreter. He was a great charge to her, but a far greater comfort.
There were his constant prayers, and the sight and example of his deep
resignation; there was the sense of protection and sympathy, the relief
and distraction of attending to him, and of gratitude for his care; and
besides, he wrote all the letters, for which Wilmet had neither time
nor heart. She could keep up while acting, instead of realizing, as the
expression of words must have forced her to do; while the struggle in
the father's mind, was only not to long unsubmissively for a conscious
interval at the last.
An English army surgeon, who came from Malta a day or two after their
arrival, thoroughly approved of M. Chenu's treatment, but agreed in his
verdict that any other expectation would be futile; recovery, though
not impossible where no vital part was injured, was most improbable
where nature had so large a surface to repair.
Yet the actual symptoms that would have been immediate doom did not
appear, but as one dim sad day rolled by after another, the parts
least hurt began to show a tendency to heal; and therewith sprang
up a conviction in Wilmet's mind that there was not always a total
insensibility to her presence or Mr. Harewood's, but that the face
changed at their voices, and that there was a preference for her hand;
and then Dr. Chenu began declaring that these English had 'complexions'
like rocks, and that if it were not 'the impossible,' there would be
hope; and instead of giving his anodynes with the reckless desire to
stifle pain, he become cautious, modified them, and only gave them when
decisively expedient.
There resulted a gradual clearing of the senses. There were lulls when
pain was comparatively in abeyance, and the faculties less and less
clouded, the eyes regained meaning, and smiles of greeting hovered on
the lips; a sense of repose in the presence of Wilmet and his father
was evident; an uneasy perception if either were absent; and at last an
exchange of words--conscious words. When his awakening was marked, not
by a groan of pain, but by the feeble inquiry, 'Where's Wilmet?' she
felt as if she had had her reward.
Once he asked 'Where's your brother?' and when she explained that none
of her brothers were with her, he seemed confused and dissatisfied; but
his voice died into an indistinct murmuring; and when twice again the
same inquiry recurred, she set it down to the semi-delirious delusions
that the narcotics sometimes occasioned. She knew that an English
gentleman had done much for him at first, and had only left him the day
before her arrival; and she had regretted being unable to discover who
he was from lips unused to British nomenclature, but had been too much
engrossed to think much about the matter. But there were now intervals
in which she fully had her John again, entirely sensible, anxious to
preserve his consciousness, so as to be desirous of putting off the
sedative as long as he could endure the attacks of suffering without
it. He could listen, and sometimes talk; and the next time he returned
to the puzzling question, 'When did your brother go?' there could be no
doubt that he was in full possession of his understanding; and Wilmet
answered, 'Dear John, I do not know what you are thinking of; Felix has
never been here at all.'
'I do not mean Felix; it was Edgar.'
'Edgar! You never have seen him, you know, dear,' said Wilmet, speaking
softly, as one persuaded that he was recalling a delusion.
'I know that I never saw him at home; but he was in the train. He was
the first to come to me; he said he would telegraph. Surely he did so?'
'That accounts for the correctness of the telegram!' said Mr. Harewood.
'I remember now that the wording was so well put, that it gave me hope
that you must be quite yourself.'
'What was it?'
They could well tell him, for it had seemed branded in fire on their
minds for days.
'Yes, that was his doing. I think I only called you her,' he said,
smiling. 'I could trust to his knowing my her of hers.'
'But how did you know one another? Was it in the train?'
'No. Poor Frank Stone recognised me at Suez, and begged me to come with
him on the engine. I remember his consulting me about representing the
impracticability of some of his subordinates; and next after that I was
somewhere on the stones, unable to stir hand or foot--not in pain, but
a numbness and faintness all over me, with every sense preternaturally
clear, as if I were all spirit. I made no doubt I was dying fast;
and when some one came to see after me, I begged him to take down my
telegram to my father while I could give it. I remember his start and
cry when I gave my name. "Good Heavens!" he said. "You are not Jack?
Wilmet's Jack?" and really, I hardly knew; my voice seemed to come from
somewhere else; but I saw the face over me that belongs to you all.'
'And did you speak to him? But no, you were in no state for that.'
'I gave what messages I could think or speak; but the numb faintness
grew on me, and seemed to gather up all my senses. I did not seem able
to care about anything when I felt myself in his hands.'
'Edgar!' repeated Wilmet, still slow to believe. 'Did you call him by
his name?'
'I cannot tell; I think I did. I know I no more doubted of its being
he than I do that you are Wilmet. Ah! I remember struggling between
a sense that I ought, and the growing disinclination to speak, and
wanting to tell him to go home, for you were all very unhappy about
him. Did I get it out? Did he answer? I cannot tell! No, dearest, I
know no more, nor why he is not here. Zadok must know; where is he?'
The Hindoo was summoned, and it was elicited that the English gentleman
had watched over the Sahib day and night, sent the telegrams, called
in the doctor from Malta, and had acted as if the patient had been
his brother, only going away by the last train before the arrival of
Mr. Harewood, and then leaving with him a packet only to be given up
in case the Major should die without recovering the power of speech.
It was claimed, and proved to contain a record of all that poor John
had endeavoured to say, but written in a disguised hand, though merely
in the spelling of the names betraying that the scribe had been no
stranger. It was plain that he had so entirely thought Major Harewood
a dying man, as to have made no attempt at concealing his own identity
from him, but he had kept it carefully guarded from every one else; and
Wilmet's heart smote her as she questioned, 'Would he have fled if it
had been Felix or Cherry who had been coming?'
Questions were asked, and both M. Chenu and Madame Spiridione testified
that the gentleman who had attended on Major Harewood had been un
jeune homme extrmement beau--grand et blond, but they had no guess as
to his name, and merely knew that he had gone away towards Alexandria.
Both there and at Cairo did Mr. Harewood write to make inquiries, but
always in vain; and the trains were so few and so slow, that he could
not go himself without a longer absence than seemed fitting to propose
in his son's precarious state, when the very efforts that nature was
making towards restoration might so easily result in fever, or in fatal
changes in the wounds.
The sight of him seemed to be only less precious to John than that of
Wilmet. When in comparative ease, it was almost a basking in their
presence. After his long years of foreign service, no one could guess,
he said, the delight it was to look at them; and when he meditated
on the journey they had taken for his sake, he would break out in
wondering gratitude, not to be checked by Wilmet's simplicity of
protest, 'Of course she had come; she could not help it.'
The pleasure and comfort she gave him were really serving to bear him
through. Not only was her touch unusually light, firm, dextrous, and
soft, but pain from her hand was not like that given by any one else,
when each dressing was tortured; and when his nerves were strung to
an acute misery of sensitiveness, her look and touch, her voice and
gesture alone were endurable. His first powers of being entertained
were shown when she talked, or sang, not indeed as her brothers could
sing, but in a low, sweet, and correct voice, that had an infinite
charm of soothing that weary sickness. He might strive not to be
exacting; but his face showed in spite of himself that when she quitted
the room the light of his life went with her, and there was nothing
left him but tedium, helplessness, and sore suffering.
She only did leave him for sleep, which she could usually time while he
was lulled by the anodyne, and for hurried meals at the table d'hte,
which collected almost every European in the place. Mr. Harewood
likewise made a great point of taking her out every evening for a sandy
walk on the boulevard under the palm trees, as a preservative of her
health, much to the perplexity of the observers. She saw no necessity
for leaving John, to plough her way in the hot sand; but it relieved
the Librarian's mind, and was besides their opportunity for discussing
questions not intended for their patient's ear.
Here it was that Mr. Harewood communicated his difficulty. He had
exchanged one course at the cathedral, but could not arrange for the
next, and it was imperative that he should be at home by the end of the
second week in the New Year. John, though they dared now to call him
better, was still immovable, and what could be done? 'Shall I,' said
the Librarian, 'telegraph to William to bring out Lucy or Grace?'
'Would that be of any use?' said Wilmet, thinking only of their
scatter-brained recklessness in Lance's case.
'They have not your faculties of nursing, my dear; but you see, I don't
perceive how otherwise to contrive for your remaining.'
'Mine! I must stay!' exclaimed Wilmet, her little proprieties most
entirely vanished into oblivion.
'I knew you would say so. Indeed, I still think nothing else gives a
hope of pulling my poor boy through; but in that case, you see, my
dear, one of the girls--or their mother--'
'She would be very uncomfortable, and all for nothing,' said Wilmet;
'and William would lose his term. You know,' and only then the colour
flew into her cheeks, 'I could do very well alone if you were only to
marry us.'
With such simplicity and straightforwardness was it said, that the
Librarian had replied, 'The very best plan,' before the strangeness
struck him, and he began to falter, 'You have--John has settled it?'
'No,' said Wilmet, crimson, but grave, steady, and earnest, 'it was
only this that made me think of it; but if it can be managed without
hurting him, it seems to me the most feasible way.'
This form of speech of course only proceeded from unfathomable depths
of affection and reserve, and it was understood.
'Dear child,' said Mr. Harewood, 'this is the truest kindness of all. I
will not thank you. You and I are too much one with him for that; but I
wish his mother could have known what he has won.'
Soft silent tears were dropping fast under Wilmet's broad hat.
Maidenliness would have that revenge; and she could not speak.
The question of broaching the subject to John overwhelmed her
with embarrassment and shamefastness, at the thought of her own
extraordinary proceeding. Perhaps an impulse might have led her into
proposing it to him, as she had done to his father, but the bare idea
of so doing filled her with shame and dismay; and Mr. Harewood, a
ceremonious and punctilious gentleman of the old school, thought it
incumbent on him to lead his son to make the proposition, so that it
might come at least in appearance from the right quarter.
He had to watch his opportunity, for John was by no means always
fit for conversation, and when he was, was not willing to dispense
with Wilmet's presence; and it was necessary at last to come to, 'I
want to speak to you before she comes back;' and then, having calmed
the restless eye that watched for her, the Librarian explained the
necessities that called him home: and these were fully appreciated by
the Major, who owned that it had been much to have had him for these
six weeks, but therewith came a look of alarm, and the exclamation,
'Oh, but how about her?'
'She does not think of leaving you. We must consider how to arrange for
her.'
'Has not Clement finished his terms? Could not he be franked out?'
'Is there not a simpler way? John, nothing would make me so happy as to
leave that dear girl your wife.'
'But you go before the New Year. Father, it is not to be thought of,'
he said, with a nervous movement of his right hand, which he could now
partially use.
'There is no reason that I should not marry you as you lie there. She
would consent.'
'Dearest! she would consent to anything she thought good for me, but
the more reason that it cannot be thought of. Look at the wreck I am,
and the glorious creature she is.'
'She would not accept that objection.'
'The more need that I should. Even if this place in my side do not,
as I expect from day to day, gangrene and make an end of it at once,
it can hardly be expected that there will not be some contraction or
distortion to make an object of me.'
'Does Chenu tell you this?' asked his father, who had never had the
chances so plainly set before him.
'No. Chenu does as well as any one can; but he has not the gift of
foresight, and there is no use in taxing his French complaisance by
asking questions that no one can answer,' he answered, with quiet calm
and patience that almost overcame his father.
'I did not think you were so despondent,' he said.
'I do not think I am despondent,' was the reply; 'I feel as if I had
only to lie here and wait my orders from above. I suppose weakness and
sedatives blunt the feelings, for I do not regret all that might have
been, as I should have thought I should--nay, as I did, in one night of
fever in India. I can only feel thankfulness for intervals like this,
and the blessing of having you both with me again. Father, I would not
have spoken out, but that I thought you knew it better than I.'
'So I do--so I ought, my dear boy; but I cannot cease to hope that
your having been so far given back to us is an earnest that God will
entirely restore you.'
'That may be yet, but in the uncertainty, it hardly seems right to take
advantage of my darling's devotion to bring on her so terrible a blight
in her youth and loveliness. Sending her home a widow, Father!'
'Poor child! There would be little difference in her grief; and you
should take into consideration that even so, you would leave her freed
from the necessity of working at that school.'
'I could do that, without injustice to Will and the girls; and there
would be a pension besides,' said John thoughtfully; and his father
ventured to add--
'Indeed, I think if your recovery were as partial as you would have me
apprehend, it would still only be a matter of time.'
'She would have her eyes open,' said John; but he thought long before
he spoke again. 'I cannot trust myself to think of it! It is so great
a temptation! My Wilmet! my darling! to waste her strong young life on
me!'
Mr. Harewood said no more. He had experience enough to believe such
things worked themselves out without interposition; and he would have
regarded it as compromising Wilmet's dignity and confidence alike to
mention her words. He left the room when she returned, but nothing
resulted. John was restless and uncomfortable; and Wilmet, thinking
he had heard all, and deemed her forward, was unhappy, and would have
become shy, if his perturbation had not brought on feverishness; and
that as usual inflamed the hurts into such acute pain, that the doctor
gave a stronger opiate than had been needed of late, but which at first
only produced distress, moaning, and wandering. They were more anxious
about him that night and all the next day, than they had been for
more than a week; and only towards the second morning did he become
tranquil enough to fall into slumber, which lasted so late into the
following day, that Wilmet, after being up all night, was persuaded to
lie down during the noonday heat, when she had seen his sleep become
more natural, and the distressful expression relax on his countenance.
She lay on her bed in a kind of waking doze, sad, anxious, and vexed
at what she thought the consequence of the proposal into which she had
been betrayed, feeling desolate, and dreading as much as she desired a
summons to return.
Sister Hedwige did not call her till she had had more refreshing sleep
than perhaps she was aware of; and then, when she came softly into the
room, his eyes shone wistfully into hers, and she knelt down by him to
stroke back that stiff sandy hair of his, and cool his brow with her
freshly-washed hand. He lifted his as far as he could, inviting her to
clasp it; his eyes again looked into hers, and a smile came out upon
his face. 'My father has put a very wonderful thing into my head,' he
said; then, as the lovely colour deepened on her cheek, 'can it be so,
Wilmet?'
In her own calm way she answered, 'Do you not think it will be the best
way?'
'For me? No doubt of that, my dearest, sweetest, best darling!' and the
feeble force of his fingers somehow caused her brow to bend down to his
fervent kiss. 'You look as lovely as--no, ten times lovelier than you
did on the stile when you scolded me for telling you so. Why don't you
now?'
'Because I am glad my face is a pleasure to you,' she said, glowing, so
as to deserve his words, in spite of the effects of her long vigil.
'Ah! sick people are privileged to be foolish to their heart's content.
But, Wilmet, let us be wise for once. This must not be till you have
counted the cost.' And he repeated what he had said to his father of
the likelihood of permanent effects being left.
'You would want me all the more,' she said.
'And you?'
'I should want all the more to be with you.'
Again he smiled fondly on her. 'And more, my love. How easily I may
be a little worse than yesterday, and then you would have to go home
alone.'
'These things are for always,' said Wilmet; and the tears she had
resolved against came in crystal veils over her eyes, and it was vain
to squeeze them out.
'I am conquered,' said John, half quaintly, because he was afraid of
emotion. 'Here is a hand, at least! My father must manage the rest. I
can only be the most glad and thankful of men. Love, this is worth it
all!' as she tenderly smoothed his hair with her soft hand in the way
he liked so well.
'And oh! how nice it will be as you get better!'
'I can believe I shall, much more than I have hitherto done,' returned
he. Then after a happy pause, while she still stroked his head, and
they looked into one another's faces with hearts swelling with unspoken
prayers, he added, 'But of one thing I must and will be sure--of your
brother's free consent.'
She was so sure of it herself, that she only smiled at him; but his
was a sort of soldierly punctilio that forbade the profiting by her
devotion without the sanction of her family, and his father supported
him in it, and wrote from his dictation, detailing the provision which
he was making for Wilmet in case of his death and begging for a reply
by telegraph, since there was not time for Mr. Harewood to wait for an
answer by post, then signing it, with great effort, with three crooked
initials.
There could be no doubt as to the answer; and Wilmet went about her
preparations with her own peculiar modest dignity. The 'belle Mees'
had been a marvel to the French part of the community ever since M. le
docteur had shrugged his amazement at une grande Anglaise magnifique,
mais blonde et fade, coming out instead of a professional garde
malade, and then found by experience that her hand and head, her
nerve and gentleness, equalled those of the most skilful soeur with
whom he had ever been thrown. And when it slowly dawned on him what
were her relations with the Major, his wonder at English institutions
knew no bounds. He would have adored her beauty, which grew on him as
something marvellous, if he had not been a little afraid of anything so
lofty and so still, and so incapable of airy chatter, as he found her
at the table d'hte. She produced on him something of the effect of
the Pallas of the Parthenon, come across from Athens to undertake his
patient, or the goddess Neith as John sometimes called her, when he
lay watching her swift needle.
The Deaconess understood her better. Wilmet was much more nearly
the stately Teutonic maiden than the Grecian divinity; and Sister
Hedwige had had her days of romance, and beheld a Velleda in the
noble, self-possessed, helpful woman, who was equal to any of the
Fliedner disciples in resource and firmness. The German mind, too,
appreciated the betrothal tie; and when Wilmet, who had grown very
fond of the kindly, homely Schwesterchen consulted her about sending
to Alexandria for the bridal white that must not be denied to John's
eyes, she wept with joy, promised the willing aid of the Deaconess'
establishment in procuring all she needed, and, moreover, a wreath from
the myrtle they nourished in memory of home.
Wilmet's commission was not needed. She found one of the big boxes
that had been in use as tables and seats opened; and Zadok diving into
it under the Major's directions, and turning out parcels innumerable,
among which appeared a snowy mass of India muslin, exquisitely fine and
covered with delicate embroidery.
'There, Wilmet, you know what that is for.'
And with all the good-will in the world, Madame Spiridione volunteered
French counsel in the cutting out, and Sister Hedwige German needling
in the making; and Zadok, sitting cross-legged at the door, proved
himself equal to any sewing-machine, and worked faster and better than
either of the European nationalities, as indeed he was the son of a
dirjee, or embroiderer-man, and had learnt some of his trade, though
educated at a Mission school.
Dr. Chenu half despised, half envied the convenience of being married
without the production of the registers of baptism, or the consent of
either of the mayors or the commanding-officer, and a mere telegram,
'With all my heart,' from the elder brother; but still, Mr. Harewood
was obliged to make an expedition to Cairo to arrange the formalities
for the registry of the marriage, for which the Consul promised to send
an official. The question was whether this gentleman should act as
father to the bride, whose choice otherwise lay between M. Spiridione,
Dr. Chenu, and Zadok Krishnu, and who much inclined to the last
mentioned; but on the last day, by the very same train as brought the
secretary, an unexpected arrival took place.
The one interest of Rameses was the arrival of the trains--few and far
between. Mr. Harewood used to go out to count and report on the pale
faces going westward, and the rosy young ones going eastward, and to
capture the mail-bags and parcels that connected this Egyptian desert
with the outward world. So seldom did any one halt, that he was amazed,
not only to see the secretary, but a slender, black-bearded personage,
portmanteau in hand, Panama hat on head, looking not indeed Oriental,
but so un-English that it was startling to be accosted with, 'Good
morning, Mr. Harewood; I hope your son is still going on well.'
Then it flashed on the Librarian that this was the Life Guardsman who
had once ridden over to Minsterham as Alda Underwood's betrothed.
'Mr. Travis! This is unexpected! You don't bring any bad news for Miss
Underwood, I trust,' he added, taking alarm.
'Oh no, far from it. I came to try to follow up this trail of poor
Edgar. None of the family can,' he proceeded in a tone of apology; 'and
as I have time, I can let no possibility go by.--But is it true, what
they told me at Alexandria--that I am come just in time for a wedding?'
'Indeed it is, but for a very strange one. I am forced to go home when
that train returns; and that sweet girl will not--nay, cannot leave my
poor son. I hope it is not wrong in me to rejoice, turn out as it may.
They will be delighted to see you.'
Ferdinand was made very welcome. He was a breath from home that made
them feel how long they had been exiled. It appeared that he had been
at Paris, vainly seeking as usual, when he had received a telegram from
Miss Underwood, i.e. Marilda, and hurrying to England, had heard all
that could be gathered from Wilmet's letter; and here he was, intending
to pursue his inquiries in Egypt, and if needful extend his researches
to Palestine or India, according to whatever clue he might gain.
Such exertions on the part of a stranger in blood were rather
surprising; but Ferdinand seemed to think no explanation needful,
and perhaps his American contempt for space rendered the wonder
less. At any rate, his coming was a great pleasure. He was almost a
brother-in-law to Wilmet, and had belonged to old days in her life, and
he was intermingled with John's time of courtship at Bexley, so that to
both he was like a relation; and Mr. Harewood was much relieved by his
promise to remain comparatively within reach so long as it was possible
that he could be of use to Wilmet or her convalescent, as they durst
not yet term the bridegroom.
So, as John declared, the wedding was graced by representatives of all
quarters of the world. It was on African soil, between two Europeans,
and one spectator came from Asia, another from America, to say nothing
of the lesser distinctions of France, Germany, Greece, Egypt, and
Arabia, nor of the mingling of Aztec, Spanish, American, and English
blood in the veins of Ferdinand Travis.
Bizarre as were the conditions, the marriage scene was very solemn and
touching. It had proved impossible to wait for Christmas Day, as had
been wished; so the 21st of December had been chosen, and the time, the
cool early morning, before the heat of the day, and when light could
be let in without glare or scorching, such as the noontide even of
mid-winter brought.
The room was arrayed as on Sundays, not without thought of the first
Paschal Feast--kept at this very place and round about it--and Mr.
Harewood had robed himself, and brought out the preparations he had
made in case he should arrive in time for his son's last Communion
Feast, but which now served for that of his marriage.
John had so far decorated himself that he had caused M. Spiridione to
trim his hair, and shave all but his habitual red moustache. There was
not much possibility of alteration in his spare, freckled, sunburnt
face; and his condition was chiefly evident in the prone motionlessness
of his figure on the water bed, covered by a bright striped silk quilt,
outside which lay one wasted hand, still scarred and stiff. He was
striving to be calm and passive; but every now and then his fingers
twitched, and the muscles of his face quivered with strong emotion, so
that the doctor, standing behind in military uniform, with moustaches
waxed into standing out like a cat's, was anxiously watching him.
Krishnu, resplendent in white, red, and gold, was on the other side,
with an English Prayer-book, and over a chair his master's uniform
coat and medals, of which he would not be denied the display. There
too was the Greek, in his unbecoming Frank courier dress, and a few
spectators who had crept in at the unclosed door for the strange sight
of the English wedding.
Wilmet's matter-of-fact nature and freedom from self-consciousness were
great auxiliaries to her composure. Living always in the work at hand,
severance from home did not come prominently before her, and still less
the strangeness of giving herself, on her own responsibility, in a
foreign land, to one who could scarcely raise a finger to accept her,
and whose life hung on a thread. Of the lookers-on she never thought;
she could only recollect that she was qualifying herself for the entire
charge of John, and the only eyes she thought of were that one pair of
pale greenish-hazel ones, but for those she took as much pains as Alda
had done to face a world of gazers.
The snowy soft flow and straight folds of the muslin, beneath the green
wreath on her classical braids of light brown hair, far better became
the straight outline than the glossy satin, lace flutter, and formal
wreath, of the London bride. The eyelids cast down, the heightened
carnation, and trembling lip, rendered her grand beauty as modestly
tender as it was majestic, when Ferdinand Travis led her forward,
followed by the sober-suited Deaconess, by Madame Spiridione in a
Parisian cap, and her little boy in full Greek costume.
Poor Fernan! he had eagerly undertaken the service he was to render
to Wilmet, but it must have been a sad reminder of his own vanished
hopes; and as he led her forward, his slight but fine form, noble cast
of features, and clear dark colouring, so fully equalled her in good
looks, that he seemed a more fitting match for her than the feeble
helpless bridegroom, never at his best extrmement beau.
However, no such thought crossed the minds of the parties most closely
concerned as Wilmet knelt by the bedside--knelt at times when she ought
to have stood, or her hand would not have been within the reach of
the poor weak one over which her long soft fingers seemed to exercise
cherishing guidance, with that sense of power and protection she had
been used to wield through life. But though her hand was the firmer,
and less nervous, it was a much stronger, clearer, steadier voice
than could have been looked for, as if manly tenderness overcame all
physical prostration, in which John Oglandby took Wilmet Ursula to be
his wedded wife, rising into power and energy, as though even then the
impulse of guarding, protecting, supporting, love were strengthening
him; and Wilmet, on the other hand, quiet and steadfast though she
was, had her eyes swimming in tears, which now and then stole down and
dropped unawares on his coverlid, and the tone, though not broken or
faltering, was low and choked with intensity of purpose and of prayer.
'Till death us do part,' which he had said so gravely and steadily,
came from her with nearly failing breath, as though the words almost
took away her resolution.
But the Psalm and the Blessing brought back her calmness, and there had
never been any trembling in the hand that held her husband's; there
was only thankful affection in the eyes that gazed at him while she
still knelt on, and all left the chamber except the faithful friend and
faithful servant, who were to share with the newly-married pair the
holiest of feasts. And strangely enough, if Wilmet and her home were
closely interwoven with Ferdinand Travis's first admission to Christian
privileges, it had been Major Harewood's example and occasional words
that had first brought the teaching imbibed in a Mission school to bear
the fruit of true faith and confession thereof in Krishnu.
So it was a really happy and peaceful wedding-day in that strange
far-away land; and John seemed rather the better than the worse for
the exhilaration of spirits, and the sense of secure possession he
had gained. He was so much delighted with Wilmet's bridal white, that
he grumbled if she tried to put on her former dresses, and her first
personal expense was the keeping up her stock--he loved so well to see
her moving about or hovering over him in her clear pure white folds.
They were quite sufficient for one another; and Mr. Harewood left them
by the next westward train. Ferdinand went to see him on board the
Alexandrian steamer, and then continued to circulate in the haunts
of travellers, for the chance of Edgar having joined a Nile boat, or
being sketching among the tombs of the Thebaid. Every now and then he
reappeared at Rameses to report how some barbe blonde he had been
hunting down turned out fiery red; and to communicate his hopes in
some other direction. Suez was inquired through in vain; and he could
not learn that any one of the name or description had gone to India.
Indeed, that country seemed less likely to attract a man of Edgar's
tastes than the picturesque and historical Levant; and his artist
powers and charm of manner made it not unlikely that he might have been
engaged to make sketches.
One hope they had, which died away. The gentleman from the Consulate
mentioned that a party of vocalists had been giving concerts of
national melodies to the European population at Cairo and Alexandria;
and the description reminded Wilmet of last year's meteors. Indeed, it
proved on inquiry that Stanislas and Zoraya Prebel were really among
them, and that they had gone forward to the East, making a tour of the
British dependencies; but when Ferdinand had with difficulty obtained
a sight of an old programme, and a description of the performers, it
was only to convince himself that Edgar could not have been among them.
There was no name like his, and the songs that might have been his were
sung at the very time when his alibi could be proved at Rameses.
CHAPTER XXXII.
THE NID D'AVIS.
'It is called--I forget-- la something which sounded
Like alicampane, but in truth I'm confounded,
What with fillets of roses and fillets of veal,
Things garni with lace and things garni with eel,
One's hair and one's cutlets both en papillote,
And a thousand more things I shall ne'er have by rote.
I can scarce tell the diff'rence, at least as to phrase,
Between beef  la Psyche and curls  la braise;
But in short, dear, I'm tricked out quite  la Franaise.'
Moore.
One forenoon, soon after the end of the Christmas vacation, Robina
Underwood was seated at her desk, working deeply at the solution of
a quadratic equation; when from the far-off end of the schoolroom
arose that peculiar hushed choked giggle, that no one ever ascribed to
any cause but some prank of Angela's, more especially on the mornings
devoted to her natural enemy, 'the professor of the exact sciences,'
as he called himself; who was in fact a stop-gap in the absence of the
University man usually employed.
Robina knew that the more concerned she showed herself the more
madcap tricks were played, and she disturbed herself little about the
commotion, aware that she should only too soon learn the cause, if it
were anything out of the common way. So she did. In the quarter of an
hour of clearance and recreation before dinner, plenty of information
reached her, couched in boarding-school lingua franca.
'Ah! Rouge Gorge, vous ne savez pas ce qu'elle a fait.' 'Une fille
delicieuse.' 'Une Alouette superbe, tout a fait Anglique!' 'Et M. le
professeur! Comme il etait dans un cire!' (These phrases being chiefly
the original coinage of Angela herself.)
'Mais qu'est ce que c'est qu'elle a fait?' demanded the elder sister,
with small sympathy with these ecstasies.
''Le plus exquis!' and with volubility far outrunning composition,
and resulting in a wonderful compromise of languages, that a new book
had been produced out of which the class had been required to work what
was described as 'un somme dans le rgle detrois tout  tort et 
travers; detestable, horrible, vilain,' to which a chorus chimed in,
'vilain, vilain vilainissimo.' The question was, If twelve reapers
cut a field in thirty hours, how long would it take sixteen? As a
matter of course, all but a few mathematical geniuses at the head of
the class had multiplied by 16 and divided by 12, and made the result
40; but Angela, having wit enough to see that this 'n'avait pas le
sens commun,' instead of trying to make out the difficulty, had
written at the bottom of her slate, what was hastily transcribed for
Robina's edification--
Forty, by the best time-keepers.
Reapers? I should call them sleepers,
Lazy heapers, idle creepers,
And their peepers should be weepers!
All who obtained a sight of this stanza became forthwith weepers with
suppressed giggle, and there was a stern, 'Your slate, if you please,
Miss Angela Underwood.'
The effects were expressed with all the force the language could
convey. 'Il etait comme un lion enrag--il cumait  la bouche--il
disait qu'il appellerait Mlle. Fennimore'--a far greater climax, but
after all he only sentenced her to read the rule aloud to the class. No
sooner had she touched the book than she dashed it from her, 'Comme
la poison'--'comme un couleuvre,' declaring it to be a shocking one,
unfit to touch, so that of course the sums came wrong. Most of her
audience, all girls under thirteen, for she was the arithmetical lag
of the school, had no notion why the title 'Colenso's Arithmetic' so
excited her--the master had none at all; and while Angela, who was
not for nothing sister to a church candle or to a gentleman of the
press, declaimed about heresy and false doctrine, he thought it all
idleness and wilfulness, and fulfilled the threat of a summons to the
authorities. By them the matter was a little better understood; but
the disobedience was unpardonable, even if the testification against
the author were not merely a veil for dislike to the problem, and the
sentence had been solitary confinement until submission. From this
Angela was so far distant, that as the young ladies marched in to
dinner her voice might be heard singing the Ten Little Niggers.
It was an unlucky time, for the next day was Marilda's twenty-fifth
birthday, and she was going to keep it in a way of her own, namely,
by taking the whole family of children of a struggling young doctor,
over the Zoological Gardens. It was not a very good time of year, and
Marilda's first proposition had been the pantomime, but the mamma had
religious scruples about theatres, and it turned out that the Zoo was
the subject of their aspirations; so Marilda, securing her two young
cousins to help her in the care and entertainment of her party, hoped
for fine weather.
From this party of pleasure Angela must of course be debarred, unless
she yielded; and her sister was sent to reason with her, but this had
no better effect than usual. Robina was a thoroughly good industrious
girl, who neither read the papers nor listened to controversy; she
cared most for heresies as possible subjects for her examinations in
Church history, and had worked problems innumerable out of Colenso. So
all she gained was a scolding for consenting to the latitudinarianism
that caused correctly-done sums to make sixteen reapers tardier than
twelve; and the assurance that no allurement, no imprisonment, should
make the young martyr consent to truckle to a heretic. Angela looked
exactly like Clement as she spoke, except for an odd twinkle in her
eye, as if she were quizzing herself.
Robina knew herself to be too much wanted to give up the expedition,
and was sent for by Marilda in time to assist in giving the five
children the good dinner that was an essential part of the programme,
and which reminded Robin of Mr. Audley's picnic. One little boy,
however, seemed bewildered and frightened by the good things, and
more inclined to cry than to eat; but he would not hear of being left
behind, though, when arrived at the Gardens, he could give but feeble
interest even to the bears, and soon fretted and flagged so much that
Marilda thankfully accepted Robin's offer of taking him home in a cab,
and waiting for her till her rounds with the other children should be
finished.
It turned out that he had had a headache and a 'bone in his throat' all
the morning, but had kept them a secret of misplaced fortitude; and
when Robina had taken him home, wrapped up in her cloak, trembling,
shivering, and moaning, she found the mother with the yearling child
much in the same condition on her lap; and she was rendering kindly
help in putting them to bed (for of course the nurse had a holiday),
when the father came home, driven in by a sore throat and headache of
his own, and forced to pronounce, as best he could, that they were in
for an attack of scarlatina.
Here was a predicament! Robina had never had the fever, nor had any
of her home brothers and sisters in any unimpeachable manner. She
could not stay where she was, and what would either the school or Mrs.
Underwood do with her? After such consideration as the little boy
allowed her to give, she wrote a note of warning to Marilda, to be
handed to her at the door, and another to be sent on to Miss Fennimore.
The note was handed to the frightened hurried maid, and duly given.
There was a moment's pause, and then the children were left in the
carriage, and Marilda walked into the house. Then there took place what
could only be described as a scrimmage. Marilda was determined on
carrying all the four home with her, out of the way of the infection,
but the mother was persuaded that they must have it already, and would
not part with them. If they were ill in another house she would not
be able to go to them, and the thought distracted her. The father was
appealed to, and between the same dread of separation and scruples
about carrying infection farther, he gave sentence the same way, and
Marilda was most unwillingly defeated.
She could only take away Robina; and Robina submitted pretty quietly
to her decision that her quarantine must be spent at Kensington Palace
Gardens. In the first place, Marilda protested that she had had 'it;'
and though 'it' turned out only to have been a rash, and it was nearly
certain that Mrs. Underwood would be in despair, yet Robin really knew
not where else to go, and Marilda was quite as old as the constituted
authorities at home. All Robin could insist on was on remaining in
the carriage till Mrs. Underwood had heard the state of the case; but
considering the rule that Marilda exercised, this precaution was of
little use. In five minutes she was called upstairs, a note was sent
to Brompton, and she had to make up her mind to a full fortnight of
quarantine--and what was worse, of lack of appliances for preparing for
the Cambridge examination, her great subject of ambition.
Neither Mrs. Underwood nor Marilda could suppose that it was not a
treat and consolation to a schoolgirl to get a holiday; they were as
kind as possible, but oh! the dullness of the place! It was much more
dull than in Cherry's visits, for she had her own study and her own
purpose, and Alda and Edgar enlivened the house; but now Marilda had
no pursuits save business and charity, and was out many hours of the
day, there was hardly a book to be found, and Mrs. Underwood expected
her to sit in the drawing-room and do fancy-work. Meantime she was
losing precious time, her chances of marks and prizes at Brompton
were vanishing, to say nothing of her preparation for the Cambridge
examination, on which her whole start in life might depend.
The doctor's family were all very ill; but she could not think nearly
so much about them as of the music she tried to practise, and the
equations she set herself, while she reckoned the extra work by which
she could make up for lost time. Alas! on the very last day of this
weary fortnight, conscience constrained her to mention an ominous
harshness of throat; and by the evening she was wishing for nothing but
that Wilmet were not in Egypt.
However, Marilda proved herself far superior as a nurse to what she was
as a companion. She would not be kept out of her cousin's room, and
with Cherry's old friend, Mrs. Stokes, took such good and enlightened
care, that the infection did not spread, and Robina, though ill enough
to be tolerably franked for life, was in due time recovering so
favourably as to be very miserable and wretched about everything, from
the Cambridge examination to her own ingratitude. She never had felt so
like Cherry in her life.
It was hard to say which was worst, her banishment from school or from
home, or the doleful idea presented to her by that kind promise of
carrying her to be aired at Brighton for six weeks! It was the loss of
the whole term, and all the prizes she had set her heart upon, nor was
there any one to sympathise with her, as she turned her head away and
hoped no one would find out the tears in her eyes.
It was just as it had been with Lance, she thought; prevented from
sharing in the competition that might have won him success in life.
And how sweetly and brightly Lance had borne it; but then he had never
reckoned on the success she had hoped for, and besides, her nature
had not the surface insouciance that had helped him. She had more
industry, more ambition, more fixity of purpose, and the disappointment
was proportionably severer.
Poor child! she lay on the sofa, as Mrs. Underwood supposed, fast
asleep, but really trying to work out in her brain puzzling questions,
why it was good to be disappointed when one does one's best, why the
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, trying to
accept her failure as wholesome mortification to ambition, recalling
'Under Wode under Rode;' but rebelliously feeling that this did not
comfort her greatly in the very unnecessary picture her fancy proceeded
to draw of herself, with attainments fit for nothing but a nursery
governess or school drudge, or a companion to some one duller still
than Mrs. Underwood, magnanimously releasing William Harewood from all
ties to so inferior a being, and proceeding to die of a broken heart,
and to shed a few tears over her own grave; or maybe the still more
melancholy conviction, that there were no ties at all that he would or
ought to remember.
A postman's knock made her start, and Mrs. Underwood lament that she
had been awakened. Presently she was sitting up, receiving a long,
narrow, green, thin letter, at which she looked with exultation and
delight all over the visage lately so doleful. 'O Mrs. Underwood, it
is from John himself---dear John!' was the cry, as her eyes lighted
on the address; and her pleasure amounted to rapture as she read the
closely-written sheets, in that clear strong neat handwriting that had
hitherto always been Wilmet's monopoly.
Alexandria, March 20th.
MY DEAR ROBINA,
I hope this may find you as it leaves me at present, a thankful
convalescent, and able to think of undertaking a journey with
more motive force in your own person than I can yet boast. My
good little French doctor has unlimited faith in the healing
virtues of the Pyrenean baths, he being Gascon born, and has
even volunteered to help us on our way thither when going home
for his holiday--a chance too good to be lost. Malta must be
our first stage; and if, as I am told to hope, I can get my
sick leave extended, after being sat upon by the doctors there,
we shall go on to Bagnres, where we hope to arrive about the
last week in April. We think you had better meet us there. Miss
Underwood will see about arranging an escort for you; Wilmet
is writing to her about it. She also desires that you will rig
yourself out afresh, bringing nothing you have used while laid
up; and you had better likewise provide the stock of books the
Cambridge dons advise, as we shall be very quiet and stationary
for some time, and I will gladly do my best to help you, unless
modern lights have gone quite beyond the capacities of the R.E.
You see by my date that we have made our first move. Chenu
was anxious to get us away from Rameses before the Egyptian
plagues should have become rampant, and after Wilmet had found
a scorpion curled amiably up on my pillow, she was ready for an
immediate start. So, amid the shrieks of the Arabs and tears of
the entire establishment, I was carried by Travis and Krishnu
to the station, and deposited in a horse-box, that I fancy
occasionally transports a harem, our host weeping and kissing
Wilmet's hands to the last moment. Poor people! they treated
us with uniform kindness. If you can make inquiries about the
price of a dinner-service, write me the result; it is a sort of
testimonial that might be convenient as well as appropriate.
Here, in this great hotel, we are no longer No. 1, but
simple units, and find it so much less enlivening, and more
common-place, that we even regret the nightly laughter of the
hyenas. I want Wilmet to join a party who are going to pay
their respects to the Sphinx; but she will not hear of it, even
under the care of Fernan Travis, who has grown quite familiar
with that venerable animal. He is an admirable squire for her
(Mrs. H----, I mean, not Mrs. S----,) at the table d'hte
and is altogether as excellent a fellow as ever lived. I am
much struck with the ripening he has undergone since we were
together at Bexley, and his deeply conscientious views of his
very trying and difficult position. He means to see us off for
Malta, and then to make his way to Jerusalem for Easter, for
the chance that the throng may attract poor Edgar. Never was
search more indefatigable. Wilmet sends her love, but does
not write, as she has letters in hand to Felix and to Miss
Underwood.
Hoping to see your face as round as ever before a month is over,
Your affectionate brother,
J.O. HAREWOOD.
Write to us at Malta whether you can come, and we will either
write or telegraph to you when to start.
On a separate page were directions for the journey; and a cheque was
enclosed, the first Robina had ever received, providing amply for
journey, outfit, and books.
An hour before, the journey to Brighton had seemed a terrific fatigue.
Now a journey to the Pyrenees was only delicious! Her happiness and
gratitude were unspeakable. This was not banishment--this was not loss
of time--this was perfection!
Wilmet's letter to Marilda, which came at the same time, was a far
more anxious one. She described her husband as certainly better, but
still with three unconquerable wounds, on shoulder, hip, and knee,
that kept him helpless and prevented him from regaining strength. He
was always a bad sailor, and she extremely dreaded the voyage; yet it
was impossible to remain in the Egyptian climate, for already the heat
was fearfully exhausting, and this long, cheerful, well-written letter
must not deceive those at home, for it had been written in the cool of
the evening, when he always revived, but for the greater part of the
day he could scarcely speak or look; and she cautioned Robina against
reckoning too much on the Pyrenean journey, since if the military
authorities would not give John his leave without his presenting
himself in England, they must try some sea-side place there. John's
hopeful plans always ran on so fast whenever he was feeling a little
better. However, Wilmet herself was very eager to have Robina, who she
thought would be a great amusement and occupation to him, and was only
puzzled about the escort, since Felix could hardly spare the time, and
Clement was in the final agony of preparing for his degree.
This however was settled by Marilda's offering her own maid, who was a
practised traveller; and not long after arrived the final intimation.
All had been made right at Malta; and Robina, who had by this time had
leisure to change her skin, and gather her strength, was to start at
once for Bagnres.
She was not allowed any parting with Angela, or any of those at home.
It was safer otherwise, and not worth the risk, she was told, and there
was nothing to do but submit; and very much alone in the world did
she feel when she stood on the deck of the Folkestone boat, with the
black-silk maid as her only protector. It was a great plunge into the
vast unknown for one solitary little schoolgirl!
Behold! A hand was held out to her, a merry pair of yellowish green
eyes twinkled, a wide mouth smiled, a greeting was in her ears: 'That's
right, Bobbie! I thought you'd be for this boat.'
'Willie! O Willie! You are crossing? How nice! But you shouldn't touch
me.'
'Bosh! I had it long ago! Are you well and jolly?'
'Quite well, thank you. You are really coming?'
'Ay, I thought I'd run over to see Jack, and how Wilmet figures as a
bride; and it is a good speculation to get you to do all the French.'
'If I can; but here's Marilda's maid, a perfect traveller's book of
dialogues. Mrs. Purle--here is Major Harewood's brother, who is going
the same way.'
A gentleman was not an unwelcome sight to Mrs. Purle, who was used to
depend on couriers, and who entreated him at once to enforce attention
to certain luggage about which she was distressed.
And to Robina, he was simply the most delightful sight in the world.
After six weeks of the flatness and tedium of those good ladies in
Kensington Palace Gardens, a little youthful brightness, fresh too
from home, would have been like the pure sea wind after dull London
air, even if it had not been, of all people, Willie, Willie Harewood
himself, timing his journey on purpose to escort her!
True, there were always two sets of feelings going on within her;
one when she was actually concerned with or about him, when the
common-place aspect overcame the remembrance of that evening by the
river-side, and left only a pleasant companionship of long standing,
with the freedom of family connection and acknowledged preference;
the other, when he was out of sight and hearing, and was the standing
romance of her life.
It was not a wholly untroubled romance, for she was not certain of her
duty. Their promise had been exchanged when they were such children,
that it would be ridiculous to mention it, and it might be equally
absurd to dwell on it; yet her mind could not help attaching weight to
it, and questioning whether her secresy might not be a fault. Yet it
would be unfair, as well as absurd, to avow seriously nonsense three
years old, and without any further advance on his part. Without any?
That was the question that recurred over and over again to the poor
little heart, whenever romance got the upper hand, the heart that
would one moment yearn, at another fail, at another bound! It was
avowed that Willie was very fond of her, and his sisters made that
fondness one of their standing jokes; but when Robin remembered the
enforced reticence with regard to Wilmet, that was no good sign, and
she could never discover whether he remembered the sixpence they had
not broken. It was no desirable state of suspense, this consequence
of having innocently listened to premature playing at lovers' vows;
and though good sense and modesty might mitigate the evil, that very
conscientiousness gave her the more to endure.
However, the pain was all in private, and private moments were few, and
encroached on by sleepiness and struggles to write letters. They went
on too fast for more than fleeting views from the train, only at Paris,
after the table d'hte Willie was urgent for a stroll in the gas-lit
streets, and on Robina's demur, appealed to Mrs. Purle's good-nature,
and brought her out, tired as she was, but enjoying the delight of the
two happy young things.
It was too late for sight-seeing, but little recked they; the wonder of
the city, then so great and gay, was quite enough for them; the long
illuminated arcades of the streets, the masses of trees in their young
foliage in the Tuileries gardens, the unaccustomed sounds--thundering
omnibus, rushing cabriolet, neighing, shrieking horses, and
high-pitched clamour of tongues, filled them with exhilarating
amusement. Then the people! Maid-servants in quaint white caps,
stately sergents-de-ville, soldiers marching to change guard, with
clanging bands, knots of talkers gesticulating, parties sitting out
on the pavement at the cafs--all was so new and queer, and it was so
wonderful to be there with only Will, that Robina could hardly believe
she was herself!
Above all, the shop windows! How they lingered and admired, like the
frank-hearted children they were! Everything looked so enchanting on
those slopes--photograph, confectionery, porcelain, millinery, or
jewellery. Oh! the raree-show those trinket-shops in the Rue Rivoli
were to them, as they gazed at the wonderful devices--those earrings
and brooches, as flies, as beetles, as fishes, shrimps, and acrobats.
At last they came on a set where the earrings represented a little
silver bird hovering, and the brooch a gold wicker nest with three
pearl eggs, and the same birds standing over it, and Robina's cry of
admiration was instantly replied to with--
'You must have those, I vow!'
'Nonsense! they must be frightfully dear.'
'I don't care; you are the bird that must have that nest.'
'But it is earrings!'
'Well!'
'I don't wear earrings.'
'That's no reason you never should.'
'No, no; Wilmet would not like it, and Mamma never did. It is making
holes in oneself to wear useless ornaments in,' said Robin, hurrying
out her remonstrance without choice of words.
'And the other thing, with the two birds--is that for your nose?'
'No, a brooch.'
'You wear brooches. You have on a thing like a calf's eye.'
'My poor onyx--for shame!' said Robina, not confessing that it was her
sole possession in that line.
'Then you shall have those two cockyolly birds.'
'No, indeed. It is a set, and they won't break it.'
'Then Grace shall have one bird, and Lucy the other.'
'Each one earring--you ridiculous boy!'
'And wear them by turns! Come in, and ask the price prettily.'
'No, I sha'n't.'
'I thought you were to speak French for me?'
'Only when I approve.'
'Then here goes!'
And Robin, who was afraid to stand in the street without him, heard him
asking, 'Quoi est le prix de ce nid d'avis?'
Fortunately, or unfortunately, it was a bi-lingual shop, and the
purchase was conducted in English; the brooch was separated from the
earrings, the change made right, and the little box containing the
treasure thrust upon Robina, who could only twit the donor with his
nid d'avis.
'Avis not the French for a bird? If it is not, it ought to be. I
thought one only had to speak Latin through one's nose and bite off the
end.'
'General rules are dangerous of application in particular instances.
There's the first hatch for you out of your nest of advice.'
'If you hatch advice for me, I'll take it.'
'That's a pretty considerable engagement!' said Robina, lightly.
'Your eggs of advice ain't rotten like some folk's.'
'They won't be pearls like these!'
'How do you know? My eyes, Bob, there goes a regular old Dominican,
looking just as if he was got up for a charade. What a place this is,
to be sure! and how hard to fancy that it is but a few hours from home
after all!'
The gift and the few words after it had brought Robina's outer and
inner worlds unusually near together; and when she opened her little
box in her room, she caught herself kissing the silver birds in a
strange thrill of pleasure and yet of doubt whether Wilmet would think
she ought to have accepted it.
The long, long journey ended in mazy sleep through the diligence part
of the transit, all in the dark, but with a dim consciousness of
wheels, voices, and bumps. It seemed quite the middle of the night,
and far too troublesome to move, when at length she was extracted
by William rather than by her own volition, and something in a
white turban appeared before her dazzled eyes in the lamp-light,
as stumbling with weariness, she was supported and guided by her
companion's arm, and reviving in the cool night air, heard that 'it was
but a few steps, and the Mem Sahib was waiting.'
Then a great door opened, and showed a flood of light intercepted by a
tall figure, and then Robina found a pair of soft arms round her, and
nestling close to a well-known bosom, felt the infinite relief of being
off her own mind and with her who had ever been the very core of home!
'My Robin, my Robin! Is she quite well? Oh, this is nice! And Willie--'
giving her sisterly kiss. 'Yes, we had your letter, we were so glad.
Mrs. Purle, how are you? thank you for bringing her! There's some tea
ready--Krishnu will show you.'
And then they were in the sitting-room, with its bright lamp and
blazing wood fire, and thorough English tea, and Wilmet in muslin and
blue ribbons, as they had never seen her but on rare gala days.
'How's John?' began William, rather blank at missing him.
'Much better--so much better, but I told him not to think of seeing you
to-night. He has been in bed more than two hours. And oh, my Bobbie,
you ought to be there too!'
'Yes, she's tired to death,' said Will; 'we have been going since eight
last night.'
She really was too much tired to speak or eat, and passively submitted,
scarcely conscious where she was--nay, at some moments thinking herself
in the old nursery in St Oswald's Buildings, in the comfort of being
undressed, cossetted, and put to bed by the hands most natural to her
since infancy. After a time of weariness too great for right sleep, and
of a strange confusion about confessions to Wilmet, she at length lost
the feverish element of over-fatigue, and slept soundly till she opened
her eyes to realise a little festooned bed in an alcove, white curtains
over the windows, strange new street-cries outside, and within, her own
box, a sofa, a table, a chair, and a fine clock, which could not be
going, for it pointed to half-past ten!
As she was sitting up and looking in vain for some means of washing,
the door gently opened, and that dear motherly face looked in. 'Awake
at last, my poor little tired bird?'
'O Wilmet, is it really so late?'
'Of course! never mind. Willie is just as bad; there are his boots
outside his door still. There, drink this coffee before you dress. Yes,
you want it; you could take nothing last night. Let me look at you; are
you quite rested, and fit to get up?'
'Oh yes!' energetically; 'if only I saw how to wash!'
Wilmet laughed, and opened a cupboard-door, displaying the requisites,
even including a tub, which she had found and purchased individually.
After the ablutions she could judge of her little sister better, and
thought the cheeks not greatly wanting in their roundness, or healthful
freshness; but all the brown hair had been cropped, and the short wavy
curls added to the childish contour. It was a prim little schoolgirl
figure that stood there in a grey carmelite dress, and black silk apron.
'My dear, have not you a bow or bit of ribbon? John likes colour.'
'Only a blue ribbon for Sunday.'
In a moment Wilmet had hurried to her own room, a rose-coloured snood
was round the brown hair, and a little Maltese cross hung by another
pair of rosy streamers round her neck.
'And a brooch, my dear. Haven't you one--what's in this box?'
'O Wilmet, I wanted to ask you about it. Willie would buy it for me at
Paris!'
'How pretty! There, that will do nicely. Are you ready? John is quite
eager for you, now he is at his best.'
So Robin, who meant to have put her question in a very different form,
was hurried away, nid d'avis and all, and the next moment found
herself in the sitting-room, where on a couch near the fire, but
commanding a view from the window, lay, half sitting, her new brother,
holding out both hands to draw her to receive his kiss of welcome.
'Well, Robin, quite recruited after the scarlet enemy? So you were dead
beat yesterday!'
'O John, I did not mean to be so late!'
'You are beforehand with that lazy brother of mine, who tacked himself
to your skirts. Just in time for djener, a thing always going
on here. Is the young Sahib awake, Zadok?' as the white figure with
a brown face entered to lay the cloth, but it was at once followed
by the young gentleman, exclaiming, 'Good morning, Wilmet; I beg
your pardon--I'd no notion of the time.' Then coming to a sudden
stand-still, 'Holloa, Jack!'
'Holloa, Bill,' replied John, imitating the tone, with a smile. 'How's
my father?'
'As--as usual! But, Jack, old fellow, how--how small you look?' said
Will, shocked and overcome into small choice of words, as he stood with
a frown of dismay on his face.
'Boiled to rags, like the policeman in the Area Belle,' said John,
trying to laugh him into reassurance. 'Did you expect the process to
have the same effect as on a pudding?'
'But my father said he was not altered!' said William, turning to his
sister-in-law.
'He has gone through a good deal since then,' said Wilmet, wistfully.
'And the sun-burning has had time to fade. If you had seen him before
we came into this mountain air, you would only wonder at him now.'
'Besides,' added John, 'you are grateful to a man for looking anyhow
at all when he lies like a mummy. And now he is dressed like his
fellow-creatures, you compare him with them.'
'And that is only since we have been here,' said Wilmet, proudly.
'And how are they all at home, Bill? How's the mother?'
'Oh, all right; and she kindly insisted on my taking out some Liebnitz
to you in case you couldn't get anything in these French places. She
fairly took me in this time, and I suggested it was rather tough for
you under present circumstances, but she said that couldn't be, for she
got it warranted in tins at the competitive.'
'Dear mother!' said John, as they all shrieked with amusement; 'I
don't think Wilmet will be at all ungrateful to her. I am afraid the
commissariat is a weight on her mind. Now, what do you think of her
looks?' demanded John, rather anxiously.
'Well, she is always--just Wilmet--but she is thinner, and not so pink
as she used to be,' said the uncomplimentary Will.
'Of course,' said Wilmet, as John's eyes turned on her the more
solicitously, 'after the heat of those last weeks in Egypt; and Malta
was almost worse, except that there was not the constant warfare with
the flies that just kept one alive.'
'It is very warm here,' said Robina, who had left London in an east
wind.
'We find it cold up here in the mountains,' said Wilmet, who wore a
velvet jacket and thick glossy striped blue and brown silk. 'Dr. Chenu
warned us to prepare.'
'Yes,' said John, 'so I sent her out at Marseilles to fit herself out,
and what does she come home with but one lugubrious black silk, which
she tried to persuade me was the correct thing!'
'And then,' said Wilmet, 'the next thing I found was his bed spread all
over with patterns, and it was all I could do not to have enough to
clothe all Bexley. I was obliged to get a new box as it is, and luggage
is frightfully expensive on these French lines.'
Willie and Robin, though both in some awe of Wilmet, could not help
smiling at a speech so exactly like herself, as to remind them of
Lance's mischievous averment that she must have married John because it
was so much cheaper than sending any one out.
Those four happy tongues, how much they had to tell and to ask, about
the two journeys and the two homes, all mixed up together, Bill's
tidings being the most recent, and all that was known by letter
becoming much more real and interesting by word of mouth.
Cherry? Yes, Cherry was very well, and had no end of a picture for the
exhibition, of the maiden spinning for her lover's ransom--she had
studied the maiden from one of Ernest Lamb's sisters, but she had put
in exactly her own eyes, poor Cherry! There was a picture of Stella
and Theodore upstairs for Wilmet Lance had played his violin to keep
Theodore happy while sitting. Oh, and had they heard that Lance had
really been asked to take the organist's place? The former one had sent
in his resignation, and after the half-year that Lance and the choir
had worked together, there was a general desire that he should take the
post. Mr. Bevan had even written to request it, at 50 a year instead
of 70.
'What a shame!' broke out Wilmet 'I hope Felix did not consent! I had
much rather he was not paid at all.'
'That was what Lance wanted, of course,' said Robina; 'he wished to
give his music freely, as he does not give up the business.'
'But Felix said he had no desire to give either 20 or 70 a year to
my Lady, and that he did not accept her as the Church,' said Will;
'and Miles--old Miles was more rabid than ever he was at the Zoraya;
and Lance was in a state bordering on distraction for fear it should
go off altogether, and he should undergo torture from a fifty-pounder
every Sunday of his life, but my Lady gave in; and Lance reconciles his
conscience to the lucre of gain by getting a lesson from Miles once a
week, and raising the pay on the biggest of those interminable little
Lightfoots.'
'George, the intelligent one, that Cherry used to have up to teach,'
interposed Robin, 'so that there's another in the shop to make up for
any time Lance spends away from it. And when Fernan's new organ comes,
whenever it is finished, it will be such a delight.'
'I hate to see him all the same,' muttered Will, with a frown; but the
observation was unheeded, as Robina eagerly told how Theodore had one
day gone in with his brothers to the choir practice, where he had been
in such a state of bliss, and kept his lieder ohne wrter so true
that they had taken him regularly first thither and then to church,
where he accompanied like a little musical instrument, and at last Mr.
Flowerdew could not resist enrolling him in the choir, where, seated
in front of Felix, and with 'one of the interminable Lightfoots' as
guardian by his side, he was safe from molestation from any teasing
freak of the other boys, and however much he might comprehend, there
was no doubt that his felicity was perfect.
'It has really altered him,' said Will. 'I did not know him when I
saw him in his surplice; and indeed he seems to have got a stimulus
altogether, between that and Scamp.'
'Scamp!'
'What, they've not ventured to tell you that they've set up a dog!' and
Bill and Bobbie both fell into convulsions, in which the Major joined
more moderately, at his lady's demure face of astonishment.
'I suppose it was forgotten, when all the wedding letters were being
written,' said Robina, rather guiltily.
'And when the mice no longer expected the cat,' said John.
'No, indeed it wasn't that!' pleaded Robina. 'Lance couldn't help it.'
'It was a votive offering,' said Will 'Lance has never ceased to be
little Dick Graeme's demi-god ever since he licked him within an inch
of his life for bolting Shapcote's plums. You know those dogs of Mr.
Graeme's, Jack--beautiful black retrievers with tan legs and muzzles.
One belonged to Dick, and no sooner has she a litter of puppies than
he must bring up one for Lance, without a hint to him or any one else,
till one day he coolly marched in with his dog at his heels.'
'His father was driving in,' said Robin, 'and had no notion the boy
had not settled it all. We were just sitting down to dinner when the
bell rang, and there was a wonderful floundering on the stairs, and in
tumbled Master Dick with this great black beast padding and sprawling
after him. Then, while Cherry stood clutching Lord Gerald in one hand
and the back of her chair in the other, much as if it had been a wolf,
we heard the pleasing intelligence; "He is for you, Underwood; he is
Sal's finest pup, and I brought him up on purpose for you."'
'But Lance was not forced to keep him.'
'We could not turn him out neck and crop; and you can imagine the
rapture of Angel and Bear, and Lance wished it so much! Even Cherry did
not like to vex the boy, and when she began to talk of Felix and the
yard, I thought how it would end. But when she said it would frighten
Theodore into fits, the next thing we saw was the two rolling on the
floor together, Tedo's arms round the dog, and Scamp licking his face
all over, and all that satiny puppy hair on the long ears mixed up with
Baby's flax. Cherry made a sketch on the spot, and there was no notion
of sending him away after that. I don't know whether Tedo cannot do
without Stella better than without Scamp, for they seem to understand
one another better, and he is not afraid to go into the garden alone
with Scamp, though he never would with Stella. It is quite new life to
him.'
'As good a thing as could have been devised for him,' said John.
'Poor dear Tedo! yes, I am glad for his sake,' said Wilmet; 'only I
hope they don't have him in the house.'
'Don't they,' said Willie, mischievously; 'didn't I nearly break my
neck over the black back of him last Monday!'
'But Lance always combs him,' eagerly interposed Robina.
'Yes, Lance is as dainty about brushing and curry-combing him as he
is over his own lark's crest when the ladies are coming for their
magazines. Oh, Scamp is a great institution; he walks Cherry out every
day, and even Felix can't resist if he makes a set at him.'
'Capital! What, not reconciled yet, Wilmet?'
'Not to having him in the house. I am thinking of Mrs. Froggatt's
carpet.'
'Ours, you mean,' said Robin; 'besides, it is drugget.'
'And past praying for,' wickedly added Bill, 'since Bernard and I made
a general average of the inkstand and Cherry's painting things at one
swoop.'
'Abdicated sovereigns should close their ears,' said John. 'No doubt
Constantius' doings much disturbed Diocletian over his cabbages.'
'I hope I was not such a tyrant,' said Wilmet; who, though used to
raillery from her brothers, had yet to learn to take it from her
husband.
'At least I hope you have retired on a cabbage, mon chou,' he said.
She smiled, but turned the subject by explaining that their excellent
doctor had not only secured these comfortable rooms on the ground floor
till the season should be advanced enough to remove to Barges, but
had recommended them to a confrre, and had found, what John added
was more difficult to get than the savant, a pony and a wheeled chair,
in which he was going out at two o'clock. 'And it is past twelve now,'
said Wilmet; 'and you ought to be resting.'
'I'll go and look about, and come back in time to put you in your
chair, Jack,' said William. 'Come along, Robin.'
'If you are not tired, Robin,' said Wilmet, 'you had better go out. We
can only keep along the road; and John ought to get some sleep before
he goes out.'
'The cabbage is well drilled, you see,' said John; but he really did
look weary, and Robina was glad enough of the positive command.
Her sister had clearly no notion but of turning the children out to
play whenever they were in the way; and for the present that was quite
enough to send her down, forgetting everything but the charm of the
walk and the companionship.
The fresh sunny spring-tide and mountain air would have been
exhilaration and ecstasy in themselves, such as she had never known,
even if there had been nothing to see, and no one she cared for at
her side. And now the ravine, the pine-clad slopes, the scattered
cottages, the rocks, the foliage, the blossoming trees, the picturesque
figures, above all, the veritable mountain summits, still glorified
by their winter snows, cutting the clear blue sky, filled her with
a sense of beauty and wonder, enlarging her whole spirit with a new
incomprehensible sensation; and William was altogether lifted out of
the hair-brained rattle-pate. His frank-hearted nature had no corner
for the affectation of sneering at his own loftiest emotions. It was
his first mountain, and he was perfectly overcome by it; he raised his
hat with an instinct of reverence, and the tears stood in his eyes as
he kept silence at first, and then murmured, 'One seems nearer the
Great White Throne!'
'I never guessed it was--oh--that there was such a soul in it!'
responded Robina, in low awe-struck accents, as if in a church.
'No words ever gave one a moment's sense of it,' he answered; and then
they began revelling in individual admiration, climbing and wandering
in oblivion of all but the light and shade, the shimmering torrent
and sheer rock, the cloud-like hills and deep clefts, till far on
the road below they spied a queer high-wheeled pony-chair, a lady in
a broad-leafed flat-crowned hat walking beside it, and the Hindoo's
unmistakable scarlet and white in attendance.
'Bless me!' cried Will, leaping up, 'didn't I mean to have carried poor
Jack to his chair! Time is nothing in these places!'
'Can we get down to them?'
'Of course! Charge, Chester, charge! Give me your hand, and I'll get
you down. I say, Robina,' in a lower, graver tone, 'I'm glad we've had
this sight together! We'll never forget it!'
Whatever sentiment might be conveyed in these words ended in as English
a view-halloo as ever startled the Pyrenees, causing the party below to
look up and wave gestures deprecatory of the headlong descent, which,
nevertheless, was effected without the fracture of limbs, though Robin
arrived breathless, and panting enough by no means to disdain a seat
by John's side. He was looking as happy as a king, in the enjoyment
of the mountain air and scenery after his long confinement on the
parching Egyptian sands; but it was silent delight, and when Robina had
recovered the physical agitation of her descent, she had time to feel
the heart-swelling at those words, and the afterthought whether it was
a stolen pleasure unless Wilmet fully knew how sweet it was to be sent
out with Will.
But speaking to Wilmet was no easy matter. She was engrossed with her
husband, and never willingly quitted him for a moment, thinking of
nothing but as it regarded him, and viewing his brother and her sister
more as means for his entertainment than in their substantial aspect.
She did indeed follow Robin to her room that evening, to satisfy
herself about the child's health; but just as the desperate struggle to
begin on this most awkward of subjects was being made, she fancied she
heard John's call, and was gone.
Next morning, not only were the two sent out together while the doctor
made his call, but William communicated to her the verses that he had
sat up late and risen early to relieve his mind of, beginning with--
'Can we ever forget this day?'
To be sure it was all mountain, and would have suited Lance equally
well with herself. It was shown to John as a 'March Hare' contribution,
and was destined to the Pursuivant; but did it not begin with we, and
had she not had the first-fruits? The consciousness grew more precious,
the conscientiousness more distressed, till it drove her, in her truth
and honesty, to the desperate measure of so decidedly begging for a
private interview, that Wilmet came at once, supposing her unwell.
'Oh no, no, but--but I wanted to make sure of its being right. All this
about Willie.'
'About Willie? He is in no scrape, I hope?'
'Oh no; only I could not be comfortable without your knowing. Those
verses, and--'
'You little goose! How red you have turned! I didn't think you could be
so silly.'
'It is not silliness,' exclaimed Robina, hotly; 'he said it.'
'My dear! he must know better. What and when?'
'Long ago. That evening at Bexley, just before Lance went to Vale
Leston.'
Wilmet fairly burst out laughing. 'My dear child, how can you bring me
here to listen to such nonsense? That sort of children's foolishness is
silly enough at the time, but to dwell on it nearly four years after is
too absurd.'
'I thought it might be play then,' said Robin, 'and everybody would
have laughed if I had told; but it never will quite go out of my head,
and now and then he says or does something that makes me think he has
not forgotten either, and I thought I ought to tell you.' She spoke low
and fast, with averted crimson face.
'You are a good little girl, Bobbie,' said her sister kindly, from
an immense matronly elevation; 'but it is a pity anything so foolish
and mischievous was ever said to you, and you ought never to have
thought of it again. You should have left the boy if he would talk such
nonsense.'
'I couldn't. Lance said we must not leave you alone,' murmured Robin.
Wilmet gave her little clear laugh. 'I'm very much obliged to Lance,'
she said; 'but I am sorry Willie was inspired with a spirit of
imitation.' Then, as the mirror betrayed an unconvinced look, 'Has he
said anything to you since?'
'I--I can't tell--you might not call it anything. Only that brooch! O
Wilmet, you aren't going to be angry with him--he never said anything
direct.'
'I shall say nothing to him without far more reason; I never saw any.
At home he talks to Cherry.'
'Yes, but--' she was ashamed to say 'he likes me best,' and it turned
into 'Everybody does.'
Which Wilmet could not gainsay; and she went on: 'As to the verses, you
have sense to see they mean nothing. Willie likes you, of course, and
we are all brothers and sisters now; but as for any more, it is the
merest absurdity to think of it, and though you mean to be good, my
dear little sister, this is just working up a mountain out of nothing.
There can't be a more unlucky propensity than fancying everybody is
paying you attention, especially if you are not particularly pretty,
and have to be a governess, and take care of yourself!'
'I know I'm not pretty,' said Robin, rather proudly; 'and I never shall
expect any one to pay attention to me;' and as Wilmet's smile denoted
incredulity after this specimen, 'this is quite different from anyone
else.'
'I should hope so,' said the elder sister. 'There now, Robin, you have
done quite right to tell me; and now we'll think no more about it, but
go on as usual.'
With this Robina had to be content; and if the incredulity was
mortifying, at any rate liberty was sweet, and there was a precious
underlying conviction that there was something that, if Wilmet would
not see, it was not her fault. Conscience was free to enjoy the
most brilliant spring her life had known. Throughout the fortnight
of William's stay they were out together nearly all day, sometimes
climbing near home, sometimes joining expeditions of English visitors,
always sympathising in seriousness or sportiveness, and ever ready to
fulfil the sisterly part of beast of burden towards his belongings when
he wanted to climb any specially inaccessible place, or smoke with the
friends he picked up. She always viewed that fortnight as the most
exquisite of her whole life!
There was no sentiment in their last walk; for a brother and sister,
who were always in the habit of fastening themselves on every one who
was seen going out, stuck to them to their own door; but when Will took
possession of two water-colour sketches he had begged from Robina, and
announced his intention of framing and hanging them in his rooms, to
call up before him what without them would never be forgotten, they won
for their artist a thrill of delight such as none of Geraldine's far
superior performances had ever obtained for her.
Robin had no one talent in any remarkable degree; her drawing was
exact and tasteful, but without genius; none of the Underwood sisters,
except Angela, had much voice, and her musical powers were only
cultivated at the expense of much diligence; but her general ability,
clear-headedness, and intelligence were excellent; and John surprised
his wife by observing that he thought she resembled Felix the most of
them all, both in countenance and character. Robin's--the round ruddy
face of the family--like Felix's defined delicately moulded features
and fair colouring! John smiled; he never took the trouble to defend an
opinion that Wilmet thought unreasonable, but he contented himself with
saying, 'There was a good deal of stuff in the Robin.'
She did not flag when her holiday was over; indeed, there was a quiet
purpose in her soul that made her dutiful industry doubly hopeful and
pleasant. She had a good master. John's nature was hard-working, and
the invigoration of cooler air made want of employment irksome enough
to give him great satisfaction in the acquisition of a well-grounded
intelligent girl pupil to whom his aid was of real value. Their lessons
and their subjects multiplied as his strength increased, and though
they had plenty of fun and nonsense over them, Robina soon felt herself
making such progress as far more than compensated for the two months
she had so much regretted. Wilmet, telling them that some day Robin
would know how pleasant it was to have nothing to do with teaching, sat
by, stitching at a set of shirts for Clement. It was her ambition, as a
parting gift, to provide each brother with a stock; she had made those
for Felix and Theodore by John's bedside at Rameses, and to be busy
with the 'white seam,' and watch John eager and interested, and daily
looking less languid and pinched, was entire happiness to her. The
walks and drives became longer, and the neighbour brother and sister
complained that Miss Underwood could never be had, and was always
absorbed by her hard task-master, whom on her side she thought a far
more entertaining companion than they would ever be.
The move to the mountain nest at Barges was made, but the scheme made
in the warmth of their hearts in the spring, of William's spending
the long vacation there, was not fulfilled. Two objections stood in
the way; first his reading for honours, secondly the cost. He could
not afford another trip out of the proceeds of his scholarship, and
the Major's means were not so large as not to be seriously affected
by such an illness; while as Her Majesty's service had not required
his proximity to the engine, he could not obtain compensation for his
accident. When Wilmet had come to the understanding of the finances
she was to administer, she was startled at the free and open hand
which might suit a well-endowed bachelor officer on Indian pay, but
would soon drain the resources of a man--very possibly invalided for
life, and with a penniless wife. Robin would hardly have had that
wonderful cheque, if in Malta her sister had been altogether informed
of the balance at John's bankers; and when she was consulted on the
possibility of giving Bill a run, her reply was the more conclusive,
because, little importance as she attached to Robina's confession, she
preferred keeping the youth at a safe distance. Neither examination
would fare the better for mutual distractions on Pyrenean crags, and
both together they would be far less companionable to John than either
separately.
Beginning wedded life in prostrate helplessness, John had been as
entirely thought for, managed for, and 'done for,' as Theodore himself,
during these earlier months; and when he had a will of his own, it
was treated with indulgence as a sick man's fancy, and yielded to or
not according to his wife's judgment; but as time went on, there was
sometimes a twinkle of amusement on his eye-lashes when he submitted,
or withdrew an opinion rather than exert himself for controversy.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
A BOOTLESS BENE.
'"What is good for a bootless bene?"
She answered, "Endless sorrow."'
Wordsworth.
Geraldine was yet to discover how peaceful and happy was her life.
For a year and a half, the words at the head of our chapter--whatever
they may mean--had been running in her head. That 'bootless bene' was
a thing of sudden stabs and longing heartaches; but Edgar had not been
a sufficiently permanent inhabitant to be daily missed, as Wilmet was.
He had been a crowning ornament of the fabric of the house, not a stone
whose loss made a gap, but rather an ever bright, enlivening, exciting
possibility in her life, whose criticism and approval had led her on to
art, and trained her talent and taste. She never worked at a drawing
without an inward moan, and would almost have lost heart, save that he
and the clearance of his name were still her object; but for reliance,
support, and fellow-feeling, she had more in the remaining brothers
than he could ever have given her. Felix and Lance were precious
companions, and Wilmet's departure had left her no time for drooping.
Housekeeping began by being a grievous responsibility. Cherry could not
bargain like Wilmet, nor go down into the kitchen and toss up something
dainty out of mere scraps for her brothers' supper; and when she heard
that Zadok Krishnu excelled in curry and coffee, she could only lift
up her hands and sigh on the waste of good gifts of cookery upon one
Major! Martha was a good faithful servant, but odds and ends did not
go so far as they used to do; and Cherry never could, and never did,
reduce her bills to the original standard, though she brought them on
Saturday nights with such misery and humiliation that Felix was forced
to laugh at her, and represent that their pinch of poverty was over,
and excessive frugality no longer necessary. His position was now what
Mr. Froggatt's had been, and his means, with Lance's payment for board,
were quite sufficient to bear the difference, even without Cherry's
own, which fully covered the diminution through her want of time and
of notability. Waste there was not, profusion there was not; but a
certain ease there was, so soon as Cherry had learnt, as Lance said,
not to believe they should be in the County Court because they had
spent a shilling instead of elevenpence-three-farthings. She felt too
that home was comfortable to the others. The anxious stinting, though
at times needful, had, as Felix hinted to her, been good for no one.
Though praiseworthy and self-denying when it was needful, the habit
had become cramping to Wilmet herself, and to all the brothers it had
been an irritation, endured by some with forbearance, but certainly
prejudicial to others.
Nobody was afraid of Cherry; but since all had outgrown the bear-garden
age, a sympathetic government was best. Berserkarwuth might require
King Stork's 'Now, boys;' but when the ruler was a lady, and a lame
lady, chivalry might be trusted even in unruly Bernard, who had come to
an age when freedom was better for him than strictness.
So had the world gone till the autumn, when Major and Mrs. Harewood
had to retreat from their mountain abode, but did not venture on
wintering in England. They had made up their minds to winter at
Biarritz. John would have preferred Pau, but Wilmet set her face
against it, dwelling upon the benefits of sea air; and he yielded, but
he would not be baulked of a day's halt there. It was a place he had
always wished to see; and he would not defraud Robin of the castle of
the Foix, and of the tortoise-shell cradle of le Grand Monarque.
He could walk now, but only with a stick, and stooping and halting a
good deal. His obstinate hip was still troublesome, and his recovery
had been retarded by painful methods of preventing contraction. Nor was
it yet certain whether he would ever be fit to return to his corps;
and though he moved about the house, and discarded invalid habits, he
was still so anxious a charge, that Wilmet was quite justified in her
vexation at the charms of the old castle at Pau, where he would walk
and stand about, admiring and discussing history and architecture with
Robina and a clever French priest, lionising like themselves. She did
catch her sister, and severely forbid her to make a remark that could
protract the survey; but the wicked priest was infinitely worse, and
beguiled them into places where the ordinary guide would never have
thought of taking them; nor was she certain that her provoking John did
not perceive and rather enjoy her agony.
At last she got him safe to the hotel, and into the tiny bedroom
opening out of their sitting-room.
'It is much quieter there,' she said, returning. 'I have given him the
Times, and I hope he will have a couple of hours' rest before the
table d'hte.'
'Then, Wilmet, would you come with me? I made out the street, and it is
very near,' said Robin.
'What street?'
'Alice Knevett's--Madame Tanneguy. O Wilmet,' as she saw her
countenance, 'you know Cherry promised the aunts that we would see
about her if we went to Pau.'
'Cherry had no right to make such a promise, and I do not mean to be
bound by it. Madame Tanneguy does not deserve notice, especially from
us! I should have thought you had had enough of her.'
'But should not I be unforgiving to remember that?'
'It is not a matter of forgiveness, my dear. Her marriage was the best
thing that could have happened to us. I am absolutely obliged to her
for it; but that does not make her behaviour any better.'
'No; but suppose she was in distress?'
'No reason to suppose any such thing! The man was well to do; and of
course she is leading that gay life the bourgeoisie do here--at the
theatre or out on the place all the evening--nothing fit for us to
associate with.'
'I don't want to associate, and I only think it right to find out.'
'What does Robin want to find out?' said John, helping himself forward
with the table; 'some defender for Jeanne d'Albrt, whom we have heard
so run down to-day?'
'O John! why aren't you lying down?'
'Because I have no taste for being condemned to solitary confinement as
a punishment for being beguiled by that Jesuit--not even in disguise.
I'm going to write to my father. Aren't you going out again?'
'No,' said Wilmet.
'I thought I heard Robin wanting to find out some one for Cherry. These
doors aren't adapted for secrets. What was it, Bobbie?'
'I did not mean to trouble you about it, John,' said Wilmet. 'Do you
remember about that unfortunate affair of Alice Knevett?'
'Was it to her that your brother Edgar was attached?'
'Yes. Remember, it was a clandestine affair; and these children were
made to serve as tools--that is, Angela was; and though Robina refused,
she was involved in the scrape, and suffered so much for it that I
should not have thought she would have wished to run after her again.'
'Then she married a Frenchman, did she not?' interposed John.
'Yes. After refusing to give Edgar up, and giving us all an infinity
of trouble and annoyance, she suddenly threw him over without a word,
and ran away with this Frenchman from Jersey. Yet here are the Miss
Pearsons expecting us to call on her, Cherry undertaking that we shall,
and this child expecting me to go and do so!'
'Do you know anything about the Frenchman?'
'A sort of commercial traveller, I believe.'
'Agent for a wine merchant,' said Robina. 'Major Knevett said there was
nothing against his character. Miss Pearson sent the address; it is in
the street at right angles with this, about eight doors off.'
'Well,' said John, 'I do not see how you can refuse to satisfy the Miss
Pearsons about her.'
'If she were in a right frame of mind she would write to them. While
she treats them with such neglect, I do not see why I should encourage
her.'
'Cherry said they thought she was ashamed to begin,' said Robina. 'Miss
Pearson wrote severely at first, and now wants very much to make a
beginning, and to be sure that Alice is not in distress.'
'I think it ought to be done,' said John; 'it is so near, that you can
walk there at once with Robina, and at least inquire at the door. I do
not see how you can refuse Miss Pearson.'
Nobody had spoken to Wilmet with authority since her fifteenth year,
and she did not recognise the sound.
'I do not choose to notice a person who has behaved like that,' she
said; 'Miss Pearson has no right to ask it. Take off your things,
Robina; I am going to pack for to-morrow.'
There was no temper in her tone, only the calm reasonable determination
that had governed her household and ruled her scholars; and she walked
into the other room and shut the door, as on a concluded affair.
John looked round. Robina was standing by the table, wiping away a few
tears.
'I do not know what to do, John,' she said 'I wrote to Cherry that we
were coming here, and would do this. May I have Zadok to walk with me?'
'Your sister is quite right,' said John. 'I am the fit person to go.
How far did you say it was?'
'Eight doors, I counted.'
'Then we need not get a cabriolet,' said John, reaching for his hat and
stick.
'But you are so tired!'
'Not at all. If we go early to-morrow, this is the only time for doing
it.'
Whether she experienced a spark of triumph, or whether she was merely
frightened and uneasy, as her brother-in-law came limping downstairs
after her, Robina knew not. She had never seen any one but Fulbert
fly in Wilmet's face. Felix might sometimes differ and get his way,
but that was by persuasion; and the pillars of the house had always
preserved the dignity of concord towards the younglings. It was
astounding, even considering that he was her husband. So quietly
and easily he did it, too, as if he had no notion what an awful and
unprecedented action he was committing. Force of habit made Robin feel
as naughty as when Fulbert had led her and Lance to see-saw on the
timbers in the carpenter's yard; and she could not divest herself of
fears of some such reception as had awaited them on that occasion.
Wilmet packed without misgiving. She had foreseen this perplexity when
she endeavoured to avoid Pau, and her mind was too fully made up to be
overruled by Miss Pearson's ill-judged yearnings, Geraldine's imprudent
promise, Robina's foolish impulse, or John's good-nature. It was not
resentment, but disapproval. If Alice had jilted young Bruce she should
have held the same course. She would not argue before her little
sister; but in private John should be brought to a proper understanding
of Alice's enormities, and learn thankfulness to his domestic check on
Harewood easiness and masculine tolerance.
Then it struck her that those two were unusually quiet in the next
room. Some sounds she had lost in opening drawers and moving boxes;
but now all was still, John no doubt writing, and Robin--could she
have gone to her own room to cry? The elder sister began to relent,
and think the moment come for drawing from her a confession of her
wilfulness. She opened the door to seek her. Behold, John was not
there. No, nor his hat and gloves! Robina was not in her bedroom! Had
they absolutely sallied forth in opposition?
Wilmet had never been so defied by anything too big to kick and
scream! She stood aghast. Naughty obstinate Robina had wrought
upon John! He ought to have known better! He would knock himself
up--inflammation would come on--the wounds would break out again, all
because of this complication of foolish pity for that horrid little
flirt!
Wilmet's tears gushed, her chest heaved with sobs. Why could he not
have attended to her? Withal his words came back to her.
He had distinctly bidden her to go; and had she done so, he would
have been safe on that sofa. Bidden? yes, it had been a clear desire,
courteously and calmly uttered, but decisive; and only at this moment
did it strike her that his orders were more binding on her than those
of Felix. He had commanded. She had disobeyed, and he had done the
thing himself, to his own inconvenience, not to say peril.
Then came vexation. It was not fair! She would have gone anywhere had
she known the alternative. Was it kind or grateful, after her long
nursing, to risk himself without warning! Nay, could a man use plainer
words than 'You ought'--'You cannot refuse?' Yet was she, as a wife, to
obey blindly at the first word, against her judgment? Perhaps Wilmet
had never known so hard a moment as this first galling of the yoke of
subjection--the sense of being under the will of another. How could he
run after that heartless Alice, who had been Edgar's bane and Felix's
grief? Who could tell what company she kept, or if she were fit company
for Robina? And the creature was so disgustingly pretty that she could
deceive any man, even Felix. True; but a little moderation on her own
part, and she herself--the prudent matron--might have gone forth with
her husband, protecting and protected, instead of exposing Robina's
inexperienced girlhood and his manly good-nature to any possible
contaminations or deceptions. Oh! would they but come!
There was time for many such cycles of vexation, relenting,
self-reproach, and anxiety--ever growing severer towards herself,
bitterer towards Alice and Robina, tenderer towards John. It was nearly
seven o'clock before the slow thud of the stick, and the steps with
one foot foremost, proclaimed the return. Zadok was in the ante-room
and let them in. She saw John heated and panting; and reproachful
solicitude predominated in her voice as she exclaimed, 'You must stay
here. You are not fit for the table d'hte.'
'None of us are,' he answered, in a low, grave tone that startled her;
and she then saw that Robina was looking dreadfully white and overcome,
and trembling violently.
As the girl met her eye, all was forgotten but the old motherly
relation; and there was a rush to hide her face on her, and a
convulsive sobbing of, 'O Wilmet! Wilmet!'
'Lay her down! I will fetch something,' said John, moving towards the
other room. 'She has held up with all her might.'
'But oh, what is it? That wretched Alice! Bobbie, my dear child, lie
down! Don't try to keep it in; cry--no, you can't speak. O John! What
is it?--Yes, that's right,' as he brought what was needed from the
medical resources always at hand for himself; 'only tell me the worst.'
With his eyes on the measure-glass, and his steady hand dropping the
stimulant, he said, in an under-tone, 'A duel! The husband was killed;
but it was hardly Edgar's fault.'
Wilmet, with Robina almost fainting on the sofa, was wholly occupied in
administering the drops, and bathing the flushed face; and the success
of her efforts was shown by another cry of 'O Wilmet!' and then a
passion of weeping that shook her whole frame violently.
'That is best,' said John. 'She kept it in bravely.' And as the great
table d'hte bell clanged, he went to the door and spoke to Zadok.
As he returned, Robina bounded up, nervously exclaiming, 'O John, lie
down, do; you are done up!'
But when strength was needed, he found it. 'Not now, thank you, my
dear. I have told Zadok to bring us some dinner. That will make less
disturbance. We will get ready, and after that we shall be better able
to talk.'
Overwhelmed and crushed, the sisters did just as they were told; but
Wilmet turned once, and said as if out of a dream, 'Is there anything
to be done? Is he here?'
'Oh no! It was months ago--before I saw him. It was forced on him. You
shall hear all presently, dearest.'
The gentle kindness restored her, or rather drove everything out of her
thoughts but his flushed, weary, affectionate face, and heavy painful
tread; and when he grasped her arm to be helped into the sitting-room,
and sank with a sigh into his chair, half the world might have killed
the other half, so long as he was neither ill nor angry with her.
'Will you see for that poor child?' he said, as Zadok came up with the
three couverts; 'she needs restoration as much as any one.'
Robina had washed her tear-stained face, but was only brought to
the table as an act of obedience; and all through the meal John was
coercing her into swallowing soup and wine, and Wilmet was watching
that he did not neglect his own injunctions. Then disposing of Zadok
with some orders about coffee, he lay down on the sofa, but by a sort
of tacit motion invited Wilmet to give him one hand to play with, and
stroke his hair with the other--his old solace at Rameses--and oh! how
much it made up for to her! Robina was now quite restored, and longing
to relieve her soul, and the narration chiefly fell to her.
'We soon found the house--one of those immense tall old ones--and we
rang, and asked whether Madame Tanneguy lived there. "O oui," said
they, "au quatrime." We thought that rather odd; and John asked
again if she were English, and the concierge said, "Yes, assuredly;"
and as someone else came just then, we asked no more questions, only
climbed up, up those dreadful stairs, so dirty and so steep. I wanted
John to sit down and wait for me, but he would not hear of it.'
Wilmet looked at him with moist eyes, and pressed his hand. 'I was
accountable for the child,' he said, smiling. 'Besides, there was
nothing to sit upon.'
'At last,' continued Robin, 'we did get to the quatrime, and rang;
and we heard a little trot-trotting, and the door was opened by a queer
little French child, that turned and ran away, calling out, "Maman,
Maman!" and as we went in--O Wilmet! there rose up, with a little baby
in her arms, poor Alice, all in black, with a great flowing white veil,
like the widow at Bagnres. She knew me directly, and I believe we both
gave a little scream.'
'That you did,' murmured Major Harewood.
'And she said, "You--you! what do you come here for?" I did not
know what to say, but I got out something about the aunts; and she
answered, "Then you do not know, or you could never have broken in on
me and my poor orphans!" Really I thought she was mad with grief, and
said the aunts would have sent all the more; but she burst out, "No!
no! not his sister--his--the murderer of my husband!" and she began to
cry. I only thought still she was mad, but--O John, what was it? Didn't
you think so?'
'No, I saw that was not the case; but I thought she took you for
someone else, and began to explain; and I think the curiosity of making
out who I was, and how we came there, did more to bring her round than
anything else.'
'But how could this dreadful thing have been?' asked Wilmet. 'You said
it once: but it cannot really be true!'
'Too true, my dear,' said John, 'but with much extenuation. It was last
September. He really was with those National Minstrels.'
'Ah!'
'But not by name in the programme,' said Robina. 'She went to the
theatre with her husband, and there were Hungarian and German songs;
but then when the English ballad began--the Red Cross Knight--the first
notes overcame her; she had a saisissement, screamed, and almost
fainted.'
'Just like her!' exclaimed Wilmet 'Then it was all owing to that?'
'I fear so. Edgar looked up, and when he saw her, he broke down. He
began again, and got through the rest of his part; but in the meantime
M. Tanneguy had been discovering that he was not Alice's first love.'
'Not by ever so many,' muttered Wilmet. 'And of course she shuffled and
shifted off the blame to Edgar.'
'If so, she has suffered for it,' said John, with gentle repressiveness.
'And,' continued Robina, 'whatever she could say only enraged him more;
he took her home, then waited for Edgar at the door of the theatre,
demanded an explanation, and challenged him. They fought outside the
town, and M. Tanneguy was wounded; but they did not think it so bad;
and, like a brave Frenchman, he kept up to his own door, so that Edgar
might get safe away. On the third day he grew worse, and died! O
Wilmet! who could have thought it? How will Felix bear it?'
'Remember,' said John, 'that this was fastened on your brother. I
don't, of course, look on it as anything but a crime, but it should not
be exaggerated. To be insulted and called to account by a fiery Gascon,
when you believe yourself the injured party, cannot be easily bearable;
besides, Edgar had had a foreign training, not so alien to duelling as
ours, and his associates would expect it of him. For the rest, I think
he must have won his enemy's heart, for the poor lady said much of her
husband's acknowledgment of his generosity, and desire for his escape.
I am sure he might well, if he did half as much for him as he did for
me.'
'And he had done this when he touched you,' said Wilmet, shuddering.
'Or I should not be here,' said John. 'My dear,' and he held both her
hands, 'I wish I could make you look on it in a different light It was
not an assassination. To have refused the challenge would have required
a sort of resolution that few men are capable of; above all, when all
his surroundings would have expected it of him.'
'What surroundings?' replied Wilmet 'No wonder he could not bear to
face your father and me! Poor Edgar! wandering about like Cain! And
he was such a dear little boy! Papa used to call him his little King
Oberon! Oh! I am glad Papa and Mamma don't know it.' She slipped down
on her knees by John's side, hid her face in his pillow, and cried, but
softly and gently now.
'I don't think it can be less bad to Felix and Cherry,' said Robina,
sadly. 'How can we write to them?'
'We had better not do so till I have learnt more,' said John; 'I shall
go to the bureau de police to-morrow, and make inquiries, and try to
see poor Tanneguy's employer, M. Aimery, who seems to have been the
only friend that poor young thing has had.'
'Why did she not write?' asked Wilmet.
'M. Aimery did write to her father,' said Robina, 'but he has left
Jersey, and the letter was returned; and as to the aunts, you know Miss
Pearson did write sharply once, and Alice always took her strictness
for unkindness, and never knew how fond of her the aunts were. Indeed,
I fancy she has been too ill and inert to do more than go on from day
to day.'
'Has she anything to live on, poor child?'
'Her husband had a small interest in the business, and M. Aimery pays
her the proceeds every month--a hundred francs.'
'A hundred francs! four pounds three and fourpence for herself and two
children!'
'She had to move up from the nice apartments below to this dismal
quatrime, only one room, and very little in it; and then she was ill
for a long time, and the baby was born; and that took up all the ready
money there was left. She has been thinking whether she could get any
daily-governess work to do among the English; but then, how can she
leave the children?'
'Poor thing!' said Wilmet, 'I must go and see her to-morrow.'
'Do,' said her husband affectionately. 'Considering all things, we had
better remain here a few days, had we not?'
'Certainly. I will speak about the rooms. Of course we must do our best
for her and those poor children. I hope they are girls.'
'No,' said Robin,' boys--Gustave and Achille. Gustave looks
preternaturally wise and solemn, with his black eyes and bullet head;
but when his mother cried, he went into such an agony, that John had to
show him his watch, and give him his stick to ride on, before we could
hear ourselves speak. O John, what work you have done to-day!'
'And you too, Bobbie,' said Wilmet kindly, 'you had better go to bed as
soon as you have had your coffee.'
Her head was aching enough to make her glad to take the advice; and
when she was gone, John lay still, too weary, and yet too comfortable,
for the exertion of going to bed; and he was not far from sleep when
Wilmet came back from giving her sister the tender care that the shock
demanded.
Bitterness and resistance had long been swept away by those terrible
tidings; but Wilmet could not forget that she had offended, and
gathering herself into a great effort, she stood by the sofa,
dignified, but rather constrained, and said, 'I am very sorry about
this afternoon, John.'
'You were quite right,' said John, sleepily; 'it was not a business for
women alone.'
'That was not what I meant,' she answered. 'I ought not to have made
that flat refusal. I did not recollect.'
John roused himself a little, to say, 'I suppose when two people come
together who have grown up separately, their judgments must sometimes
differ, and there is not always time to adjust them.' These last words
were very sleepy again.
'No, I see I ought to have submitted; but I had no notion you would go;
I behaved very ill to you, and you did it to punish me.'
'Not exactly,' he said, stirred up at those words. 'It would have been
kinder to have told, but you had spoken plainly, and there seemed no
time--nor occasion--for--further--Jeanne d'Albrt--'
Which last words were sufficient testimony of the power of Morpheus.
After all, he was inflicting, though he did not know it, a severe
punishment. Wilmet was not a self-tormentor like Cherry; but she
did not like to have her little mutiny passed over without a
reconciliation, and to see him so perfectly unruffled by what had made
all the depths of her heart turbid. And when he had 'fallen asleep in
her very face,' she had the strongest possible temptation, if not to
pursue the argument, at least to demand if he meant to sleep there all
night, and rout him into going at once to undress; and when her real
goodness and affection would not permit this, to beguile the time with
the piece of intricate Pyrenean knitting, which had been the solace of
his active nature, when he was good for nothing else. Though she had
taught him to knit, those essential differences in the strength and
manipulation of male and female fingers, made him particularly dislike
to have rows interpolated by either of the ladies, and this she always
so far resented, that it would have been uncommonly agreeable in her
present mood to have gone on with the work. To abstain was all the
harder to a person of her instincts, because no other occupation could
be attained without opening a door, and breaking his slumbers; and
though Wilmet had plenty to think of, the deprivation of mechanical
employment for her fingers was trying enough to take away serenity or
connection from her thoughts. Instead of any sort of meditation on the
terrible tidings of the day, her mind would vibrate between desire to
take up the knitting and resolution to let him sleep till eleven.
Perhaps in truth, nothing in her whole life was so difficult to Wilmet
Harewood, or of so much service to her, than using such abstinence.
The shock and horror of the tidings when they reached Bexley may well
be believed. John, after full enquiry, had written both to Felix and
to the Miss Pearsons. Geraldine had perhaps never before believed that
Edgar was lost to her, and the blow of regarding him as a murderer
had such an effect upon her, that an illness was the consequence, in
which Felix had to call in Sister Constance's aid to supplement little
Stella's, and conquer the almost exaggerated feeling that for a time
threatened nervous fever.
Sometimes, however, a lesser worry becomes a remedy for the effects
of a greater, and Cherry's recovery was certainly not retarded by a
certain dismay at learning that the forgiving aunts had offered a
home to their errant niece and her little ones. No one could grudge
them the asylum, but it roused Cherry from bewailing the crime of the
one brother to a far more common-place anxiety about the other--a
counter-irritant that so restored her health and spirits, that Sister
Constance left her to such peace as it allowed her to enjoy. Felix
had settled down so quietly--he seemed so entirely to have got over
it, that it was hard to have all stirred up and the lady brought back
again, freed in so dreadful a manner. No woman can ever estimate
beforehand the effect that one of her own sex will produce on a man,
however sensible. Her opinion is no gauge for his; and she labours
under the further disadvantage that her better judgment is sure to be
pitied, if not as feminine spite, at least as feminine incapability of
candour; and Sister Constance advised Cherry to abstain from expressing
the faintest regret. The good old aunts religiously preserved the
secret of the mode of Tanneguy's death; but no one who knew the niece
could doubt that the whole story would be at the mercy of whoever chose
to cultivate her confidence.
Her arrival was notified by the sending in of a parcel from the
travellers, containing Wilmet's sets of shirts for Lance and Bernard
and two beautiful shawls in Pyrenean knitting, one for Cherry and one
for Mr. Harewood. Felix said very little, but his complexion was still
as tell-tale as a girl's. He was restless till Geraldine had called,
though he feared to ask her to do so. She was not indeed uneasy about
his actions; but only lest his affections should be so far out of his
power as to render him unhappy and open the old wound.
Her visit went off better than she expected. She was greatly touched
by Alice's delicate appearance and altered looks, and was favourably
impressed by her subdued affectionate manner, and her fervent gratitude
to the Harewoods, little guessing that it was to Robina that she owed
it all. There was so much to hear about the Major's degree of recovery,
his kindness, Wilmet's splendid beauty, and the sensation it excited,
and all their arrangements for the winter, that Cherry went home in a
far more ordinary mood than she could have thought possible.
For some time there was no meeting with Felix. Cherry even began to
wish it was over, and off his mind as well as her own.
It came about at last suddenly. Felix opened the house door exactly as
Alice was passing; they greeted one another, and shook hands. She had
her eldest boy with her; he was leading Theodore, and Scamp, who was at
their heels, instantly thrust his tan nose into little Gustave's face,
so terrifying the child, that Felix was lifting him in his arms out of
the dog's way, when he was startled by a yell from Theodore. The boy
had an animal's instinctive jealousy. He had never seen any child but
himself and Stella caressed by his brother; and the sight brought on
one of the accesses of passion which had begun to seize him since his
will and his strength had become somewhat more developed. Felix had no
choice but peremptorily to snatch him indoors, leaving Madame Tanneguy
and her child, who were both very much frightened, to Lance.
No more effective separation could have been devised, for Alice could
not but retain a great horror of that 'dreadful boy,' who, though much
smaller than Stella, and with little force in his soft aimless fingers,
was still nearly eleven years old, and twice as big as her tiny brown
elf. If they had been shut up together, Gustave would have mastered
him in a minute; but she of course viewed him as a formidable being;
and on the other hand, his face changed at the word 'little boy,'
and his blue eyes grew fixed and round, and his soft murmuring to an
angry inarticulate jabber, if he did but catch a sight of the little
French boy from the window. Geraldine was just beginning to feel that
the preventive had come in a curious form, between the two unconscious
creatures, when Madame Tanneguy received a remittance from M. Aimery,
and could not understand how to get it cashed. So just at the old
twilight hour of her former visits she was shown into the drawing-room,
and a message was presently sent to beg Mr. Underwood to come up when
he was at leisure.
When he came, Geraldine was struck with the peculiar gentleness of his
manner. It was gentle to all women and children, but to Madame Tanneguy
it had a sort of tender reverence that gave its exceeding kindness a
marked character, and was so unlike the good-natured elder-brotherly
raillery that used to veil his youthful adoration, that Alice
scandalised Cherry by exclaiming, 'How altered Mr. Underwood is! Grown
so grave, I should not have known him!' As if anyone would not be grave
when approaching the widow made by his brother.
He had minutely fulfilled the little service for her, and no doubt the
reverential tone gratified her, for thenceforth she was always coming
for the help and counsel that she never failed to find. 'Nobody could
advise like Mr. Underwood,' she said; and it was amazing how much she
found to consult him about--not only her French investments, but her
arrangements with her aunts, her correspondence, and at last whether
she ought to bring up Gustave and Achille as Roman Catholics. It so
much annoyed him to detect any pleasantry on his submission to her
behests, that Cherry and Lance scarce durst glance their half-amused
annoyance to one another; and Angel and Bear never fell into a
worse scrape in their lives than when they concocted a forgery with
the tidings that Madame Tanneguy presented her compliments to Mr.
Underwood, and was grieved to inform him that Gustave had scratched
Achille's nose. Would he give her his much esteemed advice whether to
apply court-plaster or gold-beater's skin?
Felix severely told Angela that to make a jest of Madame Tanneguy's
forlorn condition betokened heartlessness, and added to Bernard that
all the assistance that he or any of the brothers could afford was no
more than her due, and could never atone for the past. Bernard was
really awed, and after sulking for the rest of the day, suddenly
veered into a certain private adoration of the lady, who by this time,
with returning health, was resuming her vivacity. She had discarded her
floating crape, and her pretty little head shone in its native glossy
jet, while she smiled, chattered, and except that she was a devoted
mother, and did her duty conscientiously as an assistant in the school,
was the old Alice to all intents and purposes. Nor was it her fault if
the original Felix did not likewise revive; she tried many a little art
to beguile him into the playful terms of their former intercourse, but
he never relaxed that reserved, compassionate gentleness, nor allowed
himself to forget that his brother had first loved and then made her a
widow. Cherry could have jumped for joy that first time she detected,
and saw that Lance did, a shadow of a shade of impatience at those
exactions; and finally she settled into the trust that propinquity was
the best disenchantment, and that though there was still some romance,
it was about the Alice of old visions, not the live Madame Tanneguy,
whose obedient slave he would indeed always be, but merely as Edgar's
brother, and who was fast, by force of boring and of levity, dispersing
all the remaining glamour.
Cherry had her own anxiety, for an inspection by Wilmet was
approaching, and very suddenly. At the end of the winter, at Biarritz,
the travellers' plans had been deranged by an offer of an appointment
at Woolwich, which hurried them home in the end of February instead of
the beginning of May, as they had intended, and allowed them only to
give one clear day to each of their families. To that day Cherry looked
forward with some dread. Certainly the household was not precisely the
Babel that Wilmet had found on her former return, but a formidable
consciousness of shortcomings that would not bear inquisition beset
her, and she had such a frantic bout of tidying, that Lance found her
hopping about half dead with fatigue, and Stella nearly smothered with
dust; and begging an afternoon's remission from business, he became
the merriest and most helpful of housemaids till the operation was
accomplished.
After all, the anxiety proved to have been a little superfluous. Winds
howled all night, and Major Harewood's well-known discomfort at sea
made the arrival dubious till about three o'clock, when, in pouring
rain, a fly deposited the voyagers, shaken, battered, jaded, with a
prolonged and wretched passage, and each too anxious that the other
should rest, to be good for anything but wan smiles and affectionate
greetings. They had eaten or tried to eat at Southampton, and nothing
could be done with them but to shut them into Mr. Froggatt's state
bed-chamber and leave them, promising to be better company in the
evening.
Then there was time for Robina, who meanwhile had done little but run
about in their service, select and open the boxes and bags containing
what was wanted, and introduce the Hindoo, who was put under charge of
a young Lightfoot.
Then Lance and Robin had time to stand up in the drawing-room gazing
at one another after this thirteen months' interval. Lance held up his
hands and pretended to fall back in dismay: 'Robin-a-Bobbin grown into
a young lady! Ah!'
'And what's this?' as she flew at him to pinch the thick brown down
upon his lip. 'What kind of crop is this?' And they took one of their
old tumbling waltzes round the room together, as if to shake themselves
into one, while, with the hand that each kept loose, Robin continued to
snatch at the new decoration, and Lance to defend and smoothe it down.
'Ay,' said Felix (who tolerated it by a certain effort of philosophy,
and the humbling consciousness of being an old Philistine), 'he is
cherishing it for the Handel festival. He wants to be taken for a
German.'
'O Lance, are you to go to the Handel festival?'
'Yes, Miles has got me a place in the chorus--jolly, isn't it, of the
old fellow? I say, Robin, we must get you up there.'
'I--oh! I shall be at Woolwich then, I suppose. Do you know, Cherry, I
must only stay till Monday? Those two aren't in the least fit to get
into their house at Woolwich without help, and John has begged me--'
'I suppose you must,' said Cherry. 'After all these good accounts, this
is disappointing; but how could you all cross on such a night?'
'Why, Wilmet never minded the sea before, and John had made up his
mind soldier-fashion, and thought nothing was to be gained by waiting.
And when Wilmet had to succumb she would not believe it, and was so
disgusted at herself, and so miserable about him, that it did her all
the more harm.'
'And you!'
'Oh, I was quite well; but it was horrid enough any way--and poor John
had gone from the first to lie quite flat in the gentlemen's cabin,
where I could not get at him.'
'Before I go, what do you think of him?' asked Felix. 'One can't judge
of his looks to-day.'
'Oh! he calls himself sound--the wounds are all healed at last, but he
gets a great deal of bad pain still, either rheumatic or neuralgic; he
says it comes from the strain on his constitution, and will take no
advice about it till he can see Dr. Manby. Then he's so cripply that he
could not have gone on in the service if he were not a field-officer.
He says he is quite up to it, but we think it a great experiment. Oh!
Felix--Lance--don't go--there can't be anybody this wet afternoon!'
'Yes,' said Felix, 'this is just the time that all the old gentlemen
who get tired of their own fire-sides, and all the professionals
that can't take their walk, feel inclined to come and prose at
"Froggatt's."--But they won't want you, Lance; I'll send if there's
anything for you to do.--Good-bye, Robin Redbreast, you do look
uncommonly nice!' and he took her round cheeks between his hands,
and held up her face to kiss each of them, with mouth and brow,
individually and gravely.
'She's the Robin still,' said Cherry, 'only just a little polished up.'
'Developing,' said Lance, stalking round her, and speaking his words
deliberately; 'developing--into--the--bloom--of--sweet--seventeen--and
of--'
'Not beauty!' broke in Robina. 'I would not be as pretty as Wilmet for
two-pence.'
'Not for a major?' suggested Lance.
'He didn't marry her for her beauty,' vehemently responded Robina, 'but
for her--her niceness. Her beauty has been always in her way, and a
nuisance to her, and--'
'Sour grapes!' quoth Lance.
'Not a bit. It would be a worse hindrance in my branch of the
profession.'
Lance did not answer in jest this time; he looked at the bright
pleasant-faced girl in her maidenly bloom and fresh stylish dress, and
said, 'What a horrid pity it is! she looks ten times more of a lady
than ninety-nine out of a hundred of 'em--and there she's to go and
grind and be ground just for a governess.'
'Not a bit more of a pity than that--I'll not say that you should be a
printer, Lance, but than that anybody should be anything. I learnt my
Catechism, you see, to learn and labour to get my own living.'
'So you sent Madame Tanneguy home to prevent you from getting into
Wilmet's shoes at Miss Pearson's?'
'I should hope I was fit for something more than that!'
'Well done, Bob!'
'I didn't mean--' said Robina, rather distressed, 'but you see I have
had a much better education than ever Wilmet could get, and have gone
on longer with it; and I can go in for things that girls here would not
care to learn; so, as I am not wanted to keep house with Wilmet, it
would be just waste for me to come and do like her--poked up in this
corner.'
'Ah! you've had a taste of the world,' said Lance, speaking in jest;
but Robina, recollecting how he had crushed any ambition of his own,
and who did veritably feel that though home was home, Bexley was dull
and narrow, turned round with moist eyes.
'O Lance, I hope it is not that! You know I have been brought up to go
out, and it seems my work and duty; but I think it is a great deal more
honourable to stay here because one is wanted.'
'Because one can't help it,' said Lance, pulling her hair and smiling.
'Have you learnt to make speeches in France, Bob?'
'No. But indeed, Lance, I do want to know if you do never get tired of
things now?'
'Oh! I've no right; I'm not one of the highly educated ones!' said
Lance, in a spirit of teasing.
'Now, Lance, don't punish me, when I really want to know.'
'Taking into consideration the awful slowness and stodginess of the
place, and the contempt of one's highly educated brothers and sisters,'
said Lance, slowly, but with a twinkle in his eye that somehow made up
for the words, 'one does drag on life pretty well, by the help of
Pur and the organ. The new one is coming by next summer, if there's any
faith or conscience in the builder, which I believe there is not.'
'And,' she added, coming near and speaking low, 'did I not hear that
there had been a letter from Ferdinand?'
Cherry looked for it. 'Felix took it down to answer,' she said, 'but it
was from Sydney. He had seen Mr. Allen.'
'Oh!'
'Yes. He tracked those National Minstrels all over India, Bombay,
Calcutta, all manners of places--good faithful fellow--and at last he
found they had gone to Sydney, and there, actually, was Mr. Allen,
settled down as a music-master, making--I don't know what in a week.'
'But--'
'But there had been a great quarrel, and the concern had broken up; and
he did not in the least know where poor Edgar was gone,' sighed Cherry.
'Robin, did you hear what name he sung under at Alexandria?'
'No, Ferdinand only told Wilmet that his name was not in the programme.'
'That good Cacique!' broke out Lance; 'he is about the slowest-witted
fellow that walks the earth. I believe he would never believe it was he
if he saw anything less than Thomas Edgar Underwood in extra type. If
he only would have sent me, I'll be bound I'd have run Edgar down in no
time, instead of being always three months behind him, and now off the
scent.'
'No, but is he?'
'No, he has not given it up,' said Cherry. 'Mr. Allen did not know
whether they were gone to Melbourne or Adelaide, and he meant to try
both; and to go and see Fulbert and Mr. Audley.'
'One of them will stumble on him while Fernan is staring about with his
nose in the air,' said Lance.
'I am afraid he will only avoid them,' said Cherry sadly.
'And another certainty is that he will have taken some fresh alias,'
said Lance, 'while the Cacique is still hunting for Tom Wood. I bet on
Fulbert's finding him!'
'Has he parted from those Hungarians too?'
'Ay, there's the question! Should you like a prima-donna sister-in-law,
Robbie?'
'No, no, no--don't, Lance,' cried Cherry; 'Mr. Allen said Mademoiselle
Zoraya had--the horrid woman--thought much more of Edgar since--' she
could only pause, 'but he was far too sharp to be drawn in.'
'That I believe,' said Lance. 'Never fear, Cherry, we shall have
him some of these days, with a long beard, a longer fortune, and
the longest story--ah!' with a long sigh, 'if I wasn't an organist,
wouldn't I like to be a scamp!' The offensiveness of which word was
concealed by a sudden embrace of the Scamp dog, who was made to stand
on his hind legs, with his feet in Robina's hands, to display his
beautiful topaz eyes; and in the midst of the exhibition the door
opened, and John came slowly in, leaning on his stout stick.
'O John, I am glad! are you rested? Haven't you been asleep?'
'No; I think Wilmet will sleep if she is alone, so I am going to waste
no more time. Thank you,' as Robina put the cushion as he liked it, and
looked into his face with inquiry as she detected the well-known lines
that showed it was pain that made sleep hopeless. He smiled and gave a
little nod, by which she understood that she was to keep her discovery
to herself, and that it was not so severe but that he hoped to amuse it
away; and he began at once laughing with Geraldine.
'Well, Cherry, you see I've a rival to Lord Gerald.'
'I began to think I ought to offer him to you, though it would go to my
heart.'
'As if I would be put off with a slender little wand like that,' said
John. 'That's what I call a stick.'
'That's what I call a club,' retorted Cherry. 'I should want somebody
else to carry me if I took such a monster;' and they proceeded to a
sort of tilt between their two supporters.
'I won't have disrespect to my steadfast friend! She's made of olive
tree; her name is Olivia; and I believe Wilmet is jealous of her.'
'Indeed she is,' said Robin. 'When you go out all by yourself, and come
in hardly able to speak. That's what he went and did at Paris.'
'When one has got a wife and a sister, one breaks loose sometimes.
Here, you little Star, come and speak to me! Why, you were a
blackberry-gathering baby when I saw you last! Let me look at you now.
How old are you?'
'Eleven and a quarter,' breathed a little voice, as he gathered two
tiny hands into his, and a pair of porcelain blue eyes glanced up
for a moment out of the most dainty little oval chiselled face and
pink-and-white complexion, set in soft brown hair.
'And can eleven and a quarter hatch an egg from the Palais Royal? Not
from Bill's nid d'avis, but of a bird of larger growth,' as Stella,
with a half-breathed 'thank you' rosiness spreading over her face,
and lips raised for a kiss, beheld a beautiful blue egg, containing
implements of needlework.
John tried to talk to her over it, but could get nothing but
monosyllables, and blushes, and smiles, till he released her, and she
flew off, 'To show her egg to Theodore,' said Cherry. 'There's some
baking going on; and he never stirs from the kitchen while he can
handle the dough.'
'What a lovely little fairy it is!' said John; 'but is it wound up to
say nothing but yes or no?'
'She is awfully shy,' said Lance. 'Bill can't get as much out of her as
you have done.'
'She has not spoken a word since I have been in the room,' added Robin.
'She is a strangely silent child,' said Cherry. 'Sometimes I think
living so much with Theodore helps to make her so. She is quick at her
lessons, and is a perfect little book of reference; and will talk to
me gravely when we are alone; but it never seems to come into her head
to chatter. I'm sure Lance and Robin have talked more nonsense in this
hour than she has in six months.'
'I've a longing to hear Stella perpetrate a little nonsense,' said
Lance. 'When Angel and Bear are at home, and there is a good gabble,
there sits the child, her bright eyes smiling and gleaming, without a
word.'
A knock at the door. 'Mr. Lancelot, there's the Centry carriage in the
High Street.'
'There, you see what it is to be the lady's man!' said Lance, laughing
and running down.
'The Centry carriage means your cousin no more,' said John.
'No; she has let Centry to an old general with a large family. She said
she knew nothing about country poor, and hated county people; and her
mother likes nothing really but Brighton. I think she is quite right,'
said Cherry.
'What sort of people are they?'
'Oh! they do very well for the parish; but of course are nothing to
us. The General proses over the papers to Felix sometimes, and the
daughters have the loveliest eyes in the world.'
'That's Lance,' said Robina, laughing. 'Is he as tender-hearted as
ever?'
'Oh yes; or more so; but as long as the ladies all have the most
beautiful faces that ever were seen, and his attentions are confined to
putting attractive advertisements into their parcels, I don't mind.'
'Lance is the most altered of you all,' said John.
'Dear Lance,' said Cherry, 'he has got back a great deal of his
sunshine--quite enough to be very delightful to us, though I doubt
whether he is always as bright to himself. There is a certain
sehnsucht in the pieces of music he goes on improvising, that
sometimes makes me anxious.'
'You mean whether he has got into the right line,' said John.
'It's no use thinking about that; Felix could not do without him; and
he is fit for nothing else now,' said Cherry. 'I fancy when the new
organ comes, he will have a love in that and be happy.'
John was thoroughly one of themselves, more eager about Bexley affairs
than his wife, though she was thoroughly her affectionate self when
she joined them in the evening. She was too much tired, and too glad
to see their faces, to do more than repose in the sight; and it was
kinder to sing than to talk to either traveller. Even the next day,
when the ravages of the storm had been repaired, she had too much on
her own hands to have leisure to set Cherry to-rights; and if she
perceived any disuse of her pet economies, she acquiesced as if it
were to be quite expected, and no more worth a protest than matters
at the Bailey, whither she was going the next day. To be sure, there
was a kind of implied expectation that she would some day arrive for a
general rectification of what could just be tolerated under present
circumstances; but this was not a very pressing alarm.
The visit was over, the new home at Woolwich begun; and before many
weeks were over, it welcomed what father and aunt united in calling a
magnificent boy. Felix went with Mr. Harewood to the christening, and
found his sister a different creature, lovelier than he ever remembered
her. It seemed as if her happiness would have been almost too great
for this earth if John had only been as strong and well as he tried to
appear. But, after all, Felix really believed Wilmet would have been
lost without some one to nurse besides Christopher Underwood, dutifully
named after his two grandfathers.
Alda had actually come down for the day. It was the first time the
sisters had met since the funeral at Centry Park, and it had cost her
an effort, for her third daughter was but ten days older than Wilmet's
baby; and she could not withhold a slight plaint at the inequalities of
fate, in bestowing only girls where they were less welcome, while the
sex of Wilmet's magnificent boy could be of no possible consequence--a
remark which so exasperated not only the mother, but the father, as
greatly to amuse Felix.
Lady Vanderkist looked very thin and worn, as if much less recovered
than Wilmet, who had a beautiful fresh bloom, and was vigorous while
Alda was languid; but the brother and sister gathered that her
difficulties in coming down were far less caused by health than by
disregard to her private wishes and plans. Wilmet regretted that she
had not brought her little Mary; and she said she had hoped to do so,
but had found she could not have the horses, and did not like to take
her in a cab. She warmly invited Wilmet to town, but to Marilda's
house, not her own, except for mornings; and she apologized with real
vexation for not being able to offer Felix a bed, Adrian expected
someone that evening.
She was, of course, beautifully dressed; but Wilmet, in a delicate
pale-grey silk and Parisian rose-bud bonnet, was not the foil she used
to be; and the two sisters were still a very striking pair, though no
one would have guessed them to be twins, so worn did Alda look. She was
much kinder to Robina, too, and absolutely eager to hear of every one
at home.
But what struck Felix most was this. He had business in London, and
went back with her late in the afternoon. At the last moment, Wilmet,
wanting to cloak her sister, transferred her baby to his father, who,
as he held him, smiled to him with one of those little gestures of
tenderness, that express so very much because they are involuntary
and unconscious; and after the brother and sister were seated in the
fly, when they looked back with a last wave of the hand, Robina alone
answered it; the papa and mamma were wholly occupied in handing back
their treasure with a kiss on either side. Alda went on looking out,
and presently Felix saw her handkerchief stealing up to her eyes.
Perhaps she thought herself composed, for she turned round and said,
with an effort at a smile, 'That's what it is to have a boy! If Adrian
had ever looked like that!'
Felix charitably refrained from expressing his accordance with her
former sentiment, that it would have been all the same with a girl; and
indeed Alda had miscalculated her fortitude, for speaking brought a
flood of tears. Felix durst not look at her, and doubted whether to let
himself be conscious, but said at last, 'Caresses are no test. Many men
do not care for very young children.'
She shook her head; but as they arrived at the station she forced back
her tears, bit her lip, and drew forward her spangled veil; Felix
brought her a glass of water, and she walked along the platform with
him, holding his arm with a clasp that reminded him of the day he had
taken her home from Thomas Underwood's, but not a word did she say in
the train.
There was no carriage to meet her, and Felix could not resolve not to
see her home.
'Oh! thank you,' she said, more warmly than perhaps she had ever
thanked him before. 'I've always said one must come to you for
chivalry. But it is terribly out of the way; you will be late for the
dinner in Palace Gardens.'
'They must forgive me,' he said; 'and I should like to see the last of
you.' And as he sat by her in the hansom, he tried to give her a smile,
all affection and no pity.
'I wish there was time for you to go in. I want you to see little
Mary;' then presently, after an effort, 'You'll not speak of this,
Felix. I'm not strong yet; and I suppose daughters always are a
disappointment where there is a title.'
Felix supposed it too, and very kindly.
'Is there any chance of your coming to town again, soon?' she asked, 'I
am always at home and alone before three.'
'I do not think I shall--no--Lance is going up to the Handel festival,
and we cannot be away together.'
'Little Lance! I've not seen him since he used to have his head-aches.
But it is no use to think of it, we shall not be in town by that time,
the house is so dreadfully expensive. We shall not have one another
year. One gets sick of so much going out, and with all these little
girls it is time to begin to be prudent.'
Felix had seen enough of Sir Adrian Vanderkist's name on the turf
to think the sentence ominous; not that he was afraid of any great
crash, but expensive tastes did not accord with estates entailed and
the annual birth of a daughter; and he was greatly touched by Alda's
collapse of self-importance.
He was late, and Marilda forgave him easily, but Mrs. Underwood was
cross. No doubt she had fumed about poor relations having no right to
keep her waiting; and though there was something indefinable about
Felix that hindered her from manifesting this cause of displeasure,
his having been engaged in Alda's service did not pacify her. She
considered Lady Vanderkist as extremely ungrateful for not having
transported Marilda into those upper circles to which marriage had
introduced her, without taking into account that the obstacle lay, not
with Sir Adrian, who was ready enough to pay court to riches, but with
Marilda herself. That young lady was forming her own way in the world.
She had had enough of the Golden Venus line while, for her father's
sake, she submitted to it; and she did not choose to force herself into
fashionable circles. Country poor and the Lady Bountiful life, that
her mother would have accepted as 'comifo,' were distasteful to her;
but she had thrown her business abilities into the service of London
charities, and was there becoming every year a more considerable power.
Her business premises were in St. Matthew's district; and this made
her regard herself as a parishioner, and undertake no small amount of
service, of descriptions better known to the clergy-house than to her
mother, who set down to the accounts of the office many an hour spent
in Whittingtonian schools and alleys. At any rate, Marilda had become a
much more agreeable person, with more aplomb, more ease, and decidedly
less touch of vulgarity, since she had made her standfast, ceased to be
dragged at the wheels of the car of fashion, and become the managing
spirit of Kedge and Underwood, besides all that St Matthew's knew of.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
THE VICAR OF VALE LESTON.
'Cushions and cloth an' books, takin' the old church right roun',
Surplice, shovel, and broom, they would na ha' fetch'd half-a-crown,
Commandments to boot. They was the only good lookin' things
Wi' yellow cherubs between 'em, and nout but heads and wings.
Parson Myles was a hunter, and could gallop through a prayer,
Right straight ahead over anything, an' stop him who dare.'
Rev. W. Heygate.
There was to be a meeting about the paving of the town: Mr. Underwood,
though only twenty-eight, was a town-councillor, and decidedly an
influence in himself, as well as through the Pursuivant. He had so
worked his way up, that his fellow-citizens accepted him as one of
themselves; and his birth and breeding gave him a power which they
felt without in the least acknowledging. Besides, his conscientious
journalising made him always thoroughly get up his subjects; and he
threw himself into the merits and history of asphalt and flag-stones
with that 'all his might' with which he did whatsoever his hand found
to do.
He was busy on an article to prepare the way for the meeting, when
Lance, who had been making selections from London papers, laid the
last sheet of the 'Times' on his desk, and silently pointed to the
obituary:--
'On the 4th, at Torquay, aged 37, the Reverend Fulbert Bowles
Underwood, Vicar of Vale Leston Abbas, only son of Fulbert
Underwood, Esquire, of Vale Leston Priory.'
'I see,' quoth Felix.
Five minutes' waiting while he wrote.
'I say, does it go into Pur?'
'Certainly not. What matters it to any one here?'
That was all Lance could get out of Felix; and after a time came
the second delivery of the post. All the letters lay in a heap on
the office table, just when, as Lance mentally termed him, the
longest-windedest, button-holderest of all the municipality walked in
to bestow his opinion on the paving question upon Mr. Underwood; and
Lance not only had to retreat from the important conclave, but was
occupied himself by a succession of customers for a quarter of an hour
after its conclusion. When he made another rush into the office, he
found Felix still writing away at the paving stones, but with a good
deal of red in his cheeks, and a letter lying by his side.
'Read that, Lance,' he said, 'but don't speak till this is done.'
Lance read:--
Vale Leston Priory, May 7th.
MY DEAR MR. FELIX UNDERWOOD,
I write by desire of my poor friend Mr. Underwood, to acquaint
you with the death of his son, your cousin, the Vicar, at
Torquay, on the 4th of this month. The melancholy event had
long been anticipated, as there had been a complete break-up of
constitution; and I for one never expected to see him return
home alive when he went to Torquay with his wife last winter.
Mr. Underwood has felt the loss deeply, though not with the
same acuteness as if he had not had such long preparation,
and it had not taken place at a distance. He has become much
more feeble since you saw him five years ago, when certainly
you left a lasting impression. He wishes you to be present
at the funeral, with any of your brothers to whom it may be
convenient. The time is fixed for next Friday, the 10th, at
eleven o'clock. Your rooms will be ready for you on Monday; and
if you will mention your train, you shall be met at Church Ewe
or Ewmouth. It seems premature to mention it, but Mr. Underwood
is so anxious that no time should be lost, that he desires
me to intimate to you, that if you can procure immediate
Ordination, he will present you to the Vicarage. I do not
take this to be as simple a matter as he does, but under the
circumstances, and with your studious turn, I should think it
quite possible for you to be ready before the Vicarage lapses,
and the poor old Squire has evidently set his heart on it,
and planned it ever since he gave up hope of his son's life.
Congratulations would be out of place at this moment, but I
trust that the succession is now secure.
Remember me to my friend Mr. Lancelot--I trust that headaches
are with him a thing of the past--and believe me,
Yours very truly,
H. STAPLES.
Lance made all manner of contortions with his visage, read and re-read,
indulged in a suppressed war-dance, and finally merged all other
sensations in an agony of impatience, as still Felix's eyes and pen
continued to travel over his sheet; and not a muscle of his face moved
until the last was handed to little Lightfoot, and sent off to the
press.
'That's done,' then he said.
'You may well be on the board of paving-stones!' cried Lance. 'Nothing
but one of them could have gone on so.'
'It had to be done.'
'I could as soon have done it as flown.'
'Not if you never let your mind loose from it. Now for the letter.
Stay, we'll take it up to Cherry. I'll just say a word to Lamb.'
Felix's courtesy to his subordinates always went a great way. The
noontide lull of business was beginning to set in, but Cherry and
Stella looked up from their lessons in amaze as both brothers came in;
and Cherry mutely clasped her hands, and with the word Edgar fluttering
on her lips, but as both faces plainly indicated no, she rallied
instantly, saying, 'What wonder of wonders is it?'
'Nothing very surprising,' said Felix gravely. 'It is that poor old
Fulbert, at Vale Leston, has lost his son, and wants me to go to the
funeral.'
'That's not all,' added Lance. 'What do you think of his wanting this
here Giant to get himself ordained, and take the Vicarage on the spot?'
'Felix, you could not--not in time.'
'Nor at all. That is not to be thought of; but I shall go through
London, take Clement down with me, and see if I cannot get the living
for him; but let me read you the letter--I could barely glance at it.'
He read; and Cherry broke out, 'The succession secure! Does that mean
to you?'
'I am heir-at-law,' said Felix quietly; 'and it was entailed on me in
case his son had no children.'
'He takes it coolly, doesn't he?' said the far more elated Lance, 'but
then he's had plenty of preparation.'
'You don't mean that you've known about this?'
'I knew the estate had been entailed on me to prevent this poor man
from alienating it.'
'You knew, and you never told anyone, and went on as usual!'
'How would you have had me go on?' he asked, with a certain provoking
meekness, that sent her into a laugh, while Lance, catching Stella's
wondering eyes, practically answered the question by locking her
fingers in his, and whirling her round in a sort of impromptu choric
dance, chanting:--
'Wrong shall be right,
And right shall be might,
When--'
('bless me, what a plague three syllables are!')
'When Felix' right and Felix' might
Shall meet upon Vale Leston height!'
'It is not a height,' interposed Felix.
'The King shall have his own again then,' amended Lance. 'No, I have
it. The enchantment is over, and the Frog-prince is about to resume his
proper shape!'
'Lance, considering--'
'Blunderbore, considering the extraordinary relief and disburthening of
my mind, after labouring under this secret five years come August, if
it were not profane, I should compare myself to Christian when the pack
dropped off his back!'
'But why was it a secret?'
'For two reasons, Whiteheart,' said Felix. 'First because there was
nothing to tell; and secondly, because that "nothing" might have turned
several heads. Still, I believe you would have known it long ago, if I
had not been ashamed after binding over Lance.'
'Please, may I understand?' entreated Stella, in rather a melancholy
voice, as she found her usual mode of observation quite inadequate.
'Understand, my Star! Yes,' said Lance; 'understand that we were all of
us kicked out--all of us that were there to kick, that is to say--from
the jolliest place in all the world; and now things are coming right,
and Felix is going to be a fine old English gentleman who had a great
estate! I declare it makes me so poetical I can't get on!'
'You'd better come to me, Stella,' interposed Felix. 'Nothing is going
to happen now, my dear. It is only this. The old house where we elder
ones were born was meant to belong to my mother, but there was a flaw
in the will that left it her, and so it went to the more direct heir;
and my father would not go to law because he did not think it right
when he could not afford it, and especially as he was a clergyman.'
'O Felix!' cried Cherry eagerly.
'Yes; I have a copy of the letter. And now, the poor old gentleman
who had it has lost his son, and has sent me a kind message, as if he
wished me to go back there; but that will not be in his life-time, so
we need not talk about it. There is nothing to make any change now.'
'No?' asked Cherry, disappointed.
'Of course not. Expectations are not good sustenance. The reversion is
possibly very distant, and there may be some mistake about it, after
all.'
'Well! one ought to be prepared,' said Cherry; 'but oh! to see you at
home--home--yes, Vale Leston is home! O Felix, what it will be!'
'Don't set yourself on wishing it,' said Felix anxiously. 'Remember Pur
and the business are our dependence or independence, and most likely
are far better and safer for us.'
'Pshoo!' shouted Lance; 'I won't have you talk book!'
'May I tell Wilmet?' entreated Cherry.
'No harm in that; meantime I must get things in train, and then walk
over to explain matters to Mr. Froggatt; and as soon as I can get away
to-morrow I shall go up to town, and make Clement come on with me.'
'O Fee, one moment! Are we to go into mourning?' Then, as he held up
his hand, 'It means more than you think. It shows how much we hold by
the connection; and if I understand you, you wish nothing so little as
to have it trumpeted about that Mr. Underwood has great expectations.'
'As prudently stated as W.W. could have done it! It must turn on the
degree of connection.'
'Is he as near as Tom Underwood was?'
'The same on my mother's side. Yes, put on black ribbons; but, as you
say, don't trumpet the thing. Don't begin about it, but if any one
asks, explain how it stands.'
The heir-expectant was gone; and Lance, after waiting to indulge in
another pantomime of exultation, ran after him, humming:--
'Oh, to see him back again!'
By the middle of the next day Felix was able to leave home, after
having seen the Froggatts, whom he treated with as much deference
and attention as if he were still accountable to them. The reception
of his communication made him glad that he had been silent when the
chances were more remote, for though Mrs. Froggatt was ready to cry
for gladness at the notion of his taking his own proper place as a
gentleman, and had a farmer's daughter's respect for the squirearchy,
her husband feared that empty anticipation would spoil Felix for a
tradesman, and be injurious to the business, which he viewed with
tender pride and solicitude. So he lectured on the uncertainty of
prospective fortunes, and the folly of reckoning on them, till it was
evident that his confidence would have been sorely shattered had the
bare notion been whispered five years earlier. Indeed, his comfort
seemed compromised by finding that Felix would not be the permanent
property of the business, and he was almost displeased, as if he
thought he had allowed it to pass into his hands on false pretences. It
was vexatious and disappointing; but he had to be left to recover the
first shock, which, after all, proved his love and value for the young
man.
Felix did not reach Whittingtonia till late; and on inquiry at the
clergy-house, heard that Mr. Underwood was not at home, but the Vicar
was. To him therefore Felix went in his study, not sorry to ask his
advice. Clement, who would not receive priest's orders for some weeks,
was over young for the charge of an utterly neglected parish; but it
was dangerous to let the presentation pass by, since only a brother
could satisfactorily co-operate in dealing with the old ancestral
sacrileges, in case he should ever come in for the property himself.
Mr. Fulmort never spoke while Felix told his story; and the bell for
Evensong had begun by the time it closed. Then he said, 'I am very
glad, heartily glad. I have been watching Clement, and I see he is not
tough enough yet for our work. When a young fellow, of such a length
too, can't eat after any hard day's work, instead of being ravenous,
he is sure to break down the first time he takes cold or catches an
illness, and then he is done for. I should have had to drive him away
elsewhere, at least for some years, poor fellow, though none has ever
been more like a son to me. Yes, of course he is too young, but he is
not the sort of stuff that falls into slackness, and that is more fatal
than any amount of blunders and foolishness.'
The last words startled Felix. He had been so anxious to place Clement
at Vale Leston, that he had thought of no drawbacks till he was
roused to a foreboding of that dour uncompromising rigidity, left to
itself, sowing dissensions, becoming a hard master to them all--nay,
not improbably alienating the old Squire, and overthrowing all their
prospects! Such a future passed before Felix in his transit across the
quadrangle, and was met, but not disposed of, by the sense that it was
right and just that Clement should be put forward, 'Fais ce que dois,
advienne que pourra.' He had put Clement into his own place to console
his father for his own secession to secular work; and if devotion,
blamelessness, and earnestness were recommendations, they were not
lacking. 'And if he do give offence, and all be left to Marilda,'
thought Felix, 'let it go. It would only be for conscience sake.
Poverty is better than riches! and I may have to show that I believe
so. I only hope that the boy will not do the thing in some pig-headed
way, in which it would be hard to back him up.'
Misgivings vanished for the time when his brother was in sight. It
was not easy to make him out in the deep perspective of the choir.
Felix only knew that a fair-haired head above the average line must
be his; but when he came forward to the Eagle, whence he was to read
the Second Lesson, and afterwards give his lecture, he was in full
view. In his lankiest hobbedy-hoy days, Clement had always looked his
best surpliced; and now, with the cassock beneath, the stole over
one shoulder, and his black-and-white hood, his figure had a certain
dignity, and his voice gave Felix a thrill. The mixture of hereditary
tone and unconscious imitation were such that when he shut his eyes he
could believe himself a boy at St Oswald's, listening to his father;
and even when he looked up the illusion was hardly dispelled, for the
half-light brought out the similar moulding of the features, and a
hectic tinting. He gave a careful little discourse, evidently one of a
series, and the allegory of the Wilderness life with much more depth
and poetry than the elder brother had expected.
He had taken care to place himself out of direct view of the young
preacher, and his appearance in the quadrangle was an immense surprise
to Clement. 'Felix! you here! nothing the matter? What's that? Not poor
Edgar?' as his eye fell on Felix's new hat and hat-band.
'No, no--this is for the younger Fulbert of Vale Leston. I have more to
say to you.'
'Come in to supper, then. Have you seen the Vicar? Do you stay the
night? That's jolly! Here, Fred, you've not seen my brother!'
Fred Somers was known to be Clement's friend. With one of the natures
that prefers external to home friendship, Clement had at first bestowed
his affection on poor Harry Lamb, and since upon this companion, who
had been his predecessor by half a year in everything, and in whom
Felix was diverted to see his complete contrast. Mr. Somers was at
least five inches below Clement's six feet one and a half, and was a
dark, plump, merry little man, who looked as if the Vicar never need
scruple about getting any amount of work out of him; and Clement, with
a hand on his shoulder, looked perfectly happy, and as if working at St
Matthew's side by side with him were all he desired. And very overgrown
and boyish Clement looked too at that supper, a very merry one. There
were the six clergy, fourteen choir boys, and sundry chance-helpers,
mostly talking eagerly, with a good deal of laughter at old and new
jokes. Felix, seated by the Vicar, thought Clement far more at his
ease, more playful and familiar, than ever he had seen him at home, and
infinitely less on his dignity than he ever allowed himself to be with
Lance and Bernard.
After supper, the two brothers repaired to Clement's tiny private room,
uncarpeted, with a table, two Windsor chairs, and a book-case; and
then, when the elder had explained, the younger flatly refused to have
anything to do with Vale Leston Abbas.
'I!' he said, 'go to a fat easy-going country living when the need is
so urgent here? I to stand alone when I want years of training? It
would be enough to ruin me!'
'But the place, Clement. This parish will never be ill-supplied while
Mr. Fulmort lives; but people have souls down in the country.'
Clement had not much feeling for souls whose bodies he had never
realised; but he answered, 'Very bad for the souls to have an
inexperienced priest.'
'Quite true; but observe, it is not the choice between you and such
a clergyman as you would select, but between you and no one knows
who--certainly a person who could not help in the complication of
family and Church property, as only a brother could do.'
'That is all in the clouds,' said Clement. 'I have made up my mind to
ten years' service here, and I intend to keep to it.'
'The Vicar says you have not strength for it.'
'Then I shall go on without it.'
'Till you kill yourself.'
'The best end one could come to.'
'No, not if there be a leading of Providence elsewhere.'
'I observe that Providence is generally said to lead in the direction
of ease and  s.d. No, Felix, I am much obliged, but even if this old
man would appoint a vicar of decided opinions like mine, I cannot allow
myself to be led aside into a path of wealth and luxury contrary to all
I had marked out for myself.'
'Are people always meant to do all they have marked out for
themselves?' said Felix, as he heard the frequent first person singular.
'When it is the line of self-abnegation.'
Felix could not help smiling, and muttering between his teeth, 'Is it?'
Then he added, 'At any rate you will come down to the funeral and see
the old place?'
'No! I will not raise false expectations to be disappointed.'
The idea of baffled expectations excited by that long white-faced lad!
Even Felix was beginning to console himself, and think Clement might be
doing the best for them all, when they were summoned to the Oratory by
the evening prayer-bell. As good-nights were spoken at the foot of the
stairs, the Vicar asked Felix, 'Have you prevailed?'
'No, sir. Perhaps you will talk to him?'
Mr. Fulmort nodded, and Felix went to his own room. In the morning the
Vicar told him that he had not made much impression, but that he had
actually made it matter of obedience that Clement should go to Vale
Leston with his brother, and not consider his decision as made till he
had thoroughly seen the place.
And thus it was that Felix, in different company and different mood
from when he had last seen his birthplace, found himself stopping at a
little station called Church Ewe, about three miles short of Ewmouth;
and there a smart servant came up with his finger to his cockaded hat,
and took possession of the two little black bags.
'The beginning of greatness!' observed Clement, who was very benignant
towards Felix's prospects, though he would accept none for himself, as
they ensconced themselves in the great barouche with the pair of horses.
Felix shook his head. He wanted to hold himself as loose as possible
from gazing on the place as an inheritance, at the same time as he
greatly desired to see Clement smitten with it, almost as much from
jealousy for the old home as with a view to the future.
Their way brought them in on the opposite side from the Ewmouth
road; so that the first view was from high ground, whence the lovely
encircling valley, the slopes of wood inclosing it, the purple moorland
above them, the grey sheen of the river, the high-arched bridge, the
noble church, and grand old ancestral-looking priory, partly veiled by
fine trees, in the delicate glory of early summer, lay outstretched
before them, the shimmer of the sea, and a few white sails far in the
distance.
That sense of the eye satisfying the heart, and being as it were at
rest and at home, which he had felt at the sight five years before, and
never at any other, came over Felix; and exulting in the loveliness,
he looked eagerly to see the effect on Clement, but the smooth young
face was carefully guarded against relaxing, the light blue eye was
steadily set as unmarking anything. Felix was provoked, and then
wondered whether the Deacon were like the Moslem who refused to dwell
at Damascus, lest he should have his Paradise only on earth. A little
local information elicited nothing but civil indifferent answers, that
inspired a desire to shake that inanimate figure.
Driving up through the park, beauteous with chestnut blossom, they were
shown into the library; and there Mr. Staples came to them, cordially
shaking hands, but, as Felix fancied, somewhat critically scanning that
long straight coat with the little cross at the button-hole.
'The Squire is tolerable,' he answered to Felix's inquiry. 'I think it
is coming out in gout. He will dine with you. It does him good to see
people.'
'And Mrs. Underwood?'
'Came yesterday. Mother and brother here too. Ladies dine together
upstairs.'
'Are you staying here?'
'No; but I am over as much as I can. The old Squire wants someone, and
I don't fancy leaving him too much to Smiles--he's the curate, and has
been trying to worm himself in. Will you come to your rooms? Dinner at
seven.'
To Felix it was like meeting an old friend to tread the black stair,
and the long panelled corridors, all windows on one side, the other
hung with portraits, the Underwood red cheeks and blue eyes staring
round, and coarse like Marilda. Mr. Staples popped Clement into one
wainscotted room, and left him there, but shut himself in with Felix.
'So that's your clerical brother?'
'An excellent hard-working devoted fellow.'
'But very--?'
'Well, rather!'
'And it is quite out of the question for yourself?'
'Entirely so. Even if I thought it right, it could not be done.'
'I thought so, and told the Squire. Unlucky, for things are a good deal
involved; and you would find the vicarage income handy, while as for
this--why he is a mere boy!'
'So he feels himself. He is conscious of his want of experience, and
it would be an infinite relief to him to see it in good hands.'
'Mrs. Fulbert and her mother declare that the Squire promised poor
Fulbert to give it to her brother, Harry Shaw, whom you'll see here
to-night; but he swears he did no such thing; and on the whole, I think
Smiles would have a better chance--he's an obsequious chap, who has
been very attentive to the old man all the winter, half their spy, half
his toady. However, the Squire would never let either of them have it
while there's a parson left with Underwood blood in his veins!'
All the quaint old bedrooms in this passage opened one into the other,
and Felix unlocked the door between himself and Clement to communicate
the information received, but it apparently took no effect.
The dinner-party was dismal and incongruous enough. Obsequious was a
word that exactly depicted little, sleek, low-voiced Mr. Smiles, who
though presiding at one end of the table, seemed ready to emulate
Baillie M'Wheeble's posture; and the rival candidate, Mr. Henry Shaw,
was a red-faced, punchy man, hardly distinguishable in appearance or
manner from his farmer kindred, and, as soon became apparent, with such
principles as he had, diametrically opposed to those of Clement, who,
with his refined countenance and form, looked as if he belonged to some
other world.
Mr. Underwood was wheeled in in his chair. He was not a man to give
way, but rather to try to talk sorrow down; and the curate and Mr.
Staples, knowing his humour, set county politics going, and all
joined with a fervour, not to say violence, that struck the brothers
as unsuitable. It was more than the Squire, between deafness and the
burthen of grief, could follow; he grew abstracted, and presently
rousing himself, turned to Clement to ask what had just passed at the
other end of the table.
'That the bribery petition will fail, sir,' repeated Clement, bending
with the naturally kind and courteous manner due to age, infirmity, and
sorrow, and speaking in a clear sweet modulated tone, that evidently
struck the old man more than the words.
'You have the family voice,' he said, looking up at him. 'Why, you are
a mere lad! You don't tell me you are in Orders?'
'I was ordained Deacon last summer, sir,' said Clement colouring deeply
at having to say it loud enough to attract everyone's attention.
'Ah! eh! And your age?'
'Four-and-twenty last March.'
'You don't look eighteen,' said the Squire, with that still infantine
face close to him, reddening most youthfully. 'Where's your curacy?'
'At St Matthew's, Whittingtonia,' said Clement impressively, and
casting his eyes round, as if, thought Felix, he were making a
confession of faith and looking for persecution; but, half to the elder
brother's relief, half to his diversion, they had got into a world
where there was no thermometer of London churches, and no one knew
what the avowal implied. Mr. Smiles asked if it were a Bethnal Green
district; and Mr. Shaw observed, loud enough for the Squire to hear,
that London parishes were not the places for plain straightforward
men, no one was looked at who wasn't got up like a swell to please the
ladies; and then they both united in rallying the youthful curate about
tea-parties and pretty young ladies; but Clement was as impervious to
ridicule on that score as if his head had been cowled and tonsured,
and he bore it well, simply and gravely replying that he was too much
occupied to go into society. He volunteered no dangerous topic, but
showed much more good sense and forbearance than Felix had ventured to
give him credit for in the curt answers he was compelled to make; but
the old gentleman did not hear these, and began again.
'You've a sister married--eh?'
'Two,' said Clement, for Felix was too far off to be audible and as
further information was looked for, 'one to Major Harewood, and the
other to Sir Adrian Vanderkist.'
If Felix did for a moment feel that it sounded better than if they had
married the butcher and the baker, Mr. Shaw took care to qualify the
announcement with, 'Sporting baronet, ain't he? Got three horses at
Epsom, I think!'
'What's that?' demanded Mr. Underwood. 'Your sister's husband on the
turf?'
'I am sorry to say he is,' said Clement gravely.
'Not getting into scrapes? Any danger of his going on too fast?'
'I think not, Sir.' Felix felt he must shout, knowing well that
Clement's regret was directed rather to racing in the abstract, than to
any pecuniary peril, and for the first time feeling bound to defend Sir
Adrian as a brother-in-law. 'He is a prudent man, and not likely to go
beyond his means.'
Which was true. He was not exceeding present means. The evil was the
future of the little girls, now four in number; but Clement looked
reproachful at the answer he had to repeat to his neighbour, who
relapsed into silence for a little while, then asked again, 'Who said
one of them had married into a marching regiment?'
Mr. Staples laughed, and came to the rescue this time. 'Regiments never
march but when young ladies marry into them; but it is not true in
this case, Sir. Major Harewood is in the Royal Engineers, and has an
appointment at Woolwich.--Didn't you tell me so?' turning to Felix.
'Have you heard anything from him of this new gun?'--which gun was
safely wielded through the remainder of the meal.
After dinner, the Squire went back to his room, desiring Felix to come
with him.
He looked much older than before, and made no more effort at
cheeriness; as he sighed, settled himself, and signed Felix to a chair
near him and his great fire.
'So!' he said. 'So things come round! Why did you not bring the nice
little lad that was here before?'
'He and I cannot both leave home together, Sir. He is my right hand in
the business.'
'You've not brought him up to your business?'
'I could not help it. That sun-stroke put him back in his studies, and
he could not bear to be idle.'
'You must find some gentlemanly line for him; not too old, eh? You give
it up, of course, you've thought better of my proposal--eh?'
'Quite impossible, Sir, thank you,' said Felix. 'You are very kind, but
I am totally unfit. My education was stopped at sixteen.'
'Don't tell me you can't get through what Harry Shaw there did!
Besides, what do we want of a scholar? I'd rather have a man of sense!'
'No Bishop would or could ordain me within the time.'
'Staples did say the Bishops had got more crotchetty now-a-days. How
long would they insist on for preparation? I'd get little Smiles to
hold it for the time.'
'It is impossible, Sir, thank you, in every way--even if I could think
it right.'
'Right? It is not right the things should be separated. I've been
crippled by it all my life, and cursed my folly in setting my face
against the Church; and you'll hardly get the property in so good a
condition as I did. Why, you're bookish already, and look like one of
the cloth. Fit! you're fitter by a long chalk than Harry there! Come!
think better of it. I'd not mind the cost if they insist on a turn at
the University.'
'Thank you, Sir,' said Felix; 'but I cannot do it. It is against
my conscience.' And as he saw that this was incomprehensible, he
thought he had better bring forward a palpable testimony to the
impracticability. 'Besides, I must go on with my work. There are too
many of us for me to give over.'
'Many! The lad hasn't been fool enough to marry?'
'No, no, Sir; but there are two, a little brother and sister, at home,
and two more at school, besides Geraldine and Lancelot.'
'All depending on you?'
'The four youngest entirely so; Geraldine earns a good deal with her
painting, and Lance quite makes his own maintenance; but I could not
leave them, nor break up the home.'
Six brothers and sisters were more than any one could adopt on the
spot, and Mr. Underwood felt the cogency of the argument. 'Then you
absolutely must keep up this confounded trade of yours till the breath
is out of my body!'
'I hope to keep it up a long time yet, Sir,' said Felix; 'I have been
very happy in it.'
'And--and--there's no other way?'
'Certainly not, Sir, thank you. All I have is embarked in it; and
while things stand as they do, I should not be justified in making any
change.'
Whatever Felix's kindred might think of his occupation, they were
always forced to feel the dignity of his industry and independence.
Here was this young man, under thirty, and looking younger than he was,
talking of half-a-dozen of young brothers and sisters as a reason,
not for accepting help, but for being let alone to maintain them;
and actually showing a brother, a clergyman, scholar, and gentleman,
visibly superior to what his kinsman had brought there to meet him.
This was not a young heir to adopt, foster, and command, but a man to
address upon equal terms, and Mr. Underwood put his next suggestion
with less of authority. 'If it were not just absolute trade--retail,
ain't it? It will be against you when you come here, you see. Could not
you get out of it into Kedge and Underwood's firm? That would sound
better.'
'Yes, Sir, but I could not throw over my business without a great loss;
and it would be undertaking what I don't understand, instead of what I
do.'
'Besides,' added the Squire, going on with his talk, 'with your
expectations, family, place, and all, that girl of Tom's would jump at
you!'
Felix shook his head decidedly, though unable to help a little inward
laugh at this revival of Alda's old manoeuvre.
'By-the-by,' continued the old gentleman, 'what's become of your
brother that Tom bred up?'
'We knew of him last in Australia, Sir.'
'Next to you, is he or this tall lad you have here?'
'He is older than Clement'
'Poor Tom made too much of him--eh? Well, young men will be young men,'
said Mr. Underwood, too full of his own sorrows to think about Edgar;
'but they come round at last:' and therewith he fell into a talk about
his own son, whose illness and death he proceeded to dwell upon, as he
found he had a kind and attentive auditor; and this lasted till the
butler came to wheel him off to his bed.
Felix and Clement paid an early visit to the church next morning, and
found it in a course of being muffled in black. 'Seventy-five yards
there allys was for every Underwood on 'em,' said Abednego Tripp, who
had become much more shaky and feeble, had resigned his market-boat
to Kerenhappuch's husband, and was hobbling about the church in a
mixed, but on the whole a pleasant and exulting, frame of mind, by no
means partaking of the intense disgust with which Clement beheld the
sanctuary invaded by the paraphernalia of human woe.
Dr. May, unasked, brought Bernard over to the funeral, which was at
twelve o'clock. Neither the father nor the widow attended it; but
the incongruity of Edward Underwood's sons acting as chief mourners
was prevented by the nearer claims of the Shaw brothers-in-law. The
farmer tenants came; but the lack of neighbouring clergy and even
gentry struck the brothers in contrast with the overflowing numbers who
had flocked to their father's grave, so far from his ancestral home,
showing how much more the man can be than the position.
Bernard was staring about him with little endeavour for appearances;
and at the first moment that speech was possible, even while the
hat-bands were coming off, he looked up in the face of Clement with
open eyes, and said, 'My eyes! this is no end of a place! Is it what
is to come to us?' Clement hushed him seriously and vigorously, but
without much effect. 'Did you know 'twas like this?' he persisted,
gazing round.
'I never thought about it. Hush!'
'Why, 'tis twice as jolly a house as Abbotstoke! And the woods! And
the river! One might shoot every day, and fish the rest, and be always
boating besides!' exclaimed Bernard, enthusiastically, but happily
under his breath. 'And ain't there a hunter worth 120 here? Where is
he, Clem?'
'How should I know?'
'You've been here all night and this morning, haven't you?' said
Bernard, as if he had not thought even Tina capable of such
indifference. 'I'll get down to the stables, and find out.'
While Clement was trying to stop him, the summons to a lugubrious
luncheon did so more effectually. There Bernard had the opportunity of
fraternizing with a Shaw nephew of his own age, and none of the malice
of his seniors, who imparted the melancholy fact that the hunter-colt
was sold, but undertook to show off the stables; but fate was too
strong for Bear, he was captured by his eldest brother, and told that
while Dr. May's horse was coming round, Mr. Underwood would like to
see him.
The wish was far from mutual, and Bernard was as sulky as his namesake;
but sulkiness might pass on such an occasion for decorous solemnity;
and Bernard was always one of the show specimens--a big, well-grown,
straight-limbed boy, with a handsome Underwood face, not of the
girlishly rosy tinting of his brother's, but glowing with a hardy
healthy sunburnt hue, and he could not but answer with a sort of glum
awe-struck civility the few questions asked him, as to his age, and
where he was at school, and then whether he had ever been rabbitting.
'Only once;' and Bernard's face lost its sulkiness. 'Marilda's gone and
let her shooting!'
'And you like it?'
Bernard's lips only said 'yes,' but his blue eyes danced.
'Well, some of these days, you must come over and have a day with the
keeper, when your brother is settled here.'
The eager face of anticipation fell, and out came at unawares, 'But
that won't be till you are dead;' and then the boy began colouring to
the ears.
'No, no, I don't mean this brother; but what's his name--the young
parson? When he is here, you must come over. And here--' As the Doctor
came in to take leave, Bernard found in his hand 'tip' that exceeded
even the great days of Ferdinand's munificence!
He sprang out to Clement, who was standing in the porch. 'Oh! I say,
Clem, what a splendiferous go this is!'
Again, all he got was a scandalized hush.
'I don't mean that. He told me himself! I'm to come over to shoot
rabbits, and all that is delicious, when you are a clergyman here!
Hurrah!'
'Hold your tongue, Bernard,' said Clement, with a voice of subdued
impatience, 'and don't talk nonsense.'
'But you are going to be a clergyman here,' persisted Bernard. 'He
said so.'
'That does not make it the fact.'
'O Clem, you'd never be so viciously spiteful as not to come! Think of
the rabbits and the salmon, and a licence by-and-by!'
'Come, Bernard,' said Dr. May's cheery voice behind; then, as he shook
hands with Clement, 'You must find your way over to Stoneborough when
you are settled here. Our church is a sort of rival to yours.'
'Not mine,' protested Clement; but the Doctor was in a hurry, and was
off. Business was to be done with the family lawyer, and Felix got a
hint that he might be wanted after a time, so he betook himself to a
nook in the cloister, redolent with old memories, and began a letter
to Mr. Audley. Clement, as he really believed with malice prepense,
put himself entirely out of reach by starting off for a walk with Mr.
Smiles, who, detecting that the London clergyman's mind was far from
made up to bury himself in a dull, secluded, straggling country parish,
had kindly volunteered to show him the beauties of the scenery.
Nearly two hours had passed, when a tall shadow came across the arch,
and Clement's low eager voice asked, 'Have you any money about you?'
'Just about enough to get home with. Why?'
'How near is Ewmouth?'
'Nearly four miles. What are you after?'
'I can do it before dinner;' and the long legs seemed about to move off.
'Stay, Clement! What?'
'I must raise enough to get a bottle of port. There's a child sinking
in typhus. Don't detain me, Felix. I find there's no help for it. I
must have this place,' he added, as if throwing a tub to the whale to
effect his escape.
'Stop, ask for some here.'
'No use. Squire forbids all giving in that quarter.'
'What do you mean to do?'
'I must dispose of--of--of--Well, it must be this,' touching his little
cross, Ferdinand's gift, and nearly his favourite possession.
'Come! It won't do to make your dbut at Ewmouth by disposing of your
jewelry. I left myself a margin of half-a-crown, and if we walk from
the station, that will save two shillings more.'
'That will do,' said Clement. 'Thank you, Fee, you shall have it again.
I had given all I had about me in the other hovel. The woman is
waiting in the churchyard. I'll send her off, and then tell you.'
Felix accompanied him through the beautiful summer garden to the
rough rugged churchyard, where a lean woman in tattered drab-coloured
garments by no means accorded with the paradisaical notion of Vale
Leston. Her distress was so genuine that she scarcely thanked Clement;
but assuring him she could now get what she wanted, she walked off.
Clement sighed, and looked up at the great massive church, not with
Felix's pitying love, but like a mighty burthen.
'Well, Clem!'
'Well! I see it must be done.'
'I am very glad.'
'I am sure I am very sorry,' said Clement, with a simplicity new in him.
Before any more could pass, a servant came in search of them to summon
them to Mr. Underwood's room. He looked worn and sorrowful, but there
was a certain look of pleasure at the entrance of the two young men;
and he made a sort of introduction of them to the lawyer, Mr. Wilder, a
London solicitor, then turning to Felix, he once more asked if he still
declined all idea of eventually taking the living.
'Certainly I do, thank you, Sir.'
'So,' said Mr. Underwood, 'as is only just, the offer is passed on to
your brother.'
Clement bowed his head, colouring crimson, and the tears coming into
his eyes, as with a trembling lip he answered, 'Thank you, Sir; I will
do my best, God helping me.'
It was curious how this weight of responsibility was extinguishing
self-consciousness, and making a man of him. The tone of his reply
seemed to surprise both Squire and lawyer; and the former said, in an
old man's tone of encouragement, 'That is well. No one can say more.
Now give us your full name, that we may get on with the formalities.'
'Edward Clement Underwood, B.A., St. Cadoc's.'
'Edward?'
'It is my first name, but I have never been so called.'
'Edward! Strange it should so come about! Well, you may do pretty
well here. Small tithes commuted for 420--(Rather a contrast, thought
Felix, to the recent difficulty of raising a few shillings!)--a fair
provision for a young man; if you are content not to launch out, nor be
in a hurry to marry.'
'Certainly not,' said Clement, with an emphasis that made everybody
look up to see whether he showed any tokens of having met with a
disappointment in love; but if his cheeks were redder than usual, lip
and eye were steady and resolute enough.
'I hope not,' proceeded his patron: 'it is the worst thing a young man
can do to get his neck into the noose before he has had time to look
about him. And there's the Vicarage--been used to enlarge our stable
room--will have to be rebuilt altogether; so you had best let your
horse keep your residence for the present, and come and look after the
old man. I would not be much of a burden to you; but this is a big
house, and it is getting lonesome.'
'I will do whatever I can to be a comfort to you, Sir,' said Clement
earnestly. 'It is very kind in you, and I will certainly come first to
you. Only, Sir, I ought to warn you that I have been bred up in a very
stringent school of principles, and that if I come here, I shall feel
it my duty to do my best to carry them out.'
Mr. Underwood smiled at the lawyer. 'How exactly boys get the trick
of their father. I could think this twenty years back! Well, changes
for the worse there can't be! Ungrateful set of drunken poaching
rascals as ever lived! And as to the church, what notions you may bring
there won't do me much harm, so long as you don't bring it about your
ears. Only, look you, Edward, a word in your ear. Don't let Jane--Mrs.
Fulbert, I mean--cajole you into doing up the Vicarage for her.'
'Very well, Sir,' said Clement dreamily.
'You had better stay on a few days and look about you; I'd send you
over to see the Bishop.'
'No, Sir, thank you, I must get back to-morrow. I have little enough
time to prepare for my Ordination, but I will come down as soon after
as Mr. Fulmort can make it convenient to spare me.'
'Ay, and little Smiles will see to the duty meantime; but I say,
Edward, you are inexperienced, and he is a dirty little dog. Don't let
him expect anything from you till you've read in. He's got his quarter,
and 'tis the churchwarden's business to provide.'
Felix hoped other people did not find Clement's face so intelligible as
he did when this turned out to be the warning to inexperience. There
was little more to be done, and the conference broke up to give the
Squire time to rest before dinner.
'And now, my dear Vicar,' said Felix, linking his arm into his
brother's, and leading him to a walk beneath a wisteria-covered wall,
'let me hear what brought you to this laudable resolution.'
'I wish it may be laudable,' said poor Clement, brushing away a couple
of great tear-drops; 'I only know I have taken leave of all comfort or
ease of mind for life, and I suppose that may be right!'
'I thought,' said Felix, a little hurt, 'that my father's objection to
this place was its perfect ease.'
'A good deal has gone to the bad since his time,' said Clement, 'and
well it may! I could think of nothing but the traffic in Babylon the
Great of "the souls of men," and wonder whether I was sharing in it!
Not a word as to my fitness or unfitness, not an attempt at inquiry! I
might be the veriest disgrace to my Orders for what they cared, so long
as my name is Underwood!'
'And, Edward!' said Felix, 'I can't but be touched to see how the poor
old man feels it an act of restitution. It is the best he knows, Clem,
his first step, and I am glad you have not baulked him of it.'
'It is a vicious and rotten system altogether,' said Clement, 'and I am
not sure how far one is justified in submitting to it.'
'And now, without going into the question of lay-patronage, what
brought you to submit to it?'
'I'll tell you, Felix. I set out to walk with Smiles, to see the place,
and set Shaw so far on his way home. We went on beyond the village
street, where all looks smooth and fair--all roses and gable-ends--like
the model place you fancy it, and maybe it was in Father's time. On by
the little river--'
'The Leston. Isn't it beautiful?'
'It is like places I saw in Wales. Well, there is another little ravine
running down to meet that--very wild--a show place.'
'Blackstone Gulley. Isn't there a quarry?'
'Indeed there is; and such a set of hovels round it, run up in a
hollow without a notion of health or comfort! It seems the demand for
the stone is uncertain; so these wretched quarrymen are half their
time poaching and pilfering, a villainous ferocious lot, that do all
the harm in the neighbourhood--in fact, the Squire flew into a rage at
the very name. He had forbidden anything from his house to be given to
them; and even the Miss Hepburns were afraid to go among them. What are
you laughing at, Felix?'
'Because I see why Mr. Smiles took you that way. Go on.'
'He took us to the best point of view, but told us we had better not
go down, as typhus was raging there. I offered to wait if he had any
one to visit; and behold! it was against the principles of both to go
unless they were sent for. Mr. Shaw said it was making oneself too
common, and Mr. Smiles had to consider Mrs. Smiles and the children. By
that time we had been seen, and a woman sallied out to speak to him;
and would you believe it, he tried to warn her off with "You see I
have gentlemen with me! I always tell you to go to Mr. Tripp!" Then it
struck me that I need not stand on the etiquette our Vicar is always so
particular about, since it is nobody's parish just now, and I had the
offer; so I offered to go and see what she wanted. Smiles said a good
deal about the deceitfulness of the women, and the danger of venturing
when the men were at home, as if one had never been down a court in
Whittingtonia.'
'And was it very bad?'
'Bad, yes. Except that there's clear air and water outside, it is as
miserable as anything I ever saw in town, and more squalid and savage.
Four huts with cases of typhus! Though after all, it is not worse than
our district is in the winter; and it is by tens, while that is by
hundreds. Moreover, Ewmouth is getting into this parish, building fast
on this side. When I saw and heard those two men, and knew the place
would be turned over to one or other of them, I could not leave it to
such a fate!'
'Quite right; and not at all what the curate expected.'
'I had thought,' continued Clement, 'that such clergy had become
extinct; but I suppose nothing of a better stamp would have put up
with the poor man we buried to-day. I had imagined the choice only
lay between me and some one who, if without my advantages, would be
superior in experience and weight; but now I see the alternative: it
is plain that it is a call, though why--why it should have come to me,
I cannot think.'
'Perhaps,' said Felix, 'because we are especially bound to fight
against the evil our family has allowed to accumulate.'
'At my age, and all alone! I say, Felix,' after a pause, 'can one get
the key of the church?'
'The door into the cloister used not to be kept locked,' said Felix,
turning in that direction; and then, struck by the loveliness of
the lights and shadows, and the banksias trailing over the cloister
tracery, he could not help exclaiming, 'There's no place like it! You
will grow very fond of it, Clem!'
'I dare say I shall,' said Clement, to whose eyes the beauty seemed to
go for nothing, and who was quite past his usual heed to keeping up
his dignity with his brothers; 'I dare say I shall when I have worked
here a little while; but I had rather have had the dingiest cell in the
clergy-house and Fred Somers. Just as I had got back, when we thought
we should have such a time of it--working together there, for life
perhaps!'
'You might have him for a curate.'
'Fred! He'd never come to "easy duty in a romantic country and eligible
neighbourhood,"' indignantly quoted Clement; 'and for my part, with
only a population of eight hundred, if I were to set up a curate, I
should just give myself over to be a fat, double-chinned, easy-going
incumbent!'
'You're a good way from that,' said Felix, looking at the tall slight
being by his side; 'but I think you are right. I am as sorry for
you as can be, Clem, when I think of your pleasant evenings at the
clergy-house, and what it will be with that poor old man; but you see
he ought to be cared for as well as the parish, and there is no one but
you who can do it.'
'I must try!' said Clement, with something of a gasp.
'Well,' said Felix, who had by this time reached the door, 'I do feel
obliged to you, Clement. This helps me immensely.'
It was a great consolation to Clement that one person at least did
not congratulate him on the preferment that weighed on him so sorely;
but after he had spent some time alone in the church, he had mastered
himself, and was quite satisfactory all the evening. Their dinner
companions were the widow and her mother. The former did not look very
much crushed, though she carried a large pocket-handkerchief; and her
mother declared that nothing could have brought her down but her desire
to be acquainted with her cousins. Felix could not help thinking of the
pic-nic; and before long he perceived the drama that was being enacted.
Her great object was evidently to stay on, and continue the ruler of
the Priory; and Mr. Underwood was equally desirous to get her, not
only out of the house, but out of the village; but he could not quite
tell her so on the day of the funeral, and hints neither of them would
take. Then she fastened upon Clement, and discoursed to him about her
charities, and her regrets that during her dear Fulbert's long decline
she could do so little; only she knew things were in such excellent
hands with the Miss Hepburns, good old ladies, perfectly devoted,
treasures for any parish; but for herself--she was only too much at
liberty now, she should be delighted to go the round of the parish with
him, and introduce him to her own peculiar pets!
Clement could not snub direct; but he only bowed, he did not commit
himself; only in all simplicity he did ask about these charities, and
only succeeded in raising a mist of words, in which the desirableness
of not destroying self-dependence, and the pauperizing tendency of
liberality, were the prominent ideas.
Clement ventured a question about Blackstone Gulley; but Mrs. Underwood
hurriedly cautioned him under her breath not to say a word about it
before the Squire, it excited him so fearfully--the people were such
desperate poachers and thieves, and did such wanton mischief! They were
evidently viewed as quite out of the pale of humanity.
Little did the lady imagine that they were the chief attraction to the
Vicar-elect!
The brothers had to be off so early the next morning, that they made
their farewells that night. Mrs. Underwood hospitably told Clement they
would be better acquainted; but when he took leave with the old Squire,
his hand was held fast, while the broken eager voice entreated, 'You'll
soon be back--you'll come soon? You shall have the study, and any
rooms in the house you like.--Been down to the stables? Just say which
saddle-horse you like best; I'll have him kept for you.'
'Thank you, Sir, but I am a very good walker.' (Felix was glad he did
not say he could not ride--a degeneracy in an Underwood that plainly
had not occurred to the Squire.)
'Nonsense! Can't get about in this country without a horse. Mind, I
didn't mean that you should keep it for yourself. Take a look, if you
have not yet, and say which of the two.'
'The quietest!' exclaimed Clement, in a tone nearly of entreaty,
diverting to his elder brother, who had had enough pony-back before
his eighth year, with a little subsequent refreshment on Mr. Audley's
horse, to give him a pitying disdain for anxieties on that score.
'Eh? You are a steady-going parson--don't want a showy beast? That's
as young parsons are now-a-days. Well, you shall have the chestnut,
very good to ride or drive. Write, I say, as soon as you can fix your
day. You might see the Bishop in town. Only don't,' lowering his voice,
'leave me long alone with Jane.'
Just after the hot water had been brought to the brothers' rooms
the next morning, there was a simultaneous knocking at the door of
communication, and then an equally simultaneous turning of the handles,
which was of course ineffectual, till Felix let go, and Clement got it
open; and they stood laughing at each other, each holding an envelope,
one addressed to F. Underwood, Esquire, the other to the Reverend
Edward Underwood, each containing a cheque for 10, and scrawled on the
flap of each--'To cover expenses of journey. F.U.'
'Expenses of journey--poor old man!' said Felix. 'It would go some way
to a special train!'
'I suppose this is myself,' said Clement.
'Ah, you'll have to resign yourself to be Edward for the rest of your
days.'
'Do you mean to take it?'
'Impossible not to let him have the pleasure of it. Poor man, depend
upon it he is wishing it had been my father all the time. And it might
have been--' Felix's face quivered and contracted. 'No, it won't do
to think of that. But, Clem, look here--we won't exactly walk from
Paddington; but deducting the one pound five that this really has cost
me, you shall take the rest of mine for Blackstone Gulley.'
'It must have cost you more.'
'No, for I was coming to town any way. Did I not tell you that I am to
meet poor Edgar's creditors on Cherry's behalf, and settle with them?'
'Poor Cherry! It has been a noble thing for her to have carried out,
but one cannot but feel it wasted.'
'No,' said Felix, 'she will never feel it so. Whatever she may do for
the future, she will be able to feel that she has been just before she
was generous. Remember, she will have sent our name home again cleared
of debt. I am proud to owe that to her! Now, whichever of us is ready
first must write the old man a grateful note, and we will both sign it.'
'Stay, Felix! I can't have you giving this to my people. I shall have
plenty.'
'In time, but I don't expect you will have much in hand for some time;
and if the Squire is so furious against these people, you won't like to
ask him. Besides, they are my people, in a way, as well as yours; and
if this is really the earnest of my inheritance, I should like it to go
to them.'
CHAPTER XXXV.
THE OLD SQUIRE AND THE NEW.
'I remember, I remember,
The house where I was born,
The little window where the sun
Came peeping in at morn.'
T. Hood.
So it was that the Reverend Edward Clement Underwood became Vicar of
Vale Leston Abbas; and as Geraldine observed, when she saw his whole
worldly possessions waiting for the omnibus, he probably carried with
him less personal property than any entering incumbent on the rolls of
fame. All was contained in one box, one portmanteau, and one black bag,
and chiefly consisted in the more clerical of his father's books, his
pocket-communion plate in the well-worn case, and a few gifts from St
Matthew's, not unaccompanied with cautions on their use.
He spent a few days at home; and Mr. Bevan, who after his five years'
holiday had just come home, not only called on him, but asked him to
preach and to dine, including Felix in the latter invitation; but both
were impossible, as Clement was due at Vale Leston on the Saturday.
Thenceforth his family heard little of him. He had never been much of
a letter-writer, except when he sent a sort of essay on Church affairs
to direct the Pursuivant, and even these nearly ceased, so that, as
Lance said, there was no guessing whether he viewed the squire as the
wicked world or as a sick old sinner. And with Lance, Clement had had
a sort of passage-at-arms. He wanted much to have sent him to the
University, and was much vexed when Lance for many reasons declined;
but the offer and refusal were unknown--by the wish of both parties--to
the rest of the family. Clement said it was all indolence, and passion
for that organ of Ferdinand Travis's, which, now it had come at last,
had proved transcendently well worth waiting for. Clement viewed it
with some jealousy, and predicted that Lance would rue his decision;
and Lance could not help resenting what was unjust in the accusation
and prognostic, the more for what was just in it. To be sure, his
displeasure went no further than the resumption of the impudent old
name of Tina, but from Lance that implied much.
Clement as a beneficed clergyman was something tangible; otherwise
people were rather disappointed to find Mr. Underwood in his natural
place, looking just as usual, and though to one or two close inquirers
he allowed that some property might come to him some day, he declared
that it made no difference. And when people found no blunders in
their accounts, no failures in their serials, and no neglect of their
parcels, they left off thinking he must necessarily be demoralised; and
though the Tribune sneered more than ever at the organ of a bloated
aristocracy, the world in general soon forgot, and then disbelieved,
that their attentive bookseller had any 'expectations.'
Indeed, Felix himself had made up his mind, as he told his home sister
and brother, that the Squire had still many years to live, and that
the inheritance was only to be viewed as a dispensation from laying by
for old age, a point on the duty of which he had never decided, having
in truth nothing to lay by. The interests he now had in the place, and
the security of a welcome, satisfied his affection for it; and he was
too much at home in his present occupation to feel impatient to have it
ended.
Geraldine found the waiting a greater trial. Longings for the green
grass, the purple moorland, the sparkling river, and broad sea would
come over her; and she would wonder whether the best years of their
lives were to be spent in the Bexley streets, where she could not
help fancying the smoke of the potteries more apparent than ever;
and whether Felix were condemned to stand behind a counter till he
had grown too old to begin a new life. Then she blamed herself, and
tried to struggle the thought away; but there was to her an absolute
oppression in Bexley summer air, and an uncongeniality in the dull ugly
surroundings, that made content an almost impossible achievement; and
the anticipation assuredly did not make her happier for the present.
She declared however that Angela was wholesome to her, as a tipsy Helot
was to the Spartans. The girl was intoxicated with the prospect when
she suddenly plunged into it on coming home for the summer holidays. It
seemed nearly as good as her intended Duke, and she talked continually
of the horses she would ride, the tours she would take, the balls she
would frequent, while Felix would drily build up her castles to some
such manifestly outrageous height as to make them topple down headlong
with her.
She was not the only Helot. Madame Tanneguy's sympathetic excitement
knew no bounds, and she clasped her hands with a gesture learnt in
France, as she rejoiced in Mr. Underwood being reinstated, and never
would hear or understand that there was no re in the case. She would
be enthusiastic; she would drop in on Sundays, and question Felix point
by point about that magnificent place; and it must be owned that he
liked sympathy well enough not to answer her as ungraciously as Cherry
would have approved. She even tried to bring little Gustave, that he
and Theodore might grow accustomed to one another; but in this she
never succeeded, for Theodore having learnt that he must neither scream
at nor attack the little Frenchman, never saw him approach without
retreating to Sibby in the kitchen, or his brothers in the office.
But Lady Price's demonstrations were much more amusing. She had come
home a good deal subdued and more on her guard, and she could take
advantage of the former Miss Underwood having been so fully occupied
to excuse her past neglect. She asked Felix to dinner, and his
sisters to croquet parties indefatigably, and tried to get up musical
entertainments which must lead to his singing with Miss Caroline.
What to do was a perplexity. Felix did not like to refuse altogether
overtures from the Rectory, for he had a warm feeling for poor Mr.
Bevan himself; but the horrible penance of singing with Miss Price he
backed out of pitilessly on the score of want of time; and as to the
garden parties, Geraldine hated them, and would have declined them
altogether if Angela had not been wild to go; and Felix and Wilmet
both decreed that it would be better for the child to accustom her to a
little society than to leave her pining and raving for amusement within
her reach. So as long as Angela was at home, Cherry consented to go to
the Rectory croquet, and horribly dull she found it. Lady Price used
demonstratively to inquire after her sister Lady Vanderkist, and how
Mr. Clement was getting on, and would introduce her to two or three of
the lookers on; but they were not apt to be of the mould who brought
out Cherry's powers of conversation; and she never got on well with
any one but the old Miss Crabbe who had once brought Stella home, and
who knew the Vale Leston neighbourhood, and could tell her a good deal
about it.
Wilmet had never come home to institute her reformation. John's
occupation did not give him much leisure, and his mother's kindred sent
him so urgent an invitation, that he felt the more obliged to carry his
wife among them, because it was an act of forgiveness for his marrying
her. One of his mother's sisters had died, leaving him her portion,
and the survivor yearned after poor Lucy's son and his little boy. So
Wilmet was taken amongst the Oglandby clan, and took all the gentlemen
by storm by her beauty, and all the ladies by her domesticity and good
sense; and John found himself so taken up with business connected
with the bequest, that no time could be made for either of the homes.
Besides, it was greatly suspected that as a mother Wilmet was afraid of
Theodore and his jealousy, for she never offered to run down without
her husband. Indeed, he was carrying on a hard struggle to keep up to
his work through the inveterate remains of neuralgic suffering left by
his accident, and only those who stayed any time in the house knew how
brave an effort were his industry and cheerfulness.
Robina had a capital situation as second governess in a large
household, where she seemed very happy; while William Harewood
continued to win prosperity and honour at Oxford, ending by obtaining
a first class, and becoming a student of Christchurch. Who would have
augured the like of Bill?
The most visible effects of the heirship were big hampers of game,
which appeared at intervals all through the autumn and winter; and
Felix did thoroughly enjoy the carrying over the choicest spoils
therefrom to Marshlands, where they gave a great deal of pleasure and
a certain kind of pride. Now that Mr. Froggatt had seen no symptoms of
the turning of Felix's head, he began to believe in his prospects, and
to be a good deal divided between regard for him and for the business.
Bernard was the one who profited most by the present state of things.
Not only did he go over twice, for a day, from Stoneborough to Vale
Leston, but he spent a week there at the beginning of the Christmas
holidays, chiefly in the society of the gamekeeper. So supremely happy
was he, and so brilliant were his descriptions to Madame Tanneguy,
that by the time they had gone through a Russian scandal process among
her confidantes Vale Leston had swelled to the dimensions of Windsor
Castle; and Lance and Angel were incited to prepare for her especial
benefit a parody of 'Bolton Abbey in the Olden Time,' with Clement
in the character and costume of the Abbot, presiding over the like
profusion of game.
Not much more could be got out of the boy. He would talk indeed
plentifully, but it was all of rabbits and ferrets, pheasants and
ducks, horses and dogs. He evidently viewed himself as the Underwood
who alone could do his duty by the fer natur of the estate; and
though his magniloquence was not perfectly trustworthy, the elders
gathered from it that the old Squire had really been pleased to find
in one of the brothers the sportsman tastes he could appreciate, and
had encouraged the boy by telling him all manner of hunting anecdotes,
and letting him have the run of the woods. Bernard was small enough to
have no dignity to lose, and had galloped on the ponies turned out to
grass; but Felix had a curiosity to learn how Clement got on with the
chestnut, a question which set the school-boy into fits of laughing.
'Oh! I believe he sticks on somehow now, but just like a pair of
compasses, you know. Joe says if he has been spilt once he has been
spilt forty times. He knows by the mud on his clothes, you see; but
Mr. Eddard, as every one calls him, never says one word about it, but
stalks in just as upright as ever, and only once or twice they thought
he was a little stiff.'
'But does he go on all the same?' asked Cherry, rather alarmed.
'Oh yes, 'tis dogged as does it; and one can't get about there without
riding; such roads, and mud, and water-courses up to your knees. Yes,
and Joe doesn't think he's been off for more than a month now.'
'Hurrah!' said Lance, 'I always knew Clem had lots of pluck in his own
way! And does he drive?'
'He drives out the Squire whenever it is fine enough.'
Much more could not be made out. The boy had, as Cherry said, a fine
singleness of eye. The game was in full focus, all the rest very dim
and obscure. Yes, Clem had a jolly room enough. What he did, or whether
he went out much, this deponent knew not, only that he believed the
church bell rang at eight--he thought Clem rang it himself. Dinner was
at seven, uncommon jolly--a capital cellar--and he was with difficulty
called back from an imposing enumeration of wines, to say that Mrs.
Fulbert was certainly not in the house. Mr. Underwood seldom left his
room till the middle of the day, and then, if he were well and the
weather fine, Clement attended his airing, then left him to sleep,
and after dinner played piquet or cribbage with him. When once Mr.
Staples dined there, Bernard had taken a hand at whist, of which he was
inordinately proud.
That was all that could be gathered with any certainty, though Bernard
did nothing but groan for Vale Leston whenever he was not skating. They
had learnt that the Vicar of Vale Leston could ride and play at cards,
and they might make the most of that.
Nor did they hear more till the next April, when Felix received the
following note:--
Vale Leston Priory, April 29th.
MY DEAR FELIX,
If you can get away I wish you would come down without loss of
time. Just after Bernard left us, Mr. Underwood got a chill,
and has had a good deal of suppressed gout. The doctor thinks
ill of him. I find he never has been a Communicant. Latterly,
the sense of wrong done to my father has held him back. It is
not satisfactory now, and I long for a priest of experience,
but I must do my best, and time and faculty seem failing. Your
presence and participation would be a comfort. Can you run
down? I will have the 4.40 train met on Monday.
Your affectionate Brother,
E.C.U.
At 4.40 accordingly, Felix beheld a sporting-looking dog-cart of
varnished wood, containing a long black figure holding a very big
chestnut horse, and stretching out an eager hand to grasp his
brother's. 'That's right, Felix! I'm glad you are come!'
'Is he worse?'
'He has been changing rapidly since I wrote to you. Page does not know
what to think of him. I've been writing to ask Dr. May to come over
to-morrow.'
'You look fagged, Clem. Does the nursing fall on you?'
'We have a nurse now; and he seemed disposed to sleep, so I thought I
might come and meet you,' said Clement, who not only had the heavy eyes
of broken rest, but altogether had lost the childish contour of face,
and acquired the stamp of thought and reality.
'The daughter-in-law is no help, I suppose?'
Clement laughed, but rather sadly. 'They had had a great row over poor
Fulbert's properties before I came on the scene at all. She never was
anything but a grievance to him. He meant his son to have had Marilda;
and when that failed, consented to pay his debts and let him marry this
person, on his yielding to take Holy Orders--a miserable business,
and he feels it so now. I have tried to bring about a better state of
feeling, but I can't feel my way. I think there is more good in her
than he gives her credit for; and he fancies she blinds me, and has as
good as ordered me never to speak of her again.'
'Then he has quite adopted you?'
'Oh, yes, he is very kind to me,' said Clement warmly, and from what
he went on to say, it was clear that he had grown fond of his charge,
and found it far less of a burthen than he had expected, though he must
have been often crossed, and could have met with little congeniality.
He had been left quite unfettered in action as a clergyman; indeed, the
Squire had supported him under the growls of a few malcontents, and
though this was chiefly on the ground that State must stand by Church,
Underwood by Underwood, and that tenants had no business to think,
still it was effective. The only quarrels had been caused by the young
Vicar's peacemaking endeavours towards the widow, his proclivities
towards the pariahs of Blackstone Gulley, and his backwardness to
enter into county gaieties.
'Young men were hardly to be trusted if they were not like young men,'
argued the Squire; and he was vexed if he found Clement avoiding a
party or refusing a dinner on the score of parish engagements. Indeed,
an invitation from a sporting nobleman of a questionable repute was
declined at the cost of such offence, that Clement had thought he
should have to reconstruct the Vicarage, if not repair at once to
sleep in the hay-loft thereof; but after one evening's storm, the
subject had never been renewed. To have had more of the animal and
less of the spiritual in his young inmate would have been pleasanter
and more comprehensible to the old gentleman; and he had begun by a
certain distrust of what the military comrades of his youth and the
hunting associates of his later years would have declared sanctimonious
hypocrisy in so young a man. The first offer--as a mere matter of
course--to read prayers to him had been received with a snarl, and a
dry 'Thank you, I'll let you know when I require your services.'
Clement had desisted, and strengthened by the Vicar's counsel, had
waited to feel his way and win his ground, by many a reading of the
newspaper, many a game at piquet, many a prose on the Shaw misdeeds
and on county politics, and by what the poor old man had never known
before--the genuine filial kindness of reverence for age and infirmity,
without interested adulation.
After all, it was the attacks on the young parson's new-fangledness
that first led to discussions that died away only to be renewed again,
revealing queer prejudices and conclusions based on nearly total
ignorance--the ignorance of a careless son of a careless household
sixty years back, and since alienated from all religious teaching
by the consciousness of one act of injustice in requital of unusual
forbearance and generosity.
Clement felt as though he had done nothing, and that the opportunity
was fast fleeting. Where he had but stirred the waters, he thought that
a man like Mr. Fulmort might have produced real effect; and he was
downcast and humble at his own inefficiency, though he allowed that
no stranger would probably have been permitted to go so far as he, a
youth, an Underwood, and a son of the injured cousin's.
This, Felix's third arrival, was unlike the former ones. He had no
need to watch his brother's countenance for tokens of interest;
Clement was the one at home, and with his heart in the place, though
still he looked as if he thought there was irrelevance in the cry of
loving joy that broke from Felix at first sight of the valley in its
beauty. The moor, the wood, the river, and the sea, did not go for much
with the Vicar--it was the people he thought of, and the damages and
deficiencies of the Church struck him infinitely more than the grandeur
of the tower and picturesque beauty of the building.
He had no power to make changes in the fabric; and indeed, it had
been Mr. Fulmort's advice that in all the alterations which he should
introduce, he should carefully distinguish between essentials and
non-essentials, including in the former that spiritual support for
himself, which was needful to prevent the salt from losing savour, and
himself from becoming lowered to his people's level while waiting to
raise them, but omitting what would be viewed as mere outward ornament
till minds were trained to enter into it.
So, though Abednego Tripp's voice still reigned supreme in the
responses, there was a full complement of daily prayer and weekly
feast, though the Vicar's very heart ached over the blankness,
dreariness, and scant attendance. The main body of the parishioners
never indeed openly censured an Underwood, but they viewed these
aberrations on the part of 'Mr. Eddard,' as an outcome of gentlefolks'
lack of employment 'The last Passon Fulbert, he were all for hosses,
this here Passon Eddard, he be all for churchings,' was the parish
judgment; and only now and then were deep-set grafts implanted by his
father discovered to cheer his heart.
Indeed, the influences of school, visiting, lectures, and classes, were
the more impeded by the influence of the four Miss Hepburns.
'Ah!' said Clement, as he touched his hat to a tall grey and russet
form, 'there goes one of the trials of my life! All the religion in
the parish was kept up by those good ladies, and now they think mine
worse than none. They call me "Poor young man!" Yes, you may laugh,
Felix; but it is they who prevent me from making way. If they were only
Dissenters, I should know what to be at; but they have deserved all the
love and reverence of the parish all these years, and now they turn it
against me!'
'Knowingly?'
'So far as that they sigh at me, and warn people against trusting to
ordinances, as if I ever taught any such thing, or as if people needed
to be told not to go to church.'
'They don't do that?'
'Not exactly; but it amounts to an excuse for not going. And if I
object to one tract, they ingeniously substitute another just as bad.
I can't turn them out of the school. They were so much disgusted when
I got the Sunday school out of the Lady Chapel into the Vicarage, the
stable you know, that I was in hopes they would cut the concern; but
no, they go on like martyrs. Their object is to counteract me. They
have as good as told me they think it their mission.'
'Do you argue?'
'Oh yes, I did so plentifully the first six months, but they always
assumed I said something I never even dreamt of. They even went to Mr.
Underwood, but I don't think they got much out of him,' said Clement,
laughing a little. 'Of late I have had no time to go near them; and my
one comfort is they don't think Blackstone Gulley a place for ladies,
and fancy we have nothing to do with the East Ewmouth suburb. I don't
know why I should rejoice, though! The place there grows every day, and
into heathenism.'
No wonder poor Clement was fagged, melancholy, and discouraged. His
life was lonely. There were no gentry in the village but these ladies;
and he--with his strong opinions and assertion of his office--was
exactly the person to be as heavy a trial to middle-aged ladies
of opposite traditions, and accustomed to a semi-pastorate in the
neglected parish, as ever they could be to him. The neighbouring
clergy, except one overtasked incumbent, on the farther side of
Ewmouth, were of their way of thinking, pitied them, and stood
courteously aloof from the new-comer. Stoneborough was too far off for
much intercourse, and even there his peculiarities stood in his light,
and his position as the guest of his invalid kinsman prevented him from
bringing a friend to stay with him, or arranging an exchange to give
himself relaxation. He had not even been able to go up to Cambridge
for his M.A. degree, and had not once slept out of the Priory. Of this
he did not complain, but no doubt this isolation had assisted in his
depression and belief that he was failing utterly, and doing nothing
but mischief.
It seemed to be an inexpressible relief to talk to some one who could
understand him; and perhaps he had never so enjoyed his brother's
society before.
The butler met them at the door, saying that Mr. Underwood was awake,
and asking for both him and 'Mr. Felix;' and Clement led the way at
once to the sitting-room, where the old man still was daily wheeled,
for the restlessness of rapid failure was on him; and the sight of his
wan puffy-looking face and the sinking in of his whole figure startled
Felix, even after what he had heard. He lighted up a little at the
sight of 'Edward,' and held out a cold damp hand to Felix, complaining
of chill; nor could he bear to lose sight of the younger cousin again.
Every moment he wanted his help to change his posture or alter his
pillows; and when the brothers were called away to dinner, Clement
would hardly have gone save to obtain an opportunity of telling his
brother that he saw much change in this short time, and to despatch a
message for the medical man from Ewmouth.
He, however, said nothing definite, but administered an anodyne, and
promised to come early, advising Clement to leave the night-watch to
the nurse, as causing less excitement, and perhaps with a view likewise
to the visible effects of a long course of anxious and disturbed nights.
But in the early light of May morning, Clement was standing by his
brother's bed-side, saying in a low agitated voice, 'Felix, I think the
end is coming. His mind is clear, and he wants to see you. I think we
ought to have the Celebration. I hoped to have brought him to send for
Jane--in fact, I have sent. You must judge if we ought to wait.'
Felix had less experience of the approach of death than the young
clergyman, but the ashy sunken face and hollow breath assured him that
there was no time to lose. The old man was sensible, and perfectly knew
Felix, but was too much oppressed to speak much; only after a time he
said, with an odd kind of smile, 'That boy Edward does more for me than
ever my own, poor fellow--like his father--glad he has his place--he's
not next to you?'
'Not if poor Edgar be living, sir.'
'Don't let a scamp come between him and the property,' gasped the old
man; but Felix felt no need of answering.
'Wish my uncle had signed his will,' was the next murmur. 'Edward and
Mary would have done better--maybe, my poor boy, too. Is Edward there?
I say--you lads--never drive a son into the Church, whatever you do.'
It was a remote temptation, but there was an echo of repentance in
the warning. No more was said till all had been made ready. Old Tripp
had been sent for to make up the number; the household contained no
Communicant. The dying man made each brother give him his hand, and
said, 'Peace with all, isn't that it? You, both of you, Felix and
Edward, I did use your father and mother as I ought not, though somehow
I thought at the time I had the right, but I believe I have suffered
for it all my life; and I ask your pardon as I would ask theirs.'
'Indeed you have it, as I know you had theirs,' Felix said. 'My brother
knows as well as I, how no word like bitterness was ever allowed
amongst us.'
'Did Edward forgive me at last?'
'Not at last,' said Felix; 'he had done it so much at first, that he
never thought of it.'
'And,' added Clement, 'will you not send a message to your
daughter-in-law--to Jane, sir?'
'To Jane? Much she cares! Well, if you say I must, and if Edward
forgave me, I suppose--Tell her I'll do my best to forgive--but if she
had never got hold of poor Fulbert--God forgive me--what am I getting
to? Only mind she doesn't do the same by you. Ay, I'm at peace with her
and all of 'em! Only don't let her come. God have mercy on me?' The cry
was, at least, half bodily.
And so the holy rite began in dark doubt and dim trust and hope. How
unlike the bright cheeriness and the joy that no man could take away
from Edward Underwood's last Communion! This was the last interval of
clear consciousness. All that day he was dying, with just perception
enough to cling to Clement's presence and voice, as almost unceasingly
the young man held him up, and prayed with and for him with the
earnestness of one who held intensely full faith in the might of
intercessory prayer to aid the spirit in the doubtful strife, often
supported by the thought of the prayers that were rising in so many
churches far away for the struggling and the dying.
Felix was with him at times, but no one could do much to aid his
physical exertion; and it was needful to keep guard over Mrs. Fulbert
Underwood, as long as there was mind enough left for her presence to
cause emotion. It had been right of Clement to send for her, but she
was a trying element in the day, though not loud or coarse, but tearful
and affectionate about the dear old Squire's former kindness and the
wretched misunderstanding that had come between. There was every
reason to believe her a harpy, but at this moment she could not show
her talons; and Felix was divided between sense of humbug and fear of
injustice during the long uncongenial tte--tte. The only breaks in
it were from the doctors. Mr. Page was backwards and forwards the whole
day, and Dr. May came in the course of the morning; but they could do
nothing but apply these resources of science that seem but to lengthen
out the death agony. However, the greatest refreshment of that day was
a turn under the wall with Dr. May, hearing how highly he thought of
Clement's whole conduct towards the old man.
'I don't say the lad is altogether after my cut,' said the Doctor.
'We old folks used to think ourselves up in the steeple, and now we
find these young ones think us down in the crypts. I'm afraid he may
be bringing a hornet's nest about his ears, but that's all outside;
and for the rest, nobody could have had such an effect on poor old Ful
Underwood without something very genuine in him.'
'That is quite true,' said Felix; 'Clement has startled us sometimes,
but we have never done otherwise than respect his thorough sincerity;
and he always shows to the very best in any trouble or trial.'
'Ay,' said Dr. May; 'and I'll tell you another thing I've been slow
to find out. It's not one youth in a hundred that if he is moderate
enough to stop with what satisfied our--my--generation, has anything in
him. Why, as I saw it well put the other day--Ethel was delighted with
the notion--King Arthur tried to work up the Round Table, and because
Christian chivalry had raised that generation, comes the Quest of the
Sancgreal to lead them higher. 'Tis one of the tests of life whether we
will take to our Quest and let others take to it. Tying them down to
our Round Table does no good at all. But what am I talking of? You are
one of these boys yourself.'
'I suppose I am,' said Felix; 'but I own I should be happier to see
things as my father would have had them.'
'Somehow I saw it in you. Veneration has fixed your standard, I take
it; and you've had all the cares in the world to sober you. But
depend upon it--I've seen it many a time, in my own boys as well as
others--enthusiasm carries on the work, and where that is, you may be
only too thankful to give a loose rein. A young man must have it out
one way or another; and we may well be thankful if he gives it to the
Church, even though he may run into what seems queer to us.'
Felix laid up the conversation for himself and Geraldine, and thought
it over many times that long day.
Not till late in the evening was the unconsciousness such that Mrs.
Underwood could be admitted, and it was not till two in the morning
that the struggle was over. Clement had scarcely tasted anything since
the hurried, interrupted dinner the previous day, except what his
brother had almost forced on him at the bed-side; and he was so stiff,
spent, and worn out, that Felix could think of nothing till he had seen
him safe in bed.
Nor was it till the clash of the knell had sounded several times,
that at eight next morning, Felix gradually awoke; and only slowly
did the strokes, as he mechanically counted them, recall to him that
the event had happened--that he was in his own house--his mother's
rightful inheritance--and that his years of toil and effort were over!
To say that his first thought was not exultation would not be true. The
recovery of his natural position, and the possession of such a home for
his sisters, could not but rejoice him, though with it came the sense
of responsibility, and of a perplexing knot to be untied, a knot of
wrong to be undone at any--yes, at any cost. 'Even if it leave us
as poor as heretofore,' he spoke to himself, 'God grant me to prove my
faith in His word as to poverty.'
Ere the tolls had ceased all the multiplied honours they could pay
to sixty-five years and Squire-rector, Felix saw Clement, instead of
sleeping, on his way to the church. Felix followed thither ere long,
and the brothers met at the churchyard gate.
'Well, Clement,' said Felix, as their hands met, 'you have led this to
end better than one durst hope.'
'It had all been working long before,' said Clement in a trembling
voice.
'It has been a terrible time for you. Are you rested?'
'A little stiff and achy--but that will work off, thank you.'
'And now, Clem, you must stand by me, and help me in what is to be
done.'
The two brothers stood looking at the fine old house, the cloister
connecting it with the church, the spring beauty blossoming round;
Clement put his hand on his brother's shoulder, and said, in a half
apologetic tone, 'After all, I can't help being glad it has come to you
at last.'
It may be doubted whether any congratulation pleased Felix so much. 'I
am glad to have known it so long beforehand,' he answered. 'I hope we
shall be enabled to see the right and do it.'
Clement looked at the church and at the village; and again, with warm
impulse and tears in his eyes, exclaimed, 'I cannot help being glad.
Now I have some hope for my poor people.'
'We will do our best,' said Felix; 'and you will bear with me if I
disappoint you.'
'Nay,' said Clement, the tears nearly choking him, 'the really best
thing for the place would be, if you would let me give up, and appoint
old Flowerdew.'
'What! be driven away by the clan Hepburn?'
'Not that, exactly, except that an older man, who had not made such a
wretchedly bad beginning, might make all the difference. Till you are
settled in here, you will not conceive the mess I have made of it all.'
'I see you have had a great strain on you; you will look on it
differently when you have rested.'
'I don't know,' said Clement. 'It is not that I don't care for the
place, Felix,' he added, pleadingly; 'I do now, with all my heart and
soul--it is my charge, and must be--only if I could learn a little
more, and get rid of a little of my youth and priggishness before I
come back, it would be so much better for the people.'
'Of that last article I think you have got rid considerably.'
'I'm sure there's been enough to take the conceit out of me;' and
perhaps he proved it by adding, 'But I leave it to you, Felix; I know
you think it may be essential to your plans that a brother should hold
the vicarage, and if so, of course I would go on, knowing too what
an immense difference the influence of this house will make, and the
having you to turn to for advice.'
'If we can live here at all,' said Felix. 'I do not in the least know
the rights of the property.'
Nor could he tell till after a good deal of talk with the lawyers and
looking over of papers. The funeral was to be on the Saturday, and
conducted exactly like that of last year. Felix thought the present
no time for a protest against the seventy-five yards of black cloth.
'Though this is the last of it,' he said to Clement, 'I'll have no
church put in mourning for me.'
He saw very little of his brother, for the house was a good deal beset
with Shaws; and besides, Clement, who was to go up to London on the
Monday, had a good deal of parish visiting and business in arrear to
make up, and so far from resting, scarcely sat down or ate. He would
accept no assistance at the funeral, but every one remarked how ill he
looked. Afterwards there was a public reading of the will, which named
Felix as sole executor as well as heir; and added to the provision for
the daughter-in-law by the settlements a charge of three hundred a year
on the estate so long as she should remain a widow. A few very unkind
things were said by the Shaws, which Clement was young enough to mind a
good deal, after all his peacemaking efforts, and which made Bernard's
eyes flash.
Bernard was to stay with his brothers over the Sunday; but he must have
found it a dull evening, for Clement had a sermon to write, and Felix
was deep in calculations till long after the boy had yawned himself off
to bed.
At last Felix knocked at Clement's study-door. 'Up still! Clem, you
want rest.'
'Not I. But I have just finished. How do things turn out?'
'Fairly,' said Felix, showing him a paper where he had drawn up a
statement. 'The property altogether, you see, has been counted at four
thousand five hundred a year. Well, out of that Mrs. Underwood has
eight hundred a year, and the involvements of Fulbert's debts reduce
it a good deal more, so that Mr. Wilder says I must not reckon on more
than two thousand three hundred at present, and of that nine hundred
and fifty is the great tithe, and the rent of the Glebe farm is three
hundred and seventy. Blackstone Gulley belongs to the estate, and could
not be sold; but the speculator gave a round sum for a twenty-one
years' lease, which will not be run out these four years, so we can do
nothing about that at present. Now, Clem, this nine hundred and fifty a
year--I'm not going to make it over to you bodily. I think that, with
the Glebe Farm, your income as Vicar will be quite as much as is good
for a parson.'
'I suppose so,' said Clement, laughing; 'I never felt poor in my life
till I had four hundred a year, and I should be poorer still if I had
fourteen hundred.'
'No wonder, if you subscribe to everything, and pay for whatever is
wanted in the parish instead of asking those who ought! I believe
four thousand would not make much difference to you, or four hundred
thousand either,' said Felix, who had come to some appalling
discoveries as to Clement's ways of dealing with money.
'Perhaps not,' he answered, good humouredly; 'but what do you mean to
do? To be your own ecclesiastical commissioner?'
'Something like it; at any rate, not to put it out of my own hands
till I see the best way, and that there will be time to do while it
is putting the church and the Glebe cottages into a proper state, and
setting the Vicarage to rights. Perhaps first of all should come a
school-chapel for Blackstone Gully; and as I reckon that all this will
take six or seven years, by that time we shall be able to judge what
is most wanted--a church and endowment for Blackstone, or for that
Ewmouth suburb, or both; and when that is done, I would make over the
rectorial rights to the living.'
'O Felix! I never durst think of anything--so like a dream!' said
Clement, looking up at him.
'And you will stay here, Clem? I think you must; for you see I can hand
over the rent of the glebe, and settle these things with you, taking my
time about them in a way I could not do if the incumbent were not my
brother and my next heir.'
'But I am not your next heir.'
'I have made you so. I thought it right to draw up a very short will,
leaving everything to you, with John Harewood as executor, to save the
dead lock there would be in case of my coming to some sudden end. I can
perfectly trust to you to do right by the sisters and Theodore; and
if Edgar, poor fellow! should come home, I know you would hand over
to him what is really secular, and you would feel to be his right.
But, Clement, you need have the less scruple at my doing this, that I
have come to think there is little likelihood of the dear fellow being
alive.'
'Indeed!'
'More than a year ago, Fulbert sent me a scrap of newspaper with
an account of a man being found murdered by the bush-rangers. He
had been robbed, and there was nothing about him to lead to his
identification; but the diggers he had last been with called him Ned
Wood. Fulbert went to the place and made all possible inquiries, but
could find out nothing, but that he had been noted for singing, and was
light-complexioned. Fulbert himself believes it; and I think nothing
else would have led Fernan to give up his search. I thought it so
entirely vague and improbable, that I let no one but Lance see the
letter; indeed, I so utterly disbelieved it, that it did not dwell on
me at the time; but the longer we are without hearing, the more I am
driven to believe it.'
'You have not told Cherry?'
'If it were a certainty, I could not tell her half what Fulbert heard.
I have never spoken to her about it. I will not take away her hope on
such grounds.'
'I think you are right. I do not think anything of this story myself.'
'Nor I, at times when I think of "the child of so many prayers,"' said
Felix. 'But with such a dreadful possibility, never to be cleared up,
you see it would never do to leave things unsettled; so I just did this
for the present.'
'Yes, it can be altered at need,' said Clement, with a long breath.
'This house,' said Felix, returning to business, 'is clearly our own;
and you will go on with us of course for the present, if we can live
here. It has certainly been a priory, but I do not therefore feel bound
to restore that; I have read and thought much about those religious
houses, and I think that there is no call to give them up as things now
stand.'
'If?'
'I must talk it over with some of the financial heads. Of course I wish
it for the girls, and my own duty seems to lie here; but if it will not
do, I must let the place till the entanglements clear themselves.'
'Let the place? What! and go on with the business?' cried Clement, in
consternation.
'I must keep on the business any way.'
'Felix! Impossible! In your position--'
'I cannot have the position if I cannot have the business. Look at it:
here is Bernard to be educated, and Lance to go to the University, and
four girls without any provision worth naming, besides Theodore; and
how is all to be done out of less than a thousand pounds a year, with
this house and grounds to be kept up, and where people are used to see
five thousand spent?'
'Could you not sell the business?'
'Of course I could; but judging by what I have gathered during this
year, the capital I should receive would not bring me in anything in
proportion to what I make now; and I cannot afford to lose so much.'
'I don't see that you are a bit better off than you were before!'
'Rather worse, as far as money goes.--But this place! You don't feel
the charm of it half enough. What will it not be to Cherry, and little
Stella? I do think Cherry will get along here; though Wilmet will say
we ought not to try. But I shall pay off all the servants on Monday,
and we'll start on a new tack.'
'Yes; I believe they have preyed awfully on the old Squire. There's not
one I should wish to keep, in-door or out-door.'
'Then we would begin on a smaller scale, and harden ourselves against
traditions. I would get a real good assistant for Lamb, go backwards
and forwards, and keep on the Pursuivant myself as before.'
'The Pursuivant is all very well. It is a valuable influence: but can't
you keep that, and drop the retail affair?'
'I can't give up three hundred a year for the honour of the thing.'
'But if I live with you, could you not keep the rent of the Glebe farm
as my board?'
'You certainly have been sumptuously maintained here, but hardly at the
cost of three hundred and seventy pounds! No; I think it would be only
fair that you should give a hundred towards the housekeeping, as Mr.
Audley used to do, and something more for your horse; but to take any
more would only be robbing the Church under another form.'
'I don't like it! It will do you harm in the neighbourhood. You will
never take your proper place;' then, as Felix half smiled, 'you wonder
at these arguments from me? Yes, but I know the neighbourhood better
than you do, and I do not like to see your influence and usefulness
crippled.'
'That may be; but the choice lies between being looked down on for
being in trade and continuing in this wrong to the Church.'
'Surely we could live at small expense here! We have all been used to
frugality.'
'Yes, and I have seen that stinting has not a happy effect. In such
a house as this, we cannot live as we have done at home. We can do
without display, but plain hospitality we must have, and debt would be
worse than trade. Ah, Clem! the old home has made you the exclusive
aristocrat again! Recollect, such a restitution must involve sacrifice
of some sort. We must have the Underwood "rood" some way or other. You
are ready enough to let it be in money and luxury, but can't you let it
be in--what shall I call it--consideration? That is, if it does make
any difference, or if we find it out.'
'You'll find it out fast enough from the Miss Hepburns,' muttered
Clement.
Felix laughed 'Poor Clem! Hepburns first and last! I'm sorry to
disgrace you!'
But during that laugh Clement had bethought himself. 'I beg your
pardon, Felix; you are a lesson to me. I did not know that it was the
world that was arguing in me. To go on working in trade in order to
make restitution to the Church is heroism I did not grasp at first.'
'Perhaps,' said Felix more lightly, 'it is all reluctance to give up
being somebody at Bexley for the sake of being nobody in Ewshire. Don't
look so unhappy, old fellow; University men and beneficed clergy,
like you, think much of what I was inured to long ago. Come, put out
your lamp, and come up to bed; I am sure you can't finish that sermon
to-night.'
'If I did,' said Clement, shutting it up, 'it would be to say I was not
worth ever to preach again!'
Perhaps Felix, who had entirely disbelieved the report of Edgar's
fate till his mind had in a manner become accustomed to the idea, had
underrated the amount of shock that it would give Clement, who had
never been half so much attached to poor Edgar as himself; nor perhaps
might it have done so, but for the unnerved overstrained condition to
which the year's solitude and responsibility, the months of nursing,
and the days of severe fatigue, had brought him.
Felix was wakened from his first sleep by the strangled scream of
nightmare in the next room, and hastening in, broke the spell, and
found that poor Clement had been dreaming out what he had told him, and
had deemed himself bound, gagged, struggling to come to Edgar's aid,
and ask his pardon for having done him some horrible injury, the load
of which did not at first pass with awakening.
'No,' he said, when he had entirely resumed his waking powers, 'it is
too true! Things never were as they ought to have been between us! Who
knows what difference it might have made!'
'Of course,' said Felix, thinking that to talk it all out would conduce
to Clement's quieter rest. 'We can all look back to much that we would
have had otherwise; but I trace the original mischief to those days
when Mr. Ryder, young and eager, talked out all his crudities to the
cleverest boy in his school, just as he had done to his Oxford friends.
He feels it himself, I think. He gave unintentionally a sort of
resource against whatever was distasteful, and made all the scepticism
that the poor dear fellow was exposed to abroad not seem a mere foreign
aberration. Somehow he was afraid of what religion might do to him, and
so took refuge not so much in doubt, as in knowing it was doubted. The
only thing that I ever knew touch him, was something Lance said to him
about refusing to go and live with him in London.'
'Yes; his brightness did good, where my assumptions only added to the
general contempt.'
'Still, the more I think, the more I do believe that whether we ever
know it or not, so sweet and loving a nature must come right at last.'
And there in the dark those two brothers knelt down together and in
deep undertones uttered a few clauses of intense prayer. Then Clement
said in a broken voice, 'Felix, do keep your present room, and let us
say this together every night.'
And the elder brother's only answer was such a fatherly kiss as he gave
the younger ones. They remembered that night long after!
On the Sunday Clement was not only exhausted and unwell, but could
not help allowing it, for he fainted after his first service, and was
forced to allow himself to lie by whenever he was not actually needed,
letting Felix spare him whatever was possible. Thus it was that the new
Squire astonished the natives by taking the Vicar's Sunday class in the
stable that served for the school. By-the-by, instead of receiving such
a lecture as used to be the penalty of intrusting his own Bexley boys
to Clement, he was now dejectedly forewarned that the Vale Lestonites
did not know half as much, and had the more reason to think it true
because such an extraordinary proceeding on a Squire's part filled them
with blank speechless amazement.
The congregation were equally full of wonder, approaching to
incredulity, when their new Mr. Underwood stood forth surpliced, and
read the Lessons. He had done the like often for Mr. Flowerdew; but
he would not have thus amazed the villagers on this first Sunday if
he had not been really uneasy as to their Vicar's powers of getting
through the services. And it really was a memorable thing, to Clement
at least, to hear his full clear beautiful voice setting forth the
delights of the Land of Promise, the goodly houses and fields, and the
warnings that he was verily taking to himself against the heart being
lifted up, and forgetting, or turning to serve the gods the former
nations had served--the gods may be of family pride, and pleasure, and
ease, and comfort. To Clement it seemed as though he read the whole
magnificent chapter of Deuteronomy like a manifesto of his own future
course, declaring all against which he meant to beware. It was just
as, when he had to seal up a bundle of papers that evening, he took
up a big old white cornelian seal with the family shield, and said,
squeezing it down into a deep well-prepared bed of red sealing-wax,
'There, I never did that before; I couldn't be liable for armorial
bearings!' And as Bernard exclaimed, 'Yes, now you are a gentleman
out and out!' he answered gravely, 'Not forgetting the motto, Bear.
Remember what we take up.'
'There's no sense in those old sing-song saws,' boldly averred Bernard.
'Perhaps you'll know better some day.'
Felix went himself to St Matthew's with Clement, and had a private
conference with Mr. Fulmort, the result of which was, that the senior
curate, very glad of a breath of May loveliness, went down for three
weeks to Vale Leston, while the Vicar thereof refreshed his spirit at
St Matthew's, and that when he went back again he was to take with him
the Reverend Frederick Somers, to stay till the family move should
bring him other companions.
The only sister within reasonable distance was Robina; and Felix could
not deny himself a call on her, especially as there were no further
considerations about incommoding the family with her relations. He
was shown into a big drawing-room, not at the moment inhabited, but
with the air of being used by easy-going happy people; and almost
immediately in flew the neat trim black-silken personage with the sunny
round face he had come in search of.
'Felix! dear Felix! how nice and good to come in all your glory! Lady
de la Poer was in the school-room, and she told me to ask you to
stay to luncheon. Do, pray! I want you to see her and Grace, and my
children.'
'Very well. If I do, can you come out with me afterwards? I want your
help.'
'Oh yes! I am sure I shall be able. I'll ask at luncheon, if Lady de la
Poer does not offer.'
'Have you spoken to her?'
'Told her? Of course. We had quite a festival in the schoolroom, and
all drank your health in cowslip wine. We had had a whole lot of
cowslips sent up from the Towers; and their papa came in, and wanted to
know if Mr. Underwood were not worthy of a more generous beverage. Oh,
I wish he were at home; I want you to see him!' ('And him to see you,'
she had on the tip of her tongue, but she thought he would not like it.)
'And when are you coming home?'
'When you all go to take possession. I would not lose that for
anything. I am to have my holiday then.'
'Holiday! You are coming for good.'
'Don't you think,' she said, looking up in his face, 'that after all
this education on purpose for a teacher, it would be a shame to throw
it all up and come to live on you?'
'That was just one of the things I value this inheritance for, Robin.
There's no fear but that you would find plenty to do.'
'You have three to do it,' she said; 'and the more Angela has on her
hands the better she will get on. I have been thinking it over ever
since you wrote, Felix, and I cannot see that your having an estate
makes it right in me to live dependent when I can maintain myself. It
would not if I were your brother.'
'You are not going in for women's rights, Bob?' he said, smiling.
'Not out-and-out. But listen. What you have for us is just the run of
the house, isn't it?'
'Well, yes,' he hesitated. 'It will take some time and prudence to make
a provision for you, you horribly wise bird!'
'Then would it not be foolish to come and eat up your provision at home
when I can do something towards making one myself; and I am really very
happy?' and there was colour enough in her cheek slightly to startle
her brother.
'Oh, if you are too happy here to come away--'
'Don't say that! she cried. 'I like it, for they are all kind and
bright; and I never had such a friend as Lady Grace--and I feel as if I
were doing a duty; but--oh no!--'
'Don't be so horribly discomfited, my dear. Only when young ladies are
so happy away from home, and want to make a provision--My dear little
sister, I beg your pardon--'
'Stay, Felix; I must tell you now, that you may not fancy anything so
dreadful as that it is any one here.'
'Then there's an "it is," after all!'
'No! oh, I don't know! I tried to speak to Wilmet, and she would not
let me; but when we were both ridiculous children, a little foolish
nonsense passed between him and me.'
'Whom?'
'Willie!'
'Will Harewood? I thought that was all the Bailey nonsense.'
'I can't tell,' said Robina, leaning against him and looking down. 'Do
all I can, I can't forget the sort of--of promise; and I've never been
sure whether he meant it, but--but I think he did. O Fee! is it bad of
me?'
'My sweet Bob,' he said, and kissed her, 'I am glad you have told me. I
never thought of such an affair being on your little mind. I must say I
wish it had not happened.'
'No, don't say that,' said Robina. 'It does not worry me;' and she
laughed at the very sound of the words. 'Why, can't you see how happy
I am? and I mean to be. I know how good and nice he is; and if he
doesn't remember, or can't do it, there's no harm done. (This was in
a tone brave because it was incredulous.) But if ever it did come to
anything, I should like to have something to help on with.'
'Very practical and business-like, my bird! And I am afraid it is a
sign it goes deep!' he said musingly.
'Deep!' she said, looking up to him, 'of course it does! It would be
very odd if it did not! But that will only make me glad of whatever is
good for Will; and I think the waiting is all right. I do want to have
done something for him! The only question is whether it will be bad for
you at Vale Leston to have a governess sister.'
'There's worse than that, Robin,' said Felix, gravely, 'for the Squire
himself remains a bookseller!'
'You don't mean that!'
He briefly explained.
'That quite settles it,' she said. 'I could not go home and live in
idleness while you were working on.'
'I believe you are right, Robin; but I am disappointed. I did reckon on
my sisters living like ladies!'
'Isn't three enough for you,' laughed Robin, 'to set up in a row and
wait upon, as Stella does on her dolls?'
'Precisely so. I don't think I could have let you turn Effective Female
on my hands, if you hadn't a pretty little feminine aim of your own.'
'For shame, Felix! Don't ever think about that again! Only tell me when
to ask for my holiday.'
'There are a few repairs that must be done at once; besides I've made a
clean sweep of the servants, and turned in old Tripp's daughter to do
for Clement. I don't think we can possibly be ready for a month or six
weeks.'
By this time the gong was sounding; and Lady de la Poer came in with a
kind and friendly greeting. Felix soon found himself in the midst of a
large family party of all ages, full of bright mirth, among whom Robina
spoke and moved with home-like ease, and he himself took his place as
naturally as it was given to him. Lady de la Poer knew a little of
Ewshire, and talked to him about it in the pleasantest manner, giving
the sense of congratulation without obtruding it; and she, without
waiting to be requested--proposed Miss Underwood's going out with him,
proclaiming that she would herself take the children into Kensington
Gardens.
Then, while Robina was gone to prepare, she said, 'Your sister told me
she does not wish to leave us. I said I could not consider the answer
as final till she had seen you. Perhaps I ought not till she has seen
your new home.'
'Thank you,' said Felix. 'I confess it seemed to me startlingly prudent
and independent; but when I came to think it over, I could hardly say
that the child is wrong.'
'We were very glad, as you may believe, to find that she was happy
enough to be willing to stay on. Indeed, we both feel the benefit not
only to the little ones, but of the companionship to the elder girls.
Grace is especially fond of her, and I hope it will be a lasting
friendship.'
Felix coloured as one very much pleased, and made some acknowledgment.
'There's a sturdy fearless good sense, and yet liveliness, about her,'
continued the lady, 'which has already been of great use to Grace, who
is naturally all ups and downs. However, if she changes her mind among
the attractions of home, we promise not to feel ill-used.'
'What is Mamma saying?' exclaimed Lady Grace in person, entering the
room with Robina as her mother was speaking. 'Is she pretending that we
shall not feel ill-used if Miss Underwood deserts us? No such thing! I
shall never forgive her--never! If you try to persuade her, mind, it is
at peril of being haunted by the ghost of a forlorn maiden, pined to
death for a faithless friend!'
'You don't half like to trust her with Mr. Underwood,' said her mother,
laughing.
'I told you how good he was, Gracie,' interposed Robina.
'He is pretending to consent, and he means to undermine me! It will be
just like Beauty and the Beast. Your sisters will do their eyes with
onions, to work on your feelings; and then you'll stay on, and find the
poor Beast--that's me--at the last gasp!'
'That will be when she goes home,' said Felix, laughing. 'I promise to
bring her safe back now, Lady Grace; but surely you have enough sisters
of your own to spare me mine!'
'Now listen, Mr. Underwood. It is true, as a matter of history and
genealogy, that I've got five sisters; but Number Two--that's Mary--is
married, and no good to anybody; and Number One--that's Fanny--is
always looking after her when she is not looking after Mamma. Then
Adelaide, whom nature designed for my own proper sister, is altogether
devoted to Kate Caergwent, and cares for nobody else; and as to the
little ones--why, they are only nine and ten, and good for nothing but
an excuse for having Miss Underwood in the house! Now is not it true
that you have three sisters already at your beck and call?'
'Two, I allow; but the third is hardly at any one's beck.'
'What, that most entertaining person, Angela? I don't think we have had
such fun in the school-room since Kate's maddest days.'
'My dear, I think you have a remnant of them,' said Lady de la Poer.
'Let Miss Underwood go; I am sure her brother has no time to spare.'
'I hope,' said Felix, when they were in the street, 'that Angel has not
been exposing herself there.'
'No, no, not much,' said Robina, hesitating. 'The first time or two she
was asked to tea in the school-room she kept me sitting on thorns, and
liked it--the wicked child; but after all, there is something about
their manners that keeps her in check; they are so merry, and yet
so refined. I think nothing improves her so much as an evening with
them--except, indeed, when there's any external element.'
'External element?'
'Anything that--that excites her,' hastily said Robina. 'But is not
Lady Grace delightful?'
'She seems passionately fond of you--or was it a young lady's strong
language?'
'Oh, she means it, dear Gracie! She is lonely, you see. Lady Adelaide
is rather a wise one, and she and Lady Caergwent read and study deep,
and have plans together, and leave poor Grace out; and they all tease
her for being so excitable.'
'Well, I thought she was almost crying while she talked her nonsense.'
'Just so I think her the sweetest of them all, because she feels so
easily; but her sisters do snub her a little. And my Lady herself--is
not she exactly one's imagination of a real great lady?'
'Crme de la Crme?'
'Yes, perfect dignity and simplicity, and as tender and careful a
mother all the time as a cottage woman. I never felt any one so
mother-like, even to me.'
'I can quite believe that. Yes, if you are to work, you could hardly
do so more comfortably.'
It was a concession, and Robina had to put up with it; for as they
turned into Piccadilly he changed the subject by demanding, 'Now,
Robin, what shall it be? Seal-skins?'
'Seal-skins in the height of summer?'
'I thought all ladies pined for seal-skins. We have half a column of
advertisements of them at a time.'
'You don't want to extend the business to them?'
'No, but to give one to each of my sisters.'
'They are a monstrous price, you know. You should have heard Lord de la
Poer grumble when Addie and Grace had theirs!'
'Fifty pound will do the five, I suppose?'
'I thought there were heavy expenses, and not much ready money.'
'There's enough for that, and I mean it. I shall not know that I have
come into my fortune till I have taken home something to show for it.'
'I wonder what Wilmet would say.'
'Wilmet is not my master, and a chit like you had best not try her
line. It won't do, with your face and figure.'
Robina could only laugh, and feel that she was still Felix's child, and
if he chose to be extravagant she could not stop him.
'Which shall it be?' he continued; 'seal-skins, or silk gowns, or
anything of jewellery?'
'Jewellery would last longest, and none of us have got any,' said
Robin; 'but I believe you like the seals best.'
'I want to stroke Cherry in one. And wouldn't Wilmet look grand? She
hasn't got one, has she?'
'No. I was out with her and John last winter, when she dragged him past
the shop.'
'I thought you were aping her! Well, I've broken loose, and she will
have no choice now.'
'You don't mean to include Alda?'
'Poor Alda! Seal-skins have ceased to be an object to her; but I have
had a very warm letter from her.'
So Robina was only allowed the privilege of assisting in the selection
of the smooth brown coats and muffs. Felix insisted on despatching Mrs.
John Harewood's to her at once; and he wanted to send Angela's, but
yielded, on Robin's representation of the impossibility of her putting
it away in any security from the moth. His exultation in his purchases
was very amusing, as he stroked them like so many cats, as if he
were taking seisin of his inheritance. And when, some hours later, he
sprang out of the train, and was met by the station-master with, 'Mr.
Underwood! allow me to offer my most sincere congratulations,' and
everybody ran for his luggage as never before, he still clung close to
his precious parcel, like a child with a new toy, even to his own door,
which was suddenly opened at his bell, Sibby crying aloud, 'No, no,
Martha, not a sowl shall open the door, barring meself, to me own boy
that's come to his own again, an' got the better of all the nagurs that
kep' him out. Blessings on you, Masther Felix, me jewel, an' long life
to you to reign over it!' And she really had her arms round his neck,
kissing him.
'Well done, Sibby, and thank you! Your heart warms to the old place,
does it?' and he held out a hand to the less demonstrative Martha, who
stood curtseying, and observing, 'I wish you joy, Sir.'
By that time Stella had flown upon him, Theodore was clinging to his
leg, Lance half way downstairs, and Cherry hanging over the balusters.
'You villain!' were Lance's first words; 'why didn't you come home by
daylight? All the establishment waited till the six o'clock train was
in to give you three times three!'
'And now you are come,' added Cherry, 'stand there, right in the
middle! I want to see how a Squire looks!'
He obeyed by planting his feet like a colossus, tucking his umbrella
under his arm like a whip, putting on his hat over his brow, and
altogether assuming the conventional jolly Squire attitude, which was
greeted by shrieks of laughter and applause.
'Now let me see how a Squire's sister looks,' he continued, opening his
parcel, and thrusting Stella into the first coat that came to hand,
which being Angela's, came down to her heels.
Cherry shouted, 'Like the brown bear!' and Scamp began to bark, and
was forcibly withheld by Lance from demolishing the little brown muff
that rolled out; while Felix turned on Cherry with the jacket meant
for Stella; and she, in convulsions of merriment, could do nothing but
shriek, 'Cyrus! Cyrus! Cyrus!'
'Well, then, take the great coat, puss,' said Felix. 'Here, Stella, let
me pull you out of that! That's more like it!'
'My dear Felix,' continued Cherry, in great affected gravity, 'are
these the official garments wherein we are to be installed? Nearly as
severe as royal ermine.'
'Don't scold, Whiteheart. I had enough of that from the wise Robin
before she would help me choose them. I had set my heart on them.'
'Dear old Giant!' cried Cherry, craning up to kiss him; 'he couldn't
believe he had a landed estate till he had seen it on our backs! But,'
she added, fearing to be disappointing, 'I never knew before what it
was to be sleek and substantial. If ever I did covet a thing, it was
the coat of a seal.'
'But how is Mr. Froggatt, Lance?'
'As well as can be expected,' was Lance's reply. 'He congratulates with
tears in his eyes, says you deserve it, but bemoans poor Pur, till I am
minded to tell him that I'll stick by him and the concern; for really
I don't know what else I'm good for, and honest Lamb couldn't write a
leader to save his life.'
'I'll walk over to-morrow, and set him at rest,' said Felix. 'I could
not drop Pur if I would.'
'I'm so glad,' said Cherry. 'I felt quite sad over the proofs, like
casting off an old friend.'
'Or kicking adrift the plank that has brought one to land. I knew
Cherry would have broken her heart to part with Pur.'
'Besides, it is a real power and influence,' added Cherry; 'and it
is so improved. We had up a whole file of it for years back. Willie
Harewood had lost some of his earlier March Hare poems, and thought
they were there; so he and I hunted over reams of ancient Pur, and
couldn't find them after all. I believe you had declined them; and they
would have been lost to the world if Lance hadn't written to Robina,
and she had copies of them all, laid up in lavender.'
'And they are the most splendid of all!' said Lance.
'Only too good for the Pursuivant,' laughed Felix.
'Well,' said Cherry, 'Will and I held up our hands to find how stupid
Pur used to be four or five years ago, when you were in bondage to Mr.
Froggatt's fine words and his fears.'
'Yes, and had no opposition to put us on our mettle,' added Lance.
'The Tribune was the making of the Pursuivant; I'm inclined to offer
it a testimonial. By-the-by, Felix, are you prepared for a testimonial
yourself--or at the very least, a dinner in the Town Hall, from your
fellow citizens? They're all agog about it.'
'On the principle that "as long as thou doest well unto thyself men
will speak good of thee?"' asked Felix. 'No,' correcting himself,
'that's hardly fair; there's kind feeling in it, too; but perhaps they
will let me off when they find it is not a farewell.'
'Not!'
'Now, Cherry and Lance, I want you to look at this statement. Clement
has seen it, of course; but I don't want it to go any further, except
to Jack. It is enough to say that I find the property a good deal
burthened, which is only too true.'
'You don't seem to have much of a bargain!' said Lance, coming round to
read over Cherry's shoulder.
'The question is whether Cherry can trample on Underwood traditions,
and keep house for a thousand a year where people expect three or four
times the sum to be laid out.'
'I thought you reckoned things here at five hundred.'
'Hardly so much. We shall have to get our old bugbear, the superior
assistant. Besides, Lance, now's your time. You must begin to get ready
for Oxford at once.'
'I?' said Lance. 'No, thank you, Felix. Clement offered me the same
last year, but my head wouldn't stand grinding nohow. No, if you stick
to the old plank, so will I. I was more than half wishing it before,
and ready to break my heart at leaving the organ to some stick of my
Lady's choosing, only I didn't know what you might think due to the
manes of the Underwoods.'
'The manes of the Underwoods must make up their minds to a good deal,'
said Felix; 'but is it really true that you do not think yourself fit
for study?'
'No, but music I can combine with the work here,' said Lance; 'and
that would save the superior assistant, and you will be free to make a
gentleman of Bear.'
'Yes, that must be done,' said Felix. 'Even Stoneborough will not do
now. He is such a cocky little chap, that the only chance for him is
to get him to a great public school, where this promotion will seem
nothing to anybody.'
'My poor little Bear! I am very glad,' said Cherry. 'And he is still
young enough; yet it hardly seems fair, when all his elders had to earn
their own education.'
'Such as it was!' interjected Lance.
'Yes,' said Felix; 'and when I remember the sighs my father now and
then let out about Eton or Harrow, I feel bound to give the benefit to
the one who can take it; but I don't like the spending two hundred a
year on that boy, and then leaving you, Lance, to all the drudgery, and
a solitary house.'
'That matters the less,' said Lance, 'because I am busy with the choir
and with practice two evenings in the week, and should be more, if it
wasn't for doing the agreeable to Cherry.'
'He'll turn into a misogynist, like Mr. Miles,' laughed Cherry.
'No, he'll be consumed by an unrequited affection for all the young
ladies that come in with the loveliest eyes in the world,' said Felix.
'He'll set the March Hare poetry to music, and serenade them with it,'
added Cherry.
'No, I shall cultivate the Frogs,' said Lance. 'It would be too bad to
have left the poor old boy in the lurch.'
'Yes, that has weighed a good deal with me,' said Felix. 'I'm
determined that they shall come and stay with us at the Priory as soon
as we can get it in order, and before the winter. I'll bring them up
myself. You see, Lance, whenever I take a turn here you can be at home.'
'Home! he has begun already!'
'It was home to me first, and I always feel that it is whenever I come
in sight of it. Lancey, boy, when I think of leaving you here, it seems
letting you sacrifice yourself too much!'
'Nonsense, Blunderbore. You can't give this back to the Church if we
don't keep off your hands; and next, that coup d'tat addled my
brains so far that I'm good for no work but this that I have drifted
into.'
'Then, Cherry, you must help me make an estimate of the expenses, and
see whether we can venture to live at the Priory, or whether we must
let it, and go on here for seven years.'
'Oh!' They both looked very blank.
'I'd rather live on bread and cheese in the country,' said Cherry.
'So had I,' said Felix, 'if the manes of the Underwoods are appeasable.
One step is a riddance of all the servants; I wonder how many you can
do with. Five maids and five men I paid off, only keeping on one man,
to look after Clem's horse and see to the garden.'
'By-the-bye,' said Lance, 'George Lightfoot begged me to state that
his sister is at home, and always had a great wish to live with Miss
Underwood.'
'Let her come and speak to me, then,' said Cherry; 'though I am
afraid she must moderate her expectations. It seems to me that except
for the honour of the thing, this is another version of our old
friend--"poortith cauld."'
'Our best friend, maybe, Cherry,' said Felix, 'if we can only heartily
believe it?'
'His bride, as truly as St. Francis's,' thought she; 'and without the
credit of it.'
CHAPTER XXXVI.
POSSESSION.
'And while the wings of fancy still are free,
And I can view this mimic show of thee,
Time has but half succeeded in his theft--
Thyself removed, thy power to soothe me left.'
Cowper.
Though Felix had gone to town both in going to Vale Leston and coming
from it, a much shorter way was feasible, only necessitating a couple
of hours' delay at a junction.
This was not so entirely inconvenient, on Felix's twenty-ninth
birthday, which had been fixed for the general migration to the new
home, since Robina was to meet the others there from a country house
of Lord de la Poer's, seven or eight miles off, and Major and Mrs.
Harewood, and their two sons, would be in the down-train that was
to pick the party up. Not only were they to assist in the taking
possession, but they had secured lodgings for three months at the Glebe
Farm. 'It will be such a good thing,' had Wilmet said, 'to settle them
all in, and put Cherry and her housekeeping on the right tack.'
'My dear Wilmet, I am perfectly sensible of the admirable monarchical
constitution Kit and I live under; but my principles are against
annexation, and if you extend it to Cherry's house, I shall carry you
off at once to Buckinghamshire, or to the Hebrides!'
'I only meant to help,' said Wilmet, with a little dignity; then
changing her tone as she saw a smile twitch his moustache, 'and you
shall be judge what is help!'
Clement was already at Vale Leston; and Bernard, declaring that no
one should catch him again at that filthy hole, Bexley, had repaired
thither as soon as his holidays began. Martha, Amelia Lightfoot, and a
superior housemaid of Wilmet's selection, were gone on to make ready;
also a young gardener, whose face had pleased Felix when he came to
advertise: and half the Underwood family were at the station, together
with Willie Harewood, Sibby, and Scamp--the latter chiefly in the
service of Theodore. Sibby was useful in other ways; but she was, as
ever, to have the chief charge of the boy by day, be his refuge from
strangers, and attend to his meals, it being one of his peculiarities
that he never could or would eat at the family table. And Scamp, though
Lance's property, was so much Theodore's delight, that separation would
have been cruelty; and Lance had resigned him with free good nature,
and not without hopes of Scamp's brother as an inmate, for Dick Graeme
himself had been articled to a surveyor, and was to live and board
with Lance, his mother declaring her conviction that this was the best
security both for his moral, and his rather fragile physical, health.
One of the 'everlasting Lightfoots,' as Angela called them, had married
a nice young wife, and was to occupy the lower rooms, and do for them.
So there were nine individuals seeking what pastime the junction
afforded. The Squire--Felix's present nickname--was, to every one's
amusement, seated at the table in the waiting-room, writing a leader
with the rapidity and abstraction peculiar to himself. A leather couch
was occupied by everybody's hand-bags, umbrellas, and parasols; a cage
of doves, a basket of the more precious flower-roots, and another with
a kitten, under Geraldine's protection; while she endeavoured to keep
Theodore happy and not troublesome by a judicious dole of biscuits
to be shared with Scamp, whom he held in a string--until, at Lance's
step on the platform, the dog rushed out after him, dragging Theodore
after him--Cherry limped after Theodore, Felix hurried after them all,
and Lance took Theodore by the hand, and led boy and dog wherever it
pleased them to go, and they could go safely, while Stella rushed to
satisfy herself of the welfare of her kitten and birds.
Except for such interruptions, the public was mostly concerned to find
a place whence to behold Robina's arrival. 'What will she come in!'
said Stella. 'A carriage like the Centry one?'
'Rattling up in an old fly,' said Will, gruffly.
'Will is jealous of the swells that have proved so attractive!' said
Angela. 'Aren't you burning with curiosity to see them?'
'Not in the least! I know quite enough of them.'
'Know them?'
'A couple of tufts at Christ Church. Not a bad oar--but a regular
stuck-up fellow!'
'Which? or is the description collective?'
'Look, Angel!' cried Stella, as an open waggonette, drawn by two
handsome black horses and full of a merry party of young people, came
dashing up; a cockaded servant opened the door, and a youth in summer
costume sprang out.
'That's him!' quoth Will.
'Lord Ernest!' responded Angela.
Then the well-known figure of their own Robin was handed out by him,
and lastly one of the other damsels, whom Angel identified as Lady
Grace.
'They are not coming in here!' exclaimed Bill, grimly.
Nevertheless they were; the waggonette drove off amid nods and smiles,
and Robin and her two companions were the next moment in presence, and
Will was forced to shake hands with Lord Ernest, while Lady Grace went
through the same ceremony with Felix and Angela, indeed with every one.
'I know you all, already,' she said; 'I'm so glad to have seen you, if
only to warn you not to keep her.'
'Are you going our way?' asked Cherry, feeling the bright charm of
manner.
'No; we only came to see her safe into your hands. Come, Ernest!' But
he was enthusiastically admiring Scamp, and inquiring how to procure
the like; and it was some minutes before he shook hands with Robina,
saying, 'Then you'll let Gracie know whether one is to be had for love
or money?'
'I thought you were to have one of the brown setters?'
'Well, why not?'
'One can't have more than one dog of one's heart,' said Angela.
'They must compete for that honour, then. Dogs, as well as other
beings, must earn their place by their qualities. Eh, Gracie?'
'You foolish boy!' was his sister's reply. 'Come along. Good-bye,
my dear little Copsey. If I don't get a letter every day I shall be
convinced that your sisters are putting onions in their eyes.'
'What bright creatures!' exclaimed Cherry.
'What did she call you?' said Will
'Copsey. Oh, Copse, Underwood--the children all call me so. It is my
pet name.'
'Insufferable impudence!' muttered Will. 'And what were you thinking
of, Lance, to talk of getting him a dog of that breed, when you know
Graeme would as soon sell his children?'
'Was not he very proud of the Richborough keeper coming over after
them?'
'Those weren't sold.'
'I beg your pardon. Dick told me what he got for them.'
'One may do a thing for a neighbour, that one wouldn't for a chance
stranger at a station.'
'You Red Republican!' said Angela.
'It is enough to make one a republican in earnest.'
'In earnest, indeed!' mischievously echoed Angela.
'To see a shallow young tuft expecting to get whatever he chooses to
ask for, and every one else encouraging him in it--even those who
should have more sense!'
'Meaning me!' said Lance, putting an arm in his and walking him off to
the end of the ticket-taker's little platform; but they had no sooner
turned back than he exclaimed, 'There's that fellow again!'
There indeed he was, with 'Here's your parasol, Miss Underwood. Of
course you know the guilty person?'
'Mine was almost exactly like Lady Caergwent's, thank you!' said
Robina, comparing the plain blue sun-shade with the one she held.
'Except that hers is minus the tassel,' said Lord Ernest. 'You plainly
don't understand the principle of barter and exchange.'
'What? Always to take the least scratchy slate, and longest slate
pencil!' said Angel.
'That's an essentially school illustration that I should not have
dared to make,' said Lord Ernest.
'Nor I,' said Angela, 'but for the blissful fact that I'm no longer a
schoolgirl.'
'I envy you,' he said, with something like a sigh. 'Your wings are
grown!'
But there Robina uneasily said, 'You are keeping Lady Caergwent all
this time without her parasol.'
'There, you see!' he returned, in a half pathetic tone of appeal,
which made Angela laugh excessively. 'But, indeed, there's no fear;
she and my sisters are in Long's shop, and will spend the next two
hours in debating whether print in spots or stripes best conduces to
the morality of their old women. That's the next stage after leaving
school is it not?' turning to Angela; 'the first use to be made of your
liberty!'
'To wear stars and stripes?' she asked, with a little wilful gloss.
And so with desultory nonsense they went on; Robina more than once
interfering, and trying to send Lord Ernest off, but always hovering
about them, in a certain ill-at-ease condition. Felix, having posted
his leader, and taken his tickets, came out on the platform, and
watched the group with a shade of perplexity.
There stood Angela, the bloom of seventeen brightening her pale
colouring, and her play of feature and beautiful mischievous dark
grey eyes making her face full of attraction. A knowing little black
Tyrolese hat, with a single peacock's feather, was tipped over her
forehead; her mass of flaxen hair was in huge loops, tied with crisp
streamers; and her tall figure, in the same silver-grey as all the
sisters had agreed on, looked dashing, where Robina's--with the
adjuncts of a shady hat and a good deal of falling black lace--was
quietness itself. Robina's face, still round, honest, and rosy, had
grown more womanly, and had a distressed uneasy aspect, as she stood
a little aloof, not quite mingling in the conversation, but yet not
separating herself from it. The youth who was talking to Angela was
dark haired, with rather aquiline features, but with that peculiar
whiteness of complexion which is one of the characteristics of old
nobility, and though not exactly handsome, with a very pleasing
countenance, and an air of birth and breeding, a decided contrast to
the figure who regarded them from a little distance. William Harewood
had developed into a much bigger man than his brother, but he had not
the advantage of John's neatness of figure and soldierly bearing.
He had his mother's odd looseness of make, as if his limbs had got
together by accident, and his clothes ditto. John's hair was of the
pale sandy hue; but his, including long whiskers, was of the darker,
more fiery tint, which Lance, at his politest, termed cinnamon. To
be sure, he had a huge massive forehead, under which his yellow
green-flecked eyes could twinkle and sparkle; and his wide mouth, when
grinning from ear to ear, was an engine of fascinating drollery, while
a few deep thoughts or words instantly gave majesty to the whole face,
and extinguished all sense of its grotesqueness; but at present, as
he leant against one of the posts of the platform, a heavy ill-humour
had settled upon his countenance, which made his whole look and air
more befitting a surly navvy than a first-class prizeman, tutor of a
distinguished college, and able to get more aristocratic pupils than he
wanted for his intended reading-party on the hills of the upper Ewe.
Felix had stood for some moments, looking on, wondering what it all
meant, when the bell rang, the train swept up, the doors flew open, and
John Harewood sprang out among them.
'A crowded train!' he said. 'There's only room for three in there,
with Wilmet; Krishnu and the nurse have been keeping the places. Here,
Cherry!--Here, Robin!--What, Stella! all this live-stock?'
'Oh, yes, please, please, Robina, take the doves; I can't trust them
or my pussy with any one else.'
And past various self-concentrated people, intensely aggravated at
exchanging the companionship of one baby for that of two doves and a
kitten, the sisters were bundled, to find Wilmet watching for them,
with her elder boy asleep on her knee, a great serene good-tempered
fellow, with her features and clear skin, and though with true Harewood
hair, a Kit to be proud of.
'But where's Angela?'
'There--running after Lance.'
'In that hat! Angel? I saw her as the train came up, and never thought
of her belonging to us. How could you let her make such a figure of
herself?'
'Nature is partly accountable,' said Cherry, in an odd sort of voice.
'And--Well, she brought home the hat, and it does become her. She can
be very picturesque!'
'I'm no artist,' said Wilmet, remembering her husband's caution, and
abstaining; then, as the train began to move, 'Ah! Willie will be left
behind! No; he made a rush! How foolish! What's the matter with him? He
seemed in a brown study.'
'He is out of sorts,' said Cherry. 'I believe he is very much put out
with Lance for not going to Oxford.'
Robina looked up eagerly. 'He must have wished it very much!' she said,
catching gladly at this explanation of his ill-humour.
'Yes,' said Cherry; 'nothing would have so relieved him from the
sense that Lance blighted his prospects in his service. He came down
persuaded, I believe, that he and his big head could shove Lance
through all the passes, just as he could put him over a gap.'
'Everything comes so easy to him, that he has no notion how hard it is
to Lance,' said Robina. 'John says Lance is right, but I am sorry--'
'So Felix wrote,' said Wilmet, 'and one can only acquiesce. Oh, and
before this good little traveller wakes, tell me all about the dinner.'
'There's more that you have not heard about,' said Cherry, triumphantly.
'The inkstand!' said Stella. 'O sister! they have given him the most
splendid inkstand!'
'Who? The Bexley people?'
'Yes,' said Cherry, 'a regular testimonial. They kept it a great
secret; only Mr. Lamb came blushing in one day and borrowed one of the
old books with the coat-of-arms in it, so that I thought something was
brewing. Half the town subscribed--all Felix's young men's class, and
quantities of his old scholars; and there's a little silver knight on
the top, with a frosty silver pennon with the Rood upon it.'
'The Pursuivant himself?' said Robin.
'Yes, standing on a pedestal--a match-box, I believe, with such an
inscription on it that Felix is ashamed of it; and we have had such a
fight about its standing in the drawing-room or being suppressed in his
study, that Felix said at last that we were like Joseph's brothers in
prosperity, and wanted the warning, "See that ye fall not out by the
way."'
But the quarrel had not been a serious one, to judge by her happy face.
'It is very nice, very nice,' said Wilmet, 'and I am not at all
surprised. I thought they must do something of the kind. Was it given
at the dinner?'
'Yes; it was brought in when Mr. Postlethwayte began his speech. He
is Mayor this year, and he was so kind--he came and asked us whether
we should object to go with Mrs. Froggatt, to sit in the gallery.
Object, indeed! I wouldn't have missed it for anything in the world;
and we were just above our dear old fellow's head, where he could not
see us, which was all the better for him.'
'Was he nervous?'
'No; he said there was a reality of kindness about it all that made
him feel it as friend to friend. So the Minsterham reporter said too.
Felix brought him in to tea, because we are to have his report for Pur.
He said he had never seen such genuine feeling on all sides. He wanted
to call it an ovation. And Felix puzzled him so by declaring that
inapplicable, unless it had all been mutton.'
'And Mr. Bolton did send ever so much venison,' put in Stella; 'and a
letter besides, because he could not come himself. Mr. Postlethwayte
began by reading it.'
'Yes; that was all the right and proper thing,' said Cherry; 'all
civility about his valuable supporter. As well might he say, for hasn't
Pur fought for him through thick and thin--and suffered too! But it was
Mr. Postlethwayte who had his heart in it. There, Stella, you can say
it all off by heart like a little live page of Pur. Tell Wilmet what he
said about example.'
'He said,' rehearsed Stella, 'that Felix had set a noble example of
considering no means of independence derogatory, and only manifesting
his birth in the high sense of honour which, in the name of his
fellow-citizens, he confessed to have been no slight stimulus.'
'Well done! That was much for Mr. Postlethwayte to say.'
'Oh! everybody said everything!' answered Cherry. 'Mr. Bruce went on
about the paper. Poor dear old Pur, he never had so much good said of
him before, and every word true; but the real beauty of the thing was
the Frogs.'
'I am so glad Mr. Froggatt could go.'
'He said he would not have missed if he had had one foot in the grave.
I really was afraid, once or twice, Mrs. Froggatt would have embraced
us then and there in the gallery, before all the people. How she did
cry, dear old lady!'
'She was thinking of her own sons, poor dear!'
'Partly; but I do think half was pride and pleasure, and that sort of
feeling that grows up of unanimity. I can't describe, but it is like a
spirit mastering all. You will read in the report; but it does not give
a notion of the kind of glow, and the ecstasy of the cheer, when Mr.
Underwood of Vale Leston was given out--the looks of all the faces! Oh!
I can't describe it--one seemed obliged to sob for gratitude! And then,
in the lull at last came his voice, so clear and sweet and strong, and
taking them all by surprise. Now, Stella, go on!'
'Felix stood up,' said Stella, with a pretty little tone of
enthusiastic imitation in her low sweet voice, 'and said perhaps it
was not regular to criticise the manner of such an honour as they had
done him, but he must say that he had rather they had proposed him as
Underwood of 14 High Street. For if his good friends thought they were
disposing of him with a long farewell, he must tell them they would not
be rid of him so soon. For he said that for the means of fulfilling
his new duties he must look in great measure to his old sphere, and
their unvarying friendliness. What a noise they did make then! and when
he went on to thank them for their kindness in treating him as one of
themselves, though without any claim of long standing. And then wasn't
it nice when he went on about Mr. Froggatt!'
'Can't you see, Wilmet,' continued Geraldine, 'how being altogether
moved and excited, all sorts of things came out that he never could
have said in cold blood? About the gentleman he said it was all owing
to--his accepting him when he was a raw friendless lad, giving him an
opening for exertion--patience--kindness. You'll read it, but if you
could only have seen and heard when he said he should always esteem the
connecting of their names among the dearest honours of his life, as it
had certainly been the proudest. He told us afterwards that he saw a
face looking as if it sounded like humbug; so he added louder, "Yes,
as much the proudest and dearest, as what one may hope is personal
is better than what comes by the accident of birth." And he could
not believe that any honour could bestow on him the pleasure he had
felt when he first saw the names of Froggatt and Underwood together.
Whatever he had done or hoped to do, he felt to be due not only to
the first start, but to the long thorough training in diligent habits
of business. As Mr. Bevan said afterwards, it was the most beautiful
outpouring of gratitude without false shame. And Mr. Froggatt, who
had not the least expected it, was quite past speaking. "Gentlemen,
my feelings--" he said, and broke down, and every one cheered, and he
tried again, but only got as far as "Gentlemen, my feelings--" and
put his hand on Mr. Ryder's arm, and begged him to say it for him,
something about "a thousandfold repaid." Mr. Ryder made a set speech
of it, all very true and good, really the best of all, looking so in
the Pursuivant, but nothing to "Gentlemen, my feelings--" and the great
sob.'
'Dear old gentleman! is he more reconciled to the losing you all?'
'Yes, he is so much pleased to keep Lance, and that Felix does not
throw it all up. Indeed, if we could have given up Bexley it would have
been a great difficulty, for Felix feels that he took the duties of a
son upon him.'
'It does to a certain degree qualify one's regret,' said Wilmet. 'As
John says, one would not take the responsibility of saying a word of
remonstrance; he is no fanciful lad, but a man well used to practical
questions; but I still am sorry he should so cripple himself by acting
on scruples Papa never entertained.'
'We can hardly be sure of that,' said Cherry. 'That old letter to Mr.
Staples looked as if he were doubtful. When I told Sister Constance--I
could not help it, though Felix had not given me leave--she seemed
quite overcome, and then she pointed out how right it had all come, for
in the ordinary course of things most likely this restitution would
not have been possible. If he had been brought up as an eldest son,
and we had all had an expensive education like other people, not only
should we all have grown into acquiescence in an unavoidable sort of
abuse, but there would have been none of the power of independence that
enables him to do this; and there would have been settlements and all
manner of things to tie it up. Remember, too, that dear Papa was always
thankful that he did not have the trial of unmixed prosperity.'
Those were the last words before there was a slackening of speed;
Wilmet resumed the one Kit, Stella the other, Robina wielded the doves,
and gathered the parcels, a tall fair head under a big black hat
nodded and smiled welcome, and the little station seemed to flash with
greeting, as in another moment the halt was made, Clement wrenched open
the door, swung out Stella, holding fast by the basket, and set her
down with a kiss, next putting forth a long tender pair of arms to lift
Cherry down, and then receiving his nephew and holding him while Wilmet
and Robina extracted the other impedimenta, and the other two-thirds of
the party hurried up, amid touching of hats and services of porters,
Bernard and Angela flying upon one another, and luggage pouring out of
the van.
'I hope there's room,' said Clement, surveying the numbers. 'I brought
everything on wheels that I could get beasts for.'
And making Kit over to his father's hand, he conveyed Cherry to a
corner of the big barouche with post-horses, and then hurried back
to pack in Wilmet and her boy. He would have put in Robina and Major
Harewood, but they both cried out that this was the place for Squire
himself. Clement and John dragged him from some selection of boxes in a
recusant but passive state, and deposited him opposite to Geraldine, as
she merrily called him 'to enjoy the novel sensation of riding in one's
own coach.'
'Theodore!' he remonstrated; but Wilmet's eyes grew uneasy, and Clement
said, 'Better let Lance and me take him. You'll have a noisy welcome,
and he had better not have the first brunt. Here, Tedo, jump up by
Lance; see my big horse! Ha! I see Angel and Bear have climbed to the
box. Now then, Robin, in with you! Can you make room for Stella?'
So having packed the barouche, Clement sent it off with a dash, taking
John and Will Harewood as well as his two brothers in that dog-cart
that fitted him so oddly, while Sibby, Krishnu, the nurse and baby,
and the luggage, were disposed of in a sort of break which would hold
everything, and came soberly behind with a farm-horse.
It had been well done of the brothers to relieve Felix from the charge
of keeping the peace between Theodore and Kit, and leave him free to
enjoy the arrival with his sisters, and to be happy in having Wilmet
with him, the sharer in all his earlier exertions, and the best able to
enter into his recollections, though at first she failed to recognise
the old landmarks he pointed out, and Cherry sat dreamily smiling,
owning that she recollected nothing in particular, but all was lovely
and delicious, and not like a strange place, but as if she belonged to
it.
Then came the summit of the hill, the church tower, and the river, and
the rich valley stretched before them; and as there was a halt to put
on the drag, up came on the breeze a clash and peal. 'The bells! the
bells!' cried Stella; and Wilmet held up the finger to her boy, 'The
bells, Kit, the bells for Uncle Felix! Listen!'
'Don't you ever forget,' cried Cherry, bending to kiss the wondering
child; and grasping Felix's hand in irrepressible agitation, 'Oh! how
often I have wondered whether we should live to see this day!'
'Thank Heaven that you share it, Sweetheart,' fervently whispered
Felix; while Bernard and Angela turned round, and screamed to them to
look.
And there was a big arch all across the road, all greenery, big
white and orange lilies, and 'Welcome' and 'F.C.U.'s, and a flag
on the church tower, and a tremendous onset of drums and trumpets,
obstreperously hailing the conquering hero, who had to take off his
hat and bow to the mounted array of some dozen tenants and their
sons, all the cavalry of the estate turned out to meet him. 'Master
Kistopher' was hardened enough to military bands not to mind this at
all; but it was well that Theodore was a little behind, for the lungs
of all Vale Leston Abbas, and more too, united in the cheer as the
arch was reached. 'Oh! I hope they won't take out the horses!' cried
Cherry, more than half frightened, while Bernard and Angel danced up
and down with ecstatic cries of 'Jolly! jolly! Here's the whole place
turned out! They'll draw us up to the house! Hurrah! hurrah!' bowing so
graciously, that Cherry, in a counter paroxysm of diversion, called to
them that they would be taken for the man and maid if they appropriated
all the enthusiasm.
Happily no one was venturesome enough to meddle with the horses, but
the whole population attended the carriage up to the house, making so
much discordant uproar, that the reception was a very questionable
pleasure to the nervous; Cherry was between laughter and sobs, and
Wilmet had to spend much pains in persuading her boy that it was all
excellent fun.
At last, upon the stone steps stood Felix, with Cherry on his arm,
Theodore in his hand, nine altogether out of his twelve brothers
and sisters round him, on this the threshold of the home of his
forefathers. There he stood, bare-headed, moist-eyed, thanks to Heaven
swelling his heart, thanks to man fluttering on his lip, as he heard
the fresh shout of welcome, and the old men's 'There he is! God bless
him!'
'Well may they say so!' whispered John Harewood to his wife. 'Here, at
twenty-nine, he stands a stainless knight, with a stainless shield, as
though he had not had to fight his way, and bear up all these around
him!'
Felix meantime, withstanding Theodore's terrified tugs at his hand, put
him into Sibby's care, to be taken as far as possible from the human
greeting, and to enjoy that of the bells; Clement, with a prevision
of the welcome, had provided a supply of cider, wherewith he and the
other gentlemen proceeded to administer draughts to the health of the
new master, who was allowed to do nothing but stand on the step to
make a tableau, as Bill said, with his sisters, and return by look and
gesture the tokens of welcome and the cheer, which Clement, gathering
his choir, contrived to render considerably less inharmonious.
Then Felix, feeling that some words were due, and trained a little by
town-council exigencies, spoke forth. 'Thanks, thanks with all our
hearts, my good friends and neighbours. We did not expect so hearty a
welcome, and I am sure we shall never forget it. As far as an earnest
wish and purpose to do my best will carry me, I will try to deserve
it; but you must bear with me if I often unavoidably disappoint you,
and do not come up to the old golden age of this house. Any way, let
us do our best, one and all, to live here to the glory of God, and in
friendliness to one another. Then it will go hard if we are not very
happy together.'
The bright smile and joyous hope in his face awoke a shout of 'Yes,
yes!' and another cheer, followed by a farmer's voice proposing the
health of the ladies, with the homely addition from another quarter,
'Bless their sweet faces!' and an observation which the Major delighted
to overhear--'That there tall one, with the child by her side, was a
right-down comely one, just such as our ladies up here did used to was.'
Health to 'Mr. Eddard' followed, surprising the new comers who had not
learnt to accept the Vicar's parish name. It drained his provision of
liquor, and gave him the opportunity of saying, 'Thank you sincerely,
dear friends. We are old friends, you know, and I need say no more,
only that now we have seen the good time coming, you had better wish
the travellers good-night, and let my sisters rest. You will all be
better acquainted soon.'
'Well managed, Mr. Edward,' said Felix, smiling, as Clement, for the
first time able to speak to him after dismissing his flock, ran up the
steps looking heated and radiant.
'There's another thing I've done, Felix,' he said, rather breathlessly.
'I've got a supper for the ringers in the long room. Martha is much
displeased about it, but it is the only chance of breaking the neck of
the drinking at the Rood without making you unpopular.'
'All right, Clem, thank you. Well! you look better than when I saw you
last!'
'I'm quite jolly, thank you;' and indeed, the fagged air of depression
had changed to hope and sunshine; he had grown quite sunburnt, and as
Cherry followed up the compliment, had turned into a vigorous country
parson instead of a white town-bred one. He was acting as a sort of
host. 'This way, Wilmet. You must settle about the rooms, Cherry. It
was all guess-work between Martha and me. There's some tea in the
drawing-room by this time.'
He led them quickly through a large hall, paved with black and white
lozenges, into a sort of conservatory passage, glazed on one side,
and containing old orange-trees in tubs, and more recent fuchsias and
geraniums, a great curtain of lilac Bougainvillia drooping at one
end--making the girls shriek with ecstasy, and reproach Felix with
never having told them of it.
'I am afraid I had forgotten it,' said he. 'I never went into this part
of the house on my last two visits.'
'It was Jane's territory (Mrs. Fulbert),' said Clement, 'and I am
afraid she has dismantled the room a good deal. The one hundred pounds
you allowed her to choose as her own furniture came chiefly out of
that, and the valuable things poor Fulbert had in his smoking-room.
It was an odd choice, but I thought you would not mind that, and the
valuation man looked sharp after her. I kept out of the way of the
squabble.'
'I know where I am now,' said Wilmet. 'There's the garden-door at the
end. And here is the drawing-room door. Ah! it does look empty.'
'Oh, never mind tables and chairs. The window!' cried Angela, flying
forward to the eastern one, a deep bay, cushioned round, and looking
out on the sloping lawn, gay with flower-beds, in pleasant evening
shadow, the river sparkling beyond, and with a sidelong view of the
bridge on the one hand and the church on the other. Two other windows
looked to the south, also into the garden.
'At least she has left the piano,' said Lance.
'It was valued at eighty pounds, which would have made too large a
hole,' said Clement. 'Also she has left a chair for you to sit on,
Cherry. Are you tired?'
'I haven't time! I can't grasp it! Home! So exquisite, and all ours.
Oh! the pictures! That lady, with the bent head over the rose, and the
arch pensive eyes! She can't choose but be a Sir Joshua.'
'Right, Cherry,' said Lance, mounting a chair and turning to the back;
'"Lady Geraldine Underwood, 1770. J. Reynolds."'
'The Irishwoman that gave you eyes and mischief. Your best
possessions,' said Will.
He looked at Angela. Did he forget that neither Irish eyes nor mischief
were Robina's portion?
At that moment Stella, who had gone up to the hearth, exclaimed,
'Edgar!' then checked herself, at the sound of the seldom uttered name;
but Felix and Wilmet had both sprung to look.
'I remember,' said the latter.
'Is it my father?' whispered Stella.
It was one of a pair of the largest size of miniatures in Ross's
most exquisite style of finish, thirty years back, just before the
marriage of Edward and Mary Underwood. He, still a layman, was in a
shooting-coat, with a dog by his side, and with the look of life and
light, youth and sunshine, that had never left him--indeed, none but
the little ones who had never really seen him could have hesitated for
a moment; but it was different with the fellow-portrait. If Felix and
Wilmet had not remembered 'Mamma's picture,' they would hardly have
connected the bright soft smiling rose-tinted girl with the toil-worn
faded image on their memories. Wilmet's tears gathered; and Felix
murmured to Cherry, 'One feels that the life was killed out of her! She
looks as if one would have died to save her a breath of care! Oh! to
have brought her back!'
And with a wistful sigh he looked at Stella, the most like the
portrait, though none of the sisters really reproduced it; indeed,
the peculiar caressing and relying expression could hardly have been
brought out, except by a petted shielded life, free from all care or
hardness. Wilmet was on a more majestic and commanding scale; something
of the darling child expression was in Geraldine, but intellect and
illness had changed both the mould and colouring of the features.
Robina was of the round-faced, round-eyed type, only refined; Angela
like no one but Clement; and even Stella was not only too small, but
too thoughtful, to recall that flower-like careless loveliness of Mary
Underwood's maiden bloom.
'It was hard on you not to have had these,' said John.
'I suppose,' said Felix, 'that they were done for my uncle, and that my
father thought them too valuable to take away.'
'Better so,' said Cherry, quietly.
'Yes,' said Lance; 'to have had these before one's eyes would have made
one ready to fly at that man's throat,' glancing at the old squire in
uniform.
'And now,' said Cherry, 'they are smiling their greeting to us.'
'You'll turn out the Squire, won't you, Felix?' added Lance. 'You won't
keep him here, gloating on his victims?'
'Certainly not, if he suggests such ideas,' said Felix. 'It is Cherry's
domain, though, and she must decide whether to banish him.'
'Oh! oh!' screamed Angela, who had meanwhile followed Bernard out of
the room. 'Come here, all of you! Felix, we must have a ball! Nature
and fate decree it.'
Felix laughed, gave Cherry his arm, and the procession moved on. 'Tripp
says this conservatory was glazed for a surprise to my mother while
she was on her wedding tour,' said Clement. 'You know this wing is the
recent part of the house, built by my old great-uncle, when people had
come to have large notions as to drawing and dining rooms. Here's the
dining-room, but we shall go in there for severe tea presently. This
is the middle period, the Stewart style part,' as they came back into
the wainscotted hall, rising to the top of the house, with a staircase
opposite to the front-door, and a handsome balustraded gallery running
round the first floor.
But Angela's discovery was a great arched doorway, mantled only by a
curtain, and leading into the only really ancient part of the building
(except one turret). It was a very long room, with dark oak floor, six
arched and cusped windows looking into as many arches of the cloister
that ran along it, and black wainscot panelled walls, and oak beams,
painted with coats-of-arms. So long was it, that the billiard table at
one end, and at the other Clement's table laid out for the ringers'
supper, made little show in it; and Angela, pouncing on Will Harewood,
waltzed wildly with him up and down the shining floor, while Bernard
learnedly expounded to Stella the games at billiards he had enjoyed
with Mr. Somers there, and Lance went straight to the organ at the
farther end.
'Ah! if you can do any good with that!' said Clement. 'I have been
trying, but have only driven it and myself distracted!'
'How well I know the place!' cried Wilmet. 'Oh, if Alda could see it!
I remember your driving us all in a team here, Fee!--Yes, Kit, trot,
trot, all along. It is as if I saw you, Cherry, taking your first run
alone there.'
'Better than now, I fear,' said Felix. 'Why, Cherry, woman, we must lay
down bridges of matting for you,' as he felt her clutch his arm.
'Are all the floors so dreadful?' she sighed, as Clement next opened
from the hall door into the library, with only a bit of carpet as an
island in the middle. The library ranged with the drawing and dining
rooms, though older. It had a window and a door into the cloister, and
two windows to the east, and was surrounded with caged book-shelves.
Here stood an harmonium, and the table and deep window-seats were piled
with the miscellaneous parish appurtenances of the nineteenth-century
pastor.
'You had better have this room, Felix,' said Clement; 'there was so
much to do that I could not get my traps moved after Somers went.'
To which Felix replied by insisting that Clement should retain it. The
door into the cloister, communicating with the church and churchyard,
made it particularly eligible for the Vicar; and the study, on the
opposite side of the hall, the Squire's favourite sitting-room, with
the two south windows, would suit him and Pur,--the better that the
adjoining room, where old Fulbert had slept in his infirm days, would
serve as a housekeeper's room for Sibby and a retreat and home for
Theodore. It opened into a passage leading to the offices.
'Never mind them now,' said Clement. 'Let Martha recover before we face
her. I don't know which she resents most, the supper, or my sending
in Kerenhappuch to help her. You all will be glad to find your nests,
ladies,' he added, as poor Cherry surmounted each slippery shallow
step, clinging hard to Felix's arm, while Angela and Stella had flown
all round the upper story, and were helping Bill to laugh at the
round-eyed range of ancestors in the corridor.
'Here I put you, our grand company, Mettie,' said Clement, opening the
door of the handsome bedroom of the drawing-room wing; 'the nursery is
up over, as I daresay you remember.'
'As if I did not!'
And up to it with one accord they all went, Cherry and all--for the
stairs were close by, and of deal. At the moment of entrance, Felix,
Wilmet, and Cherry, broke into a simultaneous shout of delight, as they
beheld, staring at them in open-nostrilled pride, the rocking-horse of
their youth. In one moment Cherry's arms were round its neck, Wilmet
had her boy on the saddle, Felix was gently moving it, and patting its
dappled sides with the tenderness of ancient love.
'This at least is unprofaned! I suppose no child has mounted it since
we five hung rocking on it altogether that last morning!'
'I should like a ride now, dear old Gee-gee,' said Cherry, half
sentimentally, as Kit insisted on being taken down to go to his Emma
and his tea; and to her surprise and fright, her brothers snatched her
up, and deposited her on its back, between screaming and laughing; and
hardly was she lifted down, before Wilmet was on her knees, as Lance
said, worshipping the doll's house over which she and Alda had broken
their hearts, and setting all the the chairs and tables on their legs
again.
The very cribs in the inner nursery were all in their old places; and
to the great amusement of the rest, the four who had the honour of
being natives, each sat down upon his or her own; and Felix and Wilmet
had quite a little quarrel which owned the favoured cane-sided one,
where one could poke one's fingers through.
'One's fingers--or rather two's fingers--are rather too big to decide
that question now,' said Felix. 'However, you can take possession by
deputy, Mettie, and some day Alda shall fill them all.'
'Ah! to meet her here!'
But there was one more sadly missed--the King Oberon of the nursery,
whose star of cracked glass still marked one of the panes. Kit was
the first to see it, trot up to point, and say 'Naughty!' but no one
answered him, and Felix struggled back to a cheerful tone to say,
'After all, cane crib and all, I was not here to the last; I slept in
Papa's dressing-room after Clem came to the fore.'
'Mamma's room was the one over the library,' said Cherry, as they
descended.
'Here it is!' with transomed windows, trailed over with vine and
Virginia creeper, one towards the river, and two towards the church,
and Cherry's own particular boxes were in it. 'Oh! my dear Lord
Chamberlain,' she cried, 'this is the place the master ought to have!'
'I had rather be on the other side, Cherry,' said Felix. 'It is better
for Theodore that Clem and I should have rooms opening into one
another, as he will look to him when I sleep out.'
'And I thought the dressing-room would serve for Stella,' added
Clement. 'Why, she is quite pink!'
'Have I really a room to myself?'
'There are enough in the house for that, my little Star,' said Felix.
'I suppose you will hardly make a further progress now, Whiteheart?'
'Only let me show her the Prior's room,' said Clement, taking her to
the floor above the billiard-room. It had been a smoking-room in the
last reign; the windows were hung with heavy curtains; there was both
a stove and a cheerful grate in it, a thick carpet and cushions in the
windows, and a high screen, to cut off the draught from the little
window into the south transept, where the Prior of old used to hear
Mass, if indisposed.
'I have been purifying this room, literally and metaphorically,' said
Clement, thinking of the pictures he had removed, and the air he had
let in. 'It will make Cherry a capital painting-room.'
'Oh! but it is too much! You must not give me all the best rooms in the
house.'
'Who should have them but our lady of the house?' cried both brothers.
'And after all, there are conveniences in not painting in the
drawing-room,' said Cherry. 'May I tell, Lance?' as they both fell into
a transport of laughter. 'You must know, Willie there insisted that I
should do Cleomenes after the battle, when he would not go into his
deserted house. He used so much moral compulsion, that though I knew
that a Greek warrior was as much beyond me as an archangel, I only
feebly objected the want of a model; and Lance, in a spirit of classic
friendship, said he would sit. So one afternoon--there he stood, with
his trousers turned up to his knees, and his shirt-sleeves up to his
shoulders, no shoes or stockings--the table-cover gracefully disposed
with a big shawl-brooch on one shoulder for a chlamys--leaning on
Sibby's long broom-stick by way of a spear, endeavouring to compose his
face as if his wife were dead, and his children in captivity, and he
just beaten horse and foot, and going after them.'
[Illustration: Vale Leston house floor plans]
[Illustration: Vale Leston area map]
'Cleomenes is no laughing matter,' sternly interposed Bill.
'Cleomenes was not, but Lance was. Well, I was just making a study of
his foot, never dreaming of anybody getting in but by the street-door,
when of all things in the world, up comes Miss Pearson herself--Miss
Pearson, senior! and three girls! They had met a mad ox in the street,
or some trifle of that sort, had bolted into the shop nearly in fits,
and this unthinking Felix had popped them through the office to be
still more scandalized upstairs.'
'Poor Miss Pearson!' said Lance; 'I shall never forget her gentle "Do
I intrude?" going off into the wildest scream. And I couldn't escape
by the other door, for Cherry had her easel up against it. She could
only shriek "He's sitting!" technically, you see, like an old hen, or a
schoolmaster, for I wasn't sitting at all.'
'Well, you need have no such catastrophes here,' said Felix, when the
laughter began to subside; 'but your progress has been long enough; now
we have landed you. You younger fry, you must shake into your rooms as
you choose.'
'I secure the octagon turret-room at the end of the corridor,' cried
Angela.
'And I shall hold to my room with the rum ceiling,' said Bernard. 'It
is as good as the barrack at home! Come and see, Lance.'
'I ordered tea at seven,' said Clement, 'that Felix might be ready to
speak to the ringers after it. You must take us in hand, now, Cherry;
that is my last domestic order.'
So Cherry was left with her little sister. There was a little bustle
of unpacking at first; but by the time Cherry was ready, she missed all
sounds of Stella, and looking into her room, saw the child standing
by the window, gazing intently out in a kind of dream, which ended
in her running up to Cherry with a gasp of ecstasy, and hiding her
face against her. 'O Cherry!' she said, 'I did not know it could be
so--so--so exquisite!' and her bosom heaved with the struggle of new
emotion--she who had seen nothing but Bexley suburbs in her little life.
'It does seem almost impossible to believe we are really always to live
with these lovely sights,' said Cherry. 'It is like getting into the
Promised Land! Why, my Star, it quite overcomes you!'
'Oh! if Tedo could--could--' It was a sort of moan that burst from
Stella, followed by a shower of tears.
'Ah! Stella, sweet! We all of us miss somebody. It is not the Promised
Land yet, for there you know there will be Ephphatha indeed!' and
Cherry strangled her own sob, as her supplication went up that all
might be as well there with her heart's grief as with Stella's.
'Besides,' she added, cheerfully, 'Theodore will be happier here; he
will have more liberty and more pets.'
'And he likes the bells,' said Stella; but there was a wistful yearning
look on the sweet face, as if the excess of pleasure increased the
longing for companionship in her twin.
Cherry took her hand to encounter the dread waste of slipperiness
before her; but in further proof who was the lady and the darling of
the house, no sooner did her door open, than Felix hastened across from
his room, Clement strode up from the library, John Harewood's head
emerged from his dressing-room door; but Lance was beforehand with all,
for he was close by, helping Golightly the gardener to carry the boxes
as near as possible to their destinations.
He bore her off in triumph, with so much laughter, that the consequence
was a slip, and a shout of warning displeasure from the elder brothers.
'No fault of his,' cried back Cherry, holding tight to him. 'Only if
four brothers at once will make me so proud, I can but have a fall.'
'Aren't you prouder now?' said Lance, as they trooped into the
dining-room. 'There's a table to sit down at the head of!'
What a glittering array it was of glass and silver and
brightly-coloured china; and the profusion of country fare--roast fowl,
green pease, yellow butter in ice, virgin combs of transparent liquid
golden honey, mountains of strawberries, great jugs of milk and cream.
There was no formality indeed in the Amen that responded to their
chaplain's grace.
'Good creatures verily,' ejaculated Felix, as he took up carving-knife
and fork.
'Is it a feast for his birthday?' whispered Stella, 'or is it to be
always like this?'
'You see,' said Cherry to her neighbour, the Major, 'we remember when
we used to have a quart of blue milk, and save for the babies.'
'I say, Felix,' cried Angela, 'have we got a farm, with cows, and
turkey-cocks, and turnips, and all sorts of jolly things?'
'Stunning!' said Bernard; 'and an old bull with a ring in his nose,
that would toss you as soon as look at you!'
'That home farm is a difficulty,' said Felix. 'I believe I ought to get
rid of it, for I know nothing of farming, and have no time to learn.'
'Oh, let me manage it, if that's all!' said Angel. 'I'll get a
smock-frock and big shoes, and a long whip, and get up at four in the
morning.'
'Seriously, I hope you can keep it in your own hands,' said Clement.
'There's no getting milk otherwise. You might as well ask the farmers'
wives for their hearts' blood. There's a child that I baptized soon
after I came; the mother is sickly, and had lost two before. I found
her feeding it with some mess of pounded acorns, and recommended milk,
but found I might as well have talked of melted gold. Even when I
offered to pay, it could not be done--would break up the cheese-making.
I thought of buying a cow and some hay, and putting her in the
Vicarage; but when I saw a great jug of hot milk come in with my coffee
every morning, I ended by getting a mug and carrying it down every day;
and really the child has lived.'
'But, Clem,' said Angel, with a sort of affectation of solemnity,
'wasn't that a difficult case of conscience? Weren't you stealing Mr.
Underwood's milk?'
'No; for our old rgime--not to say St. Matthew's--had taught him to
go without,' said Felix, smiling, for he had seen the mug in force.
'Till the new Squire came, and I could unblushingly prey on him,'
rejoined Clement.
'Whereby I propose,' said Major Harewood, 'that we drink the health of
the said new Squire--with all birthday wishes--and long may he reign!'
'All birthday wishes, Felix,' responded Wilmet, who, like some of the
others, had begun tea with a glass of claret. 'Do you remember this day
thirteen years, when Robin did not know what a cold chicken was?'
'I remember it well,' said Felix, gravely. 'It seems to me to have
been the last day that I was a boy. Thank you,' as each bright face
nodded at him. 'Haven't I made speeches enough? Well, then, Ladies and
Gentlemen, many thanks to you for coming here to-day. It's little good
this place would be to me without you. And--' from the playfulness a
sudden emotion came over and thrilled his voice--'may God grant we may
still be all as happy together as we have been these thirteen years!'
'I would not have missed this for anything!' was John's very warm
aside; but a little afraid of emotion, he added, 'Yes, you are worth
looking at. You certainly are a right goodly family.'
'Seen in the light of prosperity,' said Cherry.
'He need not be accused of that,' said Wilmet. 'He never saw so many of
us together before.'
'Except the first time,' said John, 'when I thought you would never
have done coming into the room.'
'Poor John!' said Felix, 'I pity your blushes. I wonder you were not
frightened away at once!'
'And it was not Robin's fault,' said Cherry. 'Do you remember, Bobbie,
the agony you were in, till you grew desperate, and stopped Clem and me
by speaking out?'
'Robin could have had nothing to speak about,' said Wilmet, with a
resumption of her old manner that tickled the others exceedingly.
'Indeed!' quoth Lance. 'Bill remembers his confidences by the river.'
'Moonshine!' growled Bill, but scarce heeded, for John had turned to
his wife with a droll injured air of condolence, saying, 'Ah! my dear,
these little secrets will come out; but we must make the best of it!'
'And talking of rivers and moonshine,' cried Angela, 'we'll have a turn
in the boat. Hurrah for the boat! Come, Bear--come, Bill--I want my
first lesson in rowing.'
'Stay,' said Felix; 'that eddy where the Leston comes down makes
the river not safe when you do not know it. Now, girls, all of you,
remember once for all that I desire you will never go in the boat
without some one who can swim, nor take Theodore without me.'
He seldom gave a direct command, but there was enforcement in his tone;
and John added, 'Quite right. I see it is a stream not to be trusted.'
'It is just a device to hinder our going at all,' pouted Angela.
'And swimming is a mere hindrance to drowning aisy, if you are to be
drownded,' added Bill.
'Do you know,' added Clement, 'that
"To Leston and Ewe
Underwood pays due,"
in every generation?'
'Where did you pick up that adage?' asked Felix.
'A prophecy, a prophecy!' cried Angela. 'What fun! I shall hold up my
head more than ever, now we have a saw of our own! What fun!'
'Where did you hear it?' repeated Cherry, who as well as Stella looked
discomfited.
'I did not hear it,' said Clement, 'the people were far too polite to
tell me; but it was administered to Somers by way of warning, after
some eccentric proceedings in the boat with Bear. They say an Underwood
is drowned in every generation--I suppose since the sacrilege.'
'Prove the fact,' said Felix.
'Somers and I did try to make out,' said Clement, 'between registers
and monuments. We found one Lancelot in 1750, with a note
"Drowned" attached to his name, and a conglomeration of urns and
water-nymphs--Leston and Ewe, I presume--scrambling about his monument
in the south transept; and the old Squire had told me that the crayon
young lady in a cap in the library was our old great-uncle's intended,
but was drowned in crossing the ferry at Ewmouth, before the bridge was
built. She is not very pretty; and I was going to have put a photograph
in her place, but it seemed to me profane, when she had hung there so
many years for the poor old faithful lover to look at.'
'The Ewe seems to have been in overhaste to claim its due, before she
was an Underwood,' said Angela.
'Quite enough for an adage,' said John; 'one real Underwood, and one
intended.'
'However, as I do not mean the rivers to get their due through any
fool-hardiness,' said Felix, 'you must attend to my rule.'
'And I think it renders boating reasonably safe,' added Clement. 'There
are no holes, and the only danger is when there has been a good deal
of rain to make the currents strong; otherwise it is quite safe for a
tolerable swimmer. I learnt at Cambridge, and Bear is a perfect cork;
but I did not know you could swim, Fee.'
'I improved my opportunities at Ewmouth five years ago, when unluckily
Lance could not.'
'I should try again if I were to be much here,' said Lance; but the
general voice dissuaded him; and at the same time Tripp knocked at the
door--the summons to the Vicar and Squire to visit the ringers at their
banquet.
'You had better go to bed, Cherry,' said Felix, as he rose; 'you look
like a white rag.'
'Triumphs are tiring processes, to say nothing of making tea,' said
Cherry; 'but I don't want to disturb Sibby just yet.'
'I'll put you to bed, if you like,' said Wilmet 'I want to send Emma
down, and keep within hearing of the children.'
'Oh, that will be most delicious of all! So like old times!' And the
two sisters went off, to be happy together, and coo a little delight
in their Squire and his beautiful home, mingled with a domestic
consultation how the bared drawing-room could be inexpensively rendered
a pleasant family gathering place.
'A little chintz will do a great deal,' said Wilmet; 'we will see about
it.'
Which assurance set Cherry's mind at rest on that score, for her belief
in Wilmet's notable abilities was boundless. 'But what is the matter
with Robina?' she added after a few minutes, recalling the events of
the day. 'She is so silent, and has a distressed anxious look I never
saw about her before. I wonder whether she regrets the not coming home
for good.'
'I am not sure,' said Wilmet; 'I am inclined to think she is sorry to
be away from Repworth Towers.'
'O Wilmet! impossible, unnatural!'
'I never do quite understand Robin,' said Wilmet. 'She seems the
simplest, soberest girl in the world; and yet I suppose that folly of
Alice's put things into her head, for she has a strange propensity to
think people are paying her attention. Even at Barges I saw symptoms
of it, which I put a stop to at once.'
'I can't think it of any one so honest and sensible as the Robin.'
'I know it, unfortunately; and it is the more curious that she has only
moderate good looks, and no other tokens of vanity. It is particularly
unlucky in her position.'
'You don't imagine there's anything going on!'
'I hope not.'
'I have a great deal too much confidence in the Robin to suspect her.'
'Not of consciously doing wrong, but of having been flattered, and now
perhaps in a difficulty. However, I shall say nothing till we have seen
more. She may be only tired.'
Felix--with all that was on his hands--had likewise noted the absence
of the Robin's chirp, and looked for her when he came back from the
ringers' supper, to which Clement and Lance had followed him. They then
went off to Clement's library for a consultation about some music; and
Felix, repairing to the drawing-room, found nothing there but a lonely
cockchafer, knocking his head against a lonely lamp on the lonely round
table in the centre--not an enlivening spectacle; but hearing steps on
the gravel, he went out, and found John pacing under the wall with a
cigar, and Bernard emulously following in his wake.
'Where are all the others?' he asked; 'it is not far from ten.'
'Wilmet went up to the babies,' said John; 'the others are about
somewhere.'
'Larking about,' added Bernard, with superior wisdom. 'Well, John, you
were saying--'
Felix was too thankful to have Bernard doing anything so sensible as to
talk to John to interrupt them further, and turned away. He stood for a
few minutes to enjoy the strange repose of the exquisite loveliness of
the scene--the summer sunset, not yet entirely died away, but tingeing
the northern sky with pure light, while the great moon, still low,
silvered the river, and defined the grand outline of the church.
And this, not only a scene to be gazed at, but the home he had reached
at last--the home so long withheld!
'Entering into rest,' he said to himself, for the repose of mind was
great. 'And yet--
"Your rest must be no rest below."
No, home duties--higher duties, still more--forbid me to make this more
than a resting-place--not rest. "There remaineth yet a rest for the
people of God"--yet a home, but its shadow here is very sweet. Let it
not beguile me!'
Just then Angela's laugh, a very musical and yet a very giddy one, like
a rapid peal of silver bells, caught his ear; and in the moonlight in
the churchyard he saw her tall light figure, and what could be none
other than Will beside her. He was vexed. She was bare-headed, and the
churchyard was open to the village on the other side, and had a public
pathway through it. He walked quickly towards them, and called as soon
as he could do so in a low voice, 'Come in directly, Angela. You know
this is not private ground.'
'O Felix, we have found such a delicious ghost! Don't you see its white
wings?'
'Angel thinks it is her own kin, a fossil cherub,' said Will. 'Why
aren't you all out? 'tis not a scene to be wasted, especially with
Angels and Ministers of Grace to defend us.'
'Minister of Grace--that's Robin,' laughed Angela.
'Hush, Angela! come in,' said Felix, severely; 'this is no place for
nonsense--especially unkind nonsense,' he added in a lower voice.
She did not answer, but the church clock began its chimes--sweet,
mysterious, tender--given by some musical Underwood long ago, and
sounding in the dark quite unearthly, while the long deep tones of the
ten o'clock that followed came with awe upon the ear. Will was heard
to give a long sigh, but no one spoke as they all came back to the
drawing-room, which was full enough by this time--four gentlemen, hotly
discussing a cricket-match by the chimney-piece; Wilmet knitting on a
stiff chair in the corner; and Robina, under the lamp, hard at work on
some point-lace on a green roll.
'Putting out your eyes, Bob,' said Felix, feeling the need of saying
something kind to her. 'What are you doing that for?'
'Lady de la Poer has some point de Venise that she can't use because
one ruffle is wanting,' said Robina, 'and I have made out the pattern.
I want to take it back with me and surprise her.'
'It is all willing sacrifice when one puts out one's eyes in a
marchioness's service,' said Will's voice from the window.
Robina looked up resolutely. 'Very willing when one is grateful for a
great deal of motherly kindness,' she said, steadily, and yet with a
certain sadness in her voice.
'Oh yes! a handle to one's name makes a little civility go a great way.'
'You know nothing about it.' The voice was steady but indignant, and
there was a flush of deep colour on the cheeks.
'It is quite true, Robina,' said John. 'It is one of the trials of
life, that when we live in two different worlds, the inhabitants of the
one are apt to resent and misunderstand our feelings for the other.'
They were all grateful for this generalization; and Felix now spoke of
the household prayers. 'I had not begun them,' said Clement; 'I thought
the real master of the house should take the initiative.'
'Set up the domestic halter, as Mrs. Shapcote says,' added Lance.
'We might make that organ available,' said Felix, 'and screen off the
end part of the long room where it stands, for a permanency.'
'Yes, there's rather a nice window down there with our Rood in
it--nothing incongruous,' said Clement, 'if Lance can only cure the
organ.'
'Meantime, I suppose we had better have the servants in here, and use
the piano.'
'They will be all dispersed, and not like to come in,' said Wilmet.
'Possibly,' said Felix, 'but I shall go and see. I have a feeling
against beginning our first night in our new home without some
collective commendation of ourselves.'
'If we had but an authorized form for dedicating a new home, like the
Russian Church,' said Clement.
'You have not thought of anything in especial. Well, see.' And he
pointed to some marks in the prayer-book he left in Clement's hand,
while he left the room for a word or two, which he thought would better
prepare the household than a peremptory bell.
Clement was struck, as indeed they all were, with his selection. There
was the Psalm, 'Except the Lord build the house;' a short lesson (the
reading of which Felix reserved to himself), namely, the words from
Deuteronomy, against the presumption of prosperity; and the Collects,
'Prevent us O Lord in all our doings,' 'Charity,' 'the sundry and
manifold changes of the world,' and 'things temporal and things
eternal;' and then came the hymn--it was, 'Lead Thou me on.' Felix
believed he had heard its echoes in his little bed that last Sunday
night, and therefore wished for it, though it seemed a strange choice
for the new house. How Edward and Mary must have felt that 'one step
enough for me,' when they went forth with their little ones into the
moor and fen! But in this hour of restoration, was it still to be a
looking forth into mist and fog, led only by the kindly Light,
'Till through the dawn the Angel faces smile.'
Some who looked at those pictures felt as if they had had a foretaste
of those angel faces.
'And,' said Kerenhappuch to her father, 'to see Miss Mary's sons, those
dear young gentlemen, all a standing singing together like so many
lambs--it was just a picture like the three chorister boys. I says to
myself, "Keren, this 'ill be a blessed place. If this isn't the angels
come down after all!"'
CHAPTER XXXVII.
INVASIONS.
'He muttered, "Eggs and bacon,
Lobster, and duck, and toasted cheese."'
Phantasmagoria.
'When did Bernard Underwood say his people were coming?'
'On Wednesday.'
'To-day! That's right. I can take you over to-morrow to call on them.'
'So soon!'
'Welcomes can't be too soon.'
'If one is not settled in?'
'The furniture was left to them.'
'That's all men know about it!'
'I know this, that if I don't go to-morrow, I have not another free day
for a fortnight.'
'It is all very well for you. I daresay the man-kind have a room in
some trim, or don't know it if they have not; but to fall promiscuously
on the female sect, with their little amenities in an experimental
state of development, is the way to be obnoxious. Can't you go solus,
and make pretty speeches?'
'No, Ethel; it must be attention here from woman to woman. It may help
them to start in the neighbourhood.'
'I submit. How are we to go? What is the distance?'
'Twelve miles. Suppose we went by railway, and took a boat up from
Ewmouth. What do you say to that, Daisy?'
'That I have had quite enough specimens of the family in Master Bernard
and his clerical brother.'
'You liked the former specimens well enough. Eh! Do you remember
Daisiana?'
An angry flush rose to Gertrude May's cheeks, but she tried to answer
composedly, 'The man-kind, as Ethel calls them, are no matter; but what
can woman-kind be, after a life-struggle to preserve gentility over a
stationer's shop?'
'The more reason they should be susceptible to mortification from
their father's old friends,' said Dr. May, as he left the room.
'No, you can't get off, Daisy,' said Ethel. 'It must be done, and I
only wish it could be a little later, for fear we should inflict more
vexation than pleasure.'
'No; it can't be helped. He is going to run a-muck and take us in his
train,' said the spoilt child, shrugging her shoulders.
On the Thursday morning, at the Vale Leston breakfast-table it was,
'The first thing is to make the drawing-room habitable before any one
calls.'
'No one will presume on such barbarity till after Sunday!' exclaimed
Cherry.
'Unless the Miss Hepburns should--' said Wilmet.
'No,' decidedly stated Clement; 'they told me they should wait till
Monday.'
'And your library is as respectable as it is in the nature of the male
animal to keep its lair,' said Cherry; 'so I don't mind if a gentleman
comes, such as Captain Audley.'
'You need not trouble yourself about Captain Audley,' interposed
Bernard. 'Never calls on ladies by any chance; hates 'em worse than
poison.'
'Bosh, Bear! We met him at a picnic,' quoth Lance.
'That was long ago, and it grows on him; and it's monstrous hard lines
on Charlie, now he's big enough to be spooney, that he never will go
anywhere among humans. He's gone off in his yacht now to shoot seals,
and cut the Arckey--Archey--Archidiaconal meeting.'
'Archidiaconal? He's not a churchwarden, is he?'
'What is it, Clem? You know. A whole lot of fine ladies and swells and
dons and big-wigs coming to Ewmouth to go on about Gothic arches, and
Roman camps, and Britons' bones, and all that sort of rubbish.'
'Does Stoneborough derive archology from arches?' said Felix.
'Perhaps he thinks Archidiaconal functions consist in looking after
them,' added Will.
'I remember now,' said Clement; 'there is really to be a meeting of the
Archological Society at Ewmouth, and it is to be apprehended that they
may make a descent upon this place.'
'Happy hunting grounds,' said Felix. 'I only hope they will give us due
notice.'
The bare idea quickened the breakfast. By ten o'clock a survey had
been taken, and Cherry had thankfully accepted Wilmet's assurance that
there were sufficient resources scattered through the house to repair
the ravages of Mrs. Fulbert without more serious expense than that of a
piece of chintz; and having resigned the command into her hands, beheld
her consulting Clement on the possibility of being driven into Ewmouth,
which he undertook to do in person in his dog-cart without loss of
time. An exchange of all the other existing vehicles had been arranged
for one roomy waggonette, and a basket pony-carriage, fit for Cherry
to drive if ever she took courage--they had only been kept to meet the
exigencies of the arrival en masse.
By a quarter to one Dr. May had landed his daughters at the garden
steps, and was walking them up to the cloister door, when they were
greeted with a hideous whistling bray, followed by the apparition of a
figure with a pink and white shirt and grey legs, a great deal of dust
and brown moustaches, upon inflated cheeks puffing vigorously through
a big golden tube, which he next proceeded to spy down with one eye,
and through that telescope became aware of one of the new comers, and
uttered an ejaculation, 'Dr. May, by all that's lucky!' at the same
time, using both eyes more naturally, he perceived the two ladies,
blushed up to the eyes, and came forward with an apologetic greeting
and hands far too dusty for any grasp less eager than the doctor's.
'Grown out of knowledge, but you're an old friend, I see.'
'I'm sorry to be in this awful mess, but I want to get the organ to
rights before Saturday, when I must get back,' he said, as he led them
through a world of organ-pipes, scattered here, there, and everywhere,
and conducted them straight to the drawing-room. There the scene
disclosed a giddy fabric, consisting of the round table, pushed up to
a window and surmounted by a chair, and that again by a footstool, on
the top of all a lady, dropping a measuring-tape to the floor, where
a little girl was holding it by the ring at the end. The floor was
bespread with slippery glossy lengths of chintz, patterned with pink
and purple heather, on which a third sister was performing with a big
pair of scissors in a crawling position on the floor, and a fourth
was supplying the yawning shelves of a chiffonier with books. Ethel's
prognostic was justified to the full.
'Wilmet!' exclaimed Lance, 'take care! How could you? Why didn't you
send me up?'
'I should not have trusted you; but now you may help me, down.' And
there she became conscious of the guests, but with a curious simplicity
and dignity, she took no notice of them; while they thought it best to
engross themselves in shaking hands with the lame sister, with her who
scrambled up from the floor with a red and fagged visage, and with the
little one, who, amid all the dust and confusion, looked as dainty and
shining-haired as if she had been newly adorned for a feast.
'Here she is on the ordinary level of society!' said Geraldine. 'This
is Mrs. Harewood, Dr. May--Wilmet, whom I think you remember.'
Wilmet had brought her composure down with her, and astonished the
visitors therewith, as well as by the rare quality of her beauty,
reminding Ethel of the fair matronly dames of early Italian art, both
for her silence and her substantial stateliness. Nor was there the
least flutter or affectation about Cherry; she thought the adventure
fun, and had seen in a moment what sort of treatment was suitable to
the present company, so she merrily observed, 'Now that Lance has
given you a pleasing peep behind the scenes, won't you come to a less
dismantled region?'
'It is only the consequence of resigning oneself to one's gentlemen,'
returned Ethel. 'If I had had my way, you should have had time to "big
your bower."'
'Ah! but we could not afford to miss a kind welcome,' said Geraldine,
with the little pathos of sweetness that was such an attraction. 'My
brother is surveying his new domains, but he will come in almost
directly to early dinner. You are come for it? You'll come and take off
your hats. Lance!'
Lance had fled, so soon as he had extricated Wilmet from her perilous
attitude. No wonder; particular as he was about young ladies, his
dshabill, nearly as bad as that of Cleomenes, must have been dreadful
to him; and it was Wilmet who gave Cherry an arm over the oak floor.
They put Dr. May into the library, where Clement came to light; while
they took the daughters upstairs, where they were almost as much
pleased to see, as the sisters to show, the beauties of the quaint
old house, and were perfectly sensible of the well-bred simplicity,
playfulness, and absence of all false shame, so entirely different from
what they had expected.
Ethel had been prepared to spend her day in a state of good-humoured
forbearance and repression of Gertrude's intolerance. Instead of which
she found herself in that state of ease which comes of accordance
of tone, and she saw--what she had never beheld before--in her keen
unvenerative sister, who had never formed any kind of attachment out
of her own family and not many in it, the process of falling into
an enthusiasm. That lame Miss Underwood, like an old fairy with her
ivory-headed crutch stick; her marked eye-brows, thin expressive face,
with its flashes of fun and plaintive sweetness, youthful complexion
and pronounced features, was--what Daisy called--'so uncommon' as to
strike her fancy, to a wonderful degree, and she had hardly eyes or
ears to spare for anybody else; when at the sound of the dinner-bell,
which had a charming little extinguisher of its own at the top of
the octagon tower, the whole of the party were exhibited in the
dining-room--Felix and John Harewood from a round of inspection with
the bailiff; Angela from the kitchen-garden. She had been set to work
unpacking books with Robina, but becoming discursive, had flown off
to a tour on the leads with Bernard. 'So much less considerate than
Stella!' sighed Robin, left to the tasks that could only fall to the
quietest and strongest female of the family. For one happy half hour
she was cheered by Will, who volunteered help, gave her all the volumes
wrong, or put them upside-down, then lighting on Chaucer, read aloud
Palmon and Arcite, with comments, until Angela burst in, and whirled
him away to shake an apple-tree for half a dozen urchins, with whom she
had made acquaintance in the churchyard; and Robina had toiled on alone
till, on Wilmet's return, she was swept into the furniture vortex.
Dr. May's heart, like Ethel's, warmed to the long table so like their
own best days; and the perfect absence of pretension in the plain leg
of mutton and vegetables delighted them eagerly. Moreover, he was
dazzled by Wilmet's grand beauty, and the general comeliness of his old
friend's family, while he talked with immense satisfaction to Felix and
Major Harewood; but some strange change had fallen on Daisy.
She had been only fourteen at the time of her escapade on the Kitten's
Tail, and now at nineteen the presence of the gentleman concerned in it
seemed actually to keep her silent, so that she did not respond to the
advances of her nearest contemporaries, Robina and Angela, one of whom
had a good deal more manner and the other a good deal more assurance
than she could boast; and though Lance had reappeared in irreproachable
costume, she daunted his attempts at conversation by her evident
determination to listen to the elders' discussion of architects.
'Aren't you going to the Church?' asked Robina, finding him leaning
against the cloister door when there had been a move to show the Church
to the visitors.
'No use in crowding them up with all the ruck. I shall strip, and go
back to my organ-pipes. I shall not come here much. 'Tis no use being
in a false position.'
'Nonsense. A false position is pretending to be what one is not.'
'Here I pretend to be on equality, and am shown my place,' said Lance,
disconsolately; for he was very soft-hearted, and had an immense turn
for young ladies.
'You're annihilated by a breath,' said Robin; 'besides, it was only
shyness.'
'Shy? You should have seen her last time!'
'That's the very reason. If you only knew how horrid things done at one
end of one's teens feel at the other!'
However, with Robina things were mending. Will had recovered his
temper. There had been nothing to remind him of the obnoxious
family at Repworth, when the pointlace had yielded perforce to the
heather-patterned chintz, which was crackling about in all directions
under the needles of all the ladies, and even of Krishnu. Everybody,
except Angela, who said it hurt her fingers, was at work at petticoats
for ottomans and robes for armchairs, or coats for curious settees
routed out from upstairs, while Wilmet used the sewing-machine on
the curtains, to supply the place of the brocade borne off by Mrs.
Fulbert, and brought to light exquisite tamboured work of Lady
Geraldine's that happily had been entirely unappreciated in the last
reign.
Robina was stitching away the next day, when she had a treat. Bill
came after her with the blottiest of all rolls of MS., being an essay
to prove that the sun, the dawn, and the clouds, were not the origin
of everything and everybody everywhere in legend and mythology, and
he wanted a pair of ears to which to read it, so that he might hear
it himself before submitting it to John. Lance was perpetrating worse
screeches than ever with his organ-pipes, and could not Robin bring her
needling out of the sound of them and listen to a fellow?
Ample space was no small privilege to a family accustomed to be cramped
and crowded, and there was a pleasant sense of expansion in sitting
down under the cedar-tree, with Bill luxuriously spread on the grass.
Such a sense Felix had in sorting his papers into the numerous drawers
and pigeon-holes in his ample study-table, trusting himself not to
make them so many traps for losing things, since he did not hold with
Bill, that it is best to have no partitions, and have only one place
to search through. Clement was making over to him the memoranda of the
transactions conducted in his absence, when horses' feet were heard at
the front-door, and Clement reconnoitring at the window, said, 'Mr.
Milwright--the Rector of Ewford--no doubt it is about the Archology.'
'A friend of yours?'
'Not particularly. I sat next him at the Visitation, and as the
Charge ended, he touched me and said, "I'll show you the only bit of
fourteenth-century glass in the choir;" and when we came out, and he
heard my name, he said, "I congratulate you on the possession of the
finest specimen of Cistercian architecture in the rural deanery." I'm
afraid he minds his ecclesiology more than his ecclesia.'
By this time the entrance was effected of a lively well-bred man of
middle age, not at all the conventional antiquarian, though still
with one master idea. He apologized for his early call, but explained
his purpose, namely to ask permission to conduct a party of the
archologists over the Church and Priory, and to make a preliminary
inspection at once, to compare his old notes and prepare fresh ones.
They were both willingly granted; and Felix went to summon his sisters,
who would gladly profit by the primary survey without a crowd, and be
delighted to learn the traditions of the place, which were necessarily
a good deal lost to them. When the pair under the cedar looked round on
hearing voices, Robina exclaimed with surprise and recognition of the
guest.
'How do you know him?' asked her companion.
'He was staying at the Towers last winter. He was once a curate at
Repworth.'
'Will he know you?'
'Not so likely as if he had seen me as a brass; but I must go and speak
to him.'
'Such an enchanting encounter in your exile!'
'Nonsense! I only don't choose to seem ashamed of my vocation,' she
answered rather proudly, as she came forward to join the party, for
whose benefit Mr. Milwright was drawing the plan of the original Priory
with his stick in the gravel. Felix was about to introduce her, but
she held out her hand, saying, 'I have had the pleasure of meeting Mr.
Milwright before at Repworth. I am one of the governesses.'
He made civil acknowledgment, but would hardly have cared if she had
avowed herself kitchen-maid there. He knew only that two intelligent
auditors had come up; and all were soon absorbed in the interest of his
discourse, an entirely new pleasure to most.
To read in the peculiarity of the dog-tooth round the pointed arch, as
clearly as in Arabic figures, the date when the church was founded,
and to bring out stone by stone each fresh stage of improvement; to
see when a building prior came from France, and put in a flamboyant
window in the south transept; when a sturdy baron atoned for ravages
in Brittany, by giving that perpendicular tower and cloister; and
when, in a spirit of renovation, the last effort broke forth in those
marvellous fan pendants in the Lady Chapel--these were feats delightful
to enter into, and it was amusing as well as instructive to see the
ecclesiologist poke into rubbishy corners, and disinter fragments
of capitals and mouldings, sedilia and piscin, altars, and prior's
coffin-lids with floriated crosses, giving an account of their origin
as confidently as if he had had a pre-existence as a brother in the
Priory. Moreover, his intentions furnished an excellent pretext for
doing away with the seventy-five yards of black without outraging the
squire's memory; indeed, Clement undid a good deal of it to facilitate
the researches, and no one could pass it without a sly tweak to detach
another nail.
'I'll keep the hatchment over the door as long as man can wish,' said
Felix; 'but the Church in mourning I cannot stand.'
'And I think the three-decker might come down too,' added Clement. 'It
is clearly within the chancel, and is your undisputed property.'
In which opinion Mr. Milwright, as a Rector, confirmed him, and
likewise bestowed some good advice as to the manner of the intended
restoration. 'The worst of it is,' he said, 'it can't be done under
some thousands; and there's so much work of that sort about, the public
is nearly wrung dry. However, it would be the very time to set a
subscription going.'
'Paying toll,' said Felix, drily. 'No. I think the Rectory ought to do
it gradually.'
'Oh, I beg your pardon.' And Mr. Milwright recollected that he had
heard something of young Underwood being in trade, and concluded that
he had made a good thing of it; and when on the way to the house some
question was asked as to what was usual on such domiciliary visits,
he did not scruple to say that a luncheon was usually bestowed by the
inhabitants.
The visit to the house was still more entertaining. The long room
was explained to be the remnant of the old hospitium below, with the
Prior's chamber above; but the cellar was the oldest part of the house.
Felix had been thither to take stock of the wine, and had only carried
away a sense of the elaborate arrangement of the bins, and the ages
it would take to consume their contents; but Mr. Milwright passed all
these, and finally made a set like a pointer at a big beer-barrel,
pointing to a low door behind it. Golightly was sent for to assist
in moving it, which he did with great reluctance, asserting on the
authority of Mrs. Macnamara (Sibby) that it led to nothing but ruins
and foul air.
'Ah!' said Mr. Milwright, 'I am glad my friend Dobby is not quite
forgotten.'
'Indeed, Sir, if you mean to imply that I ever was actuated by such
a superstition!' cried Golightly, giving all his strength to assist
his young masters; while Angela capered about in delight at having
acquired a ghost as well as a prophecy, and Felix recollected having
been threatened with Dobby by a young nursery-maid. The door proved
to lead to a vaulted passage cut out in the solid rock, and ending in
a beautiful semicircular chamber with melon-like divisions, uniting
in one large boss at the summit, carved with the five stars which had
been the shield of the Priory. The bad conscience of some despoiling
Underwood had probably led to the idea of a walled-up monk, whose
phantom was accustomed to take his walks abroad, rattling a chain,
under the pleasing name of Dobby.
But the vault was a grand possession, and the access to it was to
be made as favourable as circumstances would permit. Mr. Milwright
next showed that the big knobs at the posts of the balustrade of the
staircase unscrewed for the insertion of flambeaux, since the builders
of the mansion, following instincts bequeathed from times of peril,
had put their banqueting-room at the top of the house. All that
was now divided by floor and wainscot into the long corridor and a
rabbit-warren of rooms, had once been a banqueting-hall, the ceiling
of which, in the upper story, still showed handsome chequer-work of
plaster mouldings, the intersections alternately adorned with roods and
crowns, L.U., and J.R. The octagon tower at the end was of earlier
date, and had formed a part of the principal entrance, flanking one of
the two great gateway towers, of which only one stump remained, built
into a wood shed.
And, as to the Prior's kitchen, a splendid octagon, with eight arches
for as many fires, and a chimney in the middle, it had been so hemmed
in with sheds and leans-to, that though it existed as a coalhole, no
one had yet explored it. Geraldine was ashamed, both as housewife and
antiquary; but she had been so much engrossed during these two first
days that she had by no means learnt all the ins and outs of her new
old home, of which all felt much prouder than before, and on the
renovation of which Mr. Milwright preached as earnestly as that of the
Church.
He took leave, having greatly excited the whole family as to the coming
feast of antiquities, and their own especial share of it.
'What shall you do about this luncheon?' asked Wilmet, when the party
next assembled round the long table.
'Give it,' briefly answered Felix.
'It will be tremendously expensive.'
'An elegant cold collation from the pastrycook at Ewmouth would be; but
I don't see why we should not have a few cold joints. Eh, Cherry?'
'Like our celebrated supper to the Minsterham choir,' responded she.
'You neither of you know what it will lead to,' was the old phrase into
which Wilmet relapsed.
'Never mind her,' interposed her husband. 'She is demoralized by
regimental djeners.'
'It serves you right for dragging me to them,' retorted Wilmet.
'I don't do so to please you, my dear, but because I can't have Major
Harewood said to mew up his handsome wife out of sight.'
'I own,' she said, not quite pleased, 'I am afraid of this affair being
more expensive than Felix imagines. If it is done at all, it must be
done properly.'
'Of course it must,' pronounced Bernard. 'If it is to be a snobbish
concern, I wash my hands of it. I shall go off to Jem Shaw out of the
way!'
'I'll tell you how to make it snobbish, Bear,' said Cherry. 'To have
the very same waiters in the very same cotton gloves, handing about the
very same lobster-salad, in the very same moulds, and and tongues in
the very same ruffles, with the very same carrot and turnip flowers on
them, that have haunted the archologists at every meal.'
'Bravo, Cherry!' broke in Will. 'Commend me to the unconventional
woman!'
'Whereas,' proceeded Cherry, still directing herself on Bernard, 'no
snob ever had such a place as the hospitium, nor such a salt-cellar as
Amelia showed me this morning, and which I'm sadly afraid was filched
from my Lord Prior, nor such wonderful old China plates and dishes,
with all the acts of the romance of the willow pattern.'
'It's all plates and dishes so far, with nothing on them, like a
Spanish don,' said Lance.
'Stay a bit,' said Cherry. 'We'll get a big piece of hung beef,
and break into Mrs. Froggatt's parting gift of hams. Then Will and
Bear shall kill us some rabbits, and they and the pigeons in that
delicious old dovecote will make no end of pies; and what with the
chick-a-biddies in the yard, and the unlimited lobsters Tripp talks
of, and a big dish of curds and cream, and Wilmet's famous lemon
cheesecakes, and all the melons and the cucumbers, and the apricocks
and mulberries, the purple grapes, green figs, and dewberries, I think
Bear's snob will be rather surprised! Then we'll have clean plates on
the side-table, and let the gentlemen fetch them for the ladies; and
if John will lend us Zadok, and Miss Lightfoot and Mr. Golightly act
according to their names, I think we shall manage it all without any
outgoing except for the solid eatables.'
'And drinkables there are enough and to spare in the cellar,' said
Felix; 'and John must sit in judgment on them. It seems to me a clear
matter of hospitality to feed hungry and tired people who turn up at
one's house, and they must be content without mere display. In fact I
see how to pay for such a feast as Cherry's genius sketches, and our
tickets into the bargain. I'll write up to the "Old World," and offer
an account of the whole concern.'
'Learning is better than house and land,' muttered Will.
'But it makes extra work of your holiday,' objected Wilmet.
'Reporting comes as natural to me as listening,' said Felix; 'besides,
I mean this to be only a sketch at the end of each day. I won't go as a
reporter this time, it is thrusting it too much down people's throats;
and besides, this is rather out of Pur's line.'
'I shall do it for that,' said Cherry. 'I won't have poor Pur
neglected.'
'We must have my father up here,' added John. 'What a banquet it will
be to him!'
'He might deliver his mind of his lecture on medival seals, which got
so much too learned for Minsterham,' added Will.
There ensued a dispute for the possession of the Librarian. Major
and Mrs. Harewood meant to move off to their lodgings at the Glebe
Farm on the Monday, for even these two days showed that Theodore and
Kit were incompatible elements in the household. The poor little
uncle's uncertain conscience had been so far reached, that he knew he
must keep his hands off; but to see the child noticed by any one he
loved was misery to him, and 'Master Kistofer' was by no means safe
from being the aggressor. He viewed all toys as his exclusive right,
and did not scruple to snatch from the astonished fingers; and as he
was active and enterprising, and could climb stairs and open doors,
it was never certain where he might next appear, nor would he obey
anybody except his own natural lawful authorities. Poor Stella was
continually on the alert; indeed she was the greatest sufferer, for
her only weapon against her nephew was coaxing, the sight of which
excited Theodore to a passion of jealousy; and though she never uttered
a murmur, she was undergoing a perpetual agony between them. The only
safety was when Kit was in the charge of Zadok, whose dark face was
Theodore's horror, and another reason for relieving the Priory of the
establishment. John apologized for the luxury of such an attendant as
Krishnu. He had brought him home with the idea of letting him study at
St. Augustine's, but his care had become a necessity during that tardy
convalescence; and when it proved that his attainments were not up to
the St Augustine's mark, and that he had no strong inclination to make
them so, but shrank from leaving his master, the decision was welcome.
He was northern mountaineer enough to bear the climate; and Wilmet
declared that he did the work of half there besides his own proper
business. He certainly was invaluable in those days of bustle and
arrival, and would have been more so but for the unlucky feud between
Kit and Theodore. However, the farm was so near, that the safe members
of the family could be together almost as much as ever.
Visitors thickened. The reported excursion of the Archological Society
made every one feel that it was expedient that the first call should
have been previously made. Sunday was the limit Even the Miss Hepburns
came not till that day; Clement merely presented them when he brought
down his imposing staff of new assistants to the horse-boxes that so
conveniently partitioned the classes, and gladly made over the big
boys to the well-practised Squire--a set of little stolid urchins to
Angela, and all the infants to Stella. If he hoped his display would
induce the former teachers to withdraw, he was mistaken; their close
white-trimmed bonnets still kept guard over the girls.
On the Monday they called, and kept on safe commonplace ground, like
the ladies they were, and grew so cordial that Wilmet proposed walking
back to see the invalid and introduce Robina, her namesake godchild.
The girl's staid looks and manners gave great satisfaction, in contrast
with Geraldine and Angela, who were thought flighty, and demonstrations
were made which led to the explanation that she was only on a visit at
home. 'A governess!' The four ladies were horror-struck. 'So selfish of
Mr. Underwood!'
Robin swelled up like her kind preparing for duels on the October lawn.
'My BROTHER!' she said, in the emphatic tone that never meant any one
but Felix.
'It is entirely her own choice,' added Wilmet.
'Nothing should have induced him to consent,' said Miss Isabella,
decidedly.
'We did not see it in that light,' said Wilmet. 'He has worked so hard
for us all, that we are glad to do anything to relieve him.'
'It can't be necessary!' exclaimed Miss Bridget, who always spoke
breathlessly, and looking appealingly to Isabella.
'Not absolutely necessary,' said Wilmet; 'but you know that so many
would be a burthen on a much larger property.'
There was a gasp all round at this, and Miss Isabella warmly said, 'My
dear Mrs. Harewood, do not let yourself be blinded. We know perfectly
what the property is, and allowing for Mrs. Fulbert's settlement and
any follies of the poor young man, I can assure you there is no reason
your sisters should not remain at home, which is the only proper place
for young women. I speak to you, as the married sister, who, as your
brother Edward tells me, have acted the part of a mother. It is your
bounden duty to protect your sisters.' (Wilmet had to frown at Robin,
who sprang up in her chair.) 'Of course your brother is meaning to
marry;' (The negative went for nothing.) 'You cannot expect anything
else; but still it is his first obligation not to cast them off, but to
provide a home for them near at hand--the only becoming thing.'
'Home is quite ready for us all, always,' cried Robina. 'My brother
would never let us want that; but while I can, I had rather maintain
myself than be a burthen upon him.'
'Ah! my dear, that is a dangerous because plausible spirit of pride
and independence. As those who have tried can tell you, very little
suffices single women, who have long ago broken with the world.'
This beautiful sentiment was received with an assenting breath by the
other three, while Miss Isabella triumphantly added, 'And that your
brother is bound to provide.'
'I saw it stated,' continued Miss Martha, 'that no one worthy the name
of man will permit the ladies of his family to go out into the world
for maintenance.'
'A man that provideth not for his own household,' whispered sadly even
gentle Miss Hepburn.
'And, Isabella--tell them,' pursued Miss Bridget, 'from facts we know--'
'Yes,' said Miss Isabella, striking the nail. 'If it is alleged to
you that the estate is not sufficient, I warn you that there must be
something wrong about the matter.'
'You know,' said Wilmet, feeling it almost wrong to extend the misdeeds
of the dead so much, 'the estate does not come clear.'
'I allow for that, but I know from Mrs. Fulbert herself what that is;
and, pardon me, that is no sufficient plea, and you ought not to be
allowed to think it is. Why, the Rectory alone is twelve hundred a
year!'
Was Felix's secret to be kept at the expense of his character? However,
Miss Martha brought some relief, by saying, 'And of course it can't be
true that those persons who were staying with Mr. Edward were monks,
come down to take possession of the Priory and restore it?'
The sisters laughed, and Wilmet explained. 'They were former
fellow-curates of his. They came down to help, because he was so much
knocked up.'
'Then,' said Miss Isabella, hushing some further observations that
evidently quivered on her sisters' tongues, 'we may assure our friends
that there is no truth in the preposterous rumour of a so-called
restitution.'
'Certainly not of the Priory,' said Wilmet.
'Nor the Rectory?' chimed in Miss Bridget.
'I am hardly at liberty to answer,' said Wilmet. 'I do not know what my
brother means to do, nor will he act hastily; but I know he has strong
feelings about tithes, and that all the rest wish to be no hindrance in
the way of what he thinks right.'
'To sacrifice his family to a scruple!'
'Quite fanatical!'
'And we heard he was so sensible!' mourned the sisterhood; while their
spokeswoman returned to the charge.
'You remember, my dear lady, that the wealth which corrupted the clergy
was curtailed by the wisdom of our forefathers?'
'Tithes!' breathed Robin, for here she thought they had an indisputable
stronghold.
'We are not under the Jewish dispensation,' said Miss Isabella, with a
half severe, half triumphant expression; 'but I see how it is. I have
traced it all along--the system of works.'
'Yes, Isabella; you saw from the time that Mr. Edward, dear misguided
young man, took from the poor dear children that precious hymn,
"Till to Redemption's[1] work you cling
By a simple faith,
'Doing' is a deadly thing,
'Doing' ends in death."'
So sighed Bridget; while Martha added, 'If Mr. Underwood would only
come to discuss it with Isabella, I am sure she would convince him.'
'And then you need not be sacrificed, my dear!' said the eldest lady.
'Nor his position in society!' added another.
'For you know, Mrs. Harewood, it is hardly fair towards the
neighbourhood to connect it with trade. Our county people are not
accustomed to it.'
'I daresay not,' said Wilmet, who had risen during the last sayings.
'Good-bye! I will tell my brother what you say.'
'Do so, my dear; I cannot bear to see a family I have known so long,
suffer for, I must say, a mere Judaizing scruple!'
Robina uttered two gasps on her way home. 'Doing ends in death!' The
other--'Single women who have broken with the world!'
Confession to Felix of the betrayal of his purpose was needful. He took
it coolly enough. 'Never mind! We can't charge poor Fulbert's memory
with such a deficit; but there are not many who will probe so hard.'
As Cherry saw, he could stand its being talked of much better as a
very chimerical and unjustifiable action than even as simple honesty.
'Do you mean to encounter them?' she asked. 'I see now the meaning of
Perseus going among the Grai,-for they seem to have but one eye; and I
think poor Clement would be glad if they had but one tooth.'
'No,' said that misguided young man; 'don't be unfair on them. They
are not in the least spiteful. Miss Martha is the only one who has the
gossip in her, and her sisters always repress her. They are very good
women, and I believe I have learnt much from them.'
He said it with melancholy candour; and Robina indignantly recurred
to their unconscious worldliness about what was due to the county; to
which Clement replied, that he feared that they would find that Felix's
resolution did cost them something besides mere luxury.
Cherry understood this when the Staples family called. The father
was all that was warm and cordial; and his wife meant to be the
same, but she patronized. She expatiated on the rapacity of Mrs.
Fulbert in carrying off so many handsome articles, and gave a sort of
'all very well' commendation of the substitutes. And she proffered
recommendations to shops and servants, and the use of her name, and
even chaperonage, in a manner that made Cherry shrink into herself
with dry thanks. It was credible that Mrs. Staples pitied the present
Underwoods, and thought they had been so much damaged by their present
circumstances as not to know how to do justice to their promotion.
The daughter Felix and Lance had liked best was married to Mr. Welsh,
the member for Ewmouth, a self-made man, and great shipowner, who,
though disappointed that working among the people had not imbued Mr.
Underwood with popular politics, was friendly and pleasant; and his
wife, a merry prosperous young matron, much more lady-like than her
mother, and drolly vehement in her new opinions, was only vexed that
the new comers declined her dinner-parties, and could only be engaged
to lunch on the first great archological day. She knew nothing about
archologists, but she should keep open house, and it would be great
fun.
Very different were the next visitors--namely, Sir Vesey Hammond,
the patriarch of the county, the undisturbed forty years' member,
the very picture of a country gentleman, white-haired, clear-eyed,
ruddy-cheeked, tall and robust, all vigorous health, and bringing an
almost equally beautiful old wife. Theirs was a real welcome. They had
come fifteen miles to give it; for had not Sir Vesey been a friend of
great-uncle Fulbert, and had not Mary been the admiration of both? Did
not Lady Hammond recollect the twins, and was not she equally ready
to do homage to 'Master Kistofer'? Nay! did she not even appease any
lurking furniture regrets, by exclaiming, 'I am so fond of this room,
and now it looks like old times. I never could like it as Mrs. Fulbert
Underwood made it, but now it is so bright and fresh and liveable! Ah!
there's the dear old treble-seated settee again. I must go and sit in
it for old acquaintance' sake!'
There was a wonderful matronly charm about her, with her dark eyes
that had last none of their softness, her snowy hair, and her sweet
old face; and all the sisters drew round, unspeakably attracted by the
motherliness that gave them a sense of what had been so long wanting to
them.
Her husband seemed to be satisfying himself that the new squire's
politics neither disgraced him, nor he his politics. Cherry caught an
echo of--'tells me you have been editing a Conservative paper.'
'Yes, Sir; I do so still.'
'I am glad of it. You are a benefactor to the country!'
Wherewith Cherry had to respond to the old lady; and when next her ears
were open county matters had set in, and the baronet was hailing a
useful auxiliary, and pressing Felix to come to dinner, next Thursday,
to be introduced to the lord-lieutenant of the county; and she found
herself included by both in the invitation.
There was a pause for an answer, and the colour came into Felix's face.
'You are very kind, Sir Vesey; but my sister is rather an invalid, and
I am still in business--only backwards and forwards here. In short, as
I told Mr. Staples just now, we cannot afford dinner visiting.'
'I understand,' said Sir Vesey, quickly and kindly, and no doubt
crediting poor Fulbert with a good deal. 'We are quite out of distance
for mere dinners. Fifteen miles is far too much for driving home at
night; but could not you and your sister come and spend a couple of
nights? We would meet you at the station.'
Lady Hammond not only backed the invitation with all her might, but
guessing perhaps that the lame invalid wanted help, extended it to
a second sister. It was impossible to decline, it was not a case of
reciprocity; and when Felix mentioned his acceptance to Mr. Staples, he
found the worthy man as gratified at his adoption by Sir Vesey as if it
had been a personal compliment.
Robina was the other sister who was to go; for, said Cherry, 'She has
customs and costumes adapted to high society, which can't be said for
all of us!' Robina thought Angela should benefit by the introduction,
but Felix declared that he could not trust Cherry to her--a cruel
stroke which she did not quite deserve, for she had a good deal of the
nursing instinct.
The expedition was chiefly memorable to Cherry in that she first saw
Felix there as a country gentleman, and could judge of his appearance
among others. The party was, however, mostly of the higher order of
'county people,' above the mark of even the original Underwoods, more
of the London-going type of which members are made. They and their
woman-kind were not as full of talent and brilliancy as Cherry's
artist friends, but had none of the stiff dullness of her cousin
Tom's circle. They were well bred, and had no lack of sensible and
fairly intellectual talk about the subjects of the day, and all were
intimately at home with one another. All the gentlemen, and most of
the ladies, were addressed by their host like one who had known them
from boys and girls. Yet though every one was so intimate, there was
no exclusiveness, and the two girls were at once let into the circle,
as it were, and made one with the rest of the ladies; in truth, Cherry
effected one of her usual conquests, and quite subdued Sir Vesey's
heart as he drove her from the station. The dinner and appointments
would not have been pronounced by Mrs. Tom Underwood comifo; they
lagged a good deal behind the complications of delicacies, and vessels,
and implements, which modern luxury delights in multiplying, and the
dresses were of a quieter style than Cherry expected, so that it by no
means fulfilled her awful notions of a state dinner in the country.
And how did her own Squire hold his place compared with others? Looking
at him critically, as she tried to do, she saw that his complexion was
devoid of the embrowning of sun and wind, his hands were over-white and
delicate, and too many cares had pressed on his young shoulders not to
have rounded them; so that he did not look like the active athletic
men who had led an out-of-door life; but in look, movement, and tone,
he was as thorough a gentleman as any one. Evening dress was perhaps
most favourable to him, for he had rejected, with a sort of dislike,
all semi-sporting morning costumes; and there was a little precision in
his neatness, not like the ideal squire, but thoroughly individual in
him, and the effect of his doing whatever he was about in the best way
he could. When Bernard once declared that Felix's dress looked as if it
were always Sunday, Stella gravely made answer, 'I think it is always
the Fourth Commandment with him!' In which, perhaps, the little woman
found the key of his nature.
There was no lack of ease about him; he did perhaps say 'Sir' more
than is the ordinary custom, but this had rather a graceful effect to
an elderly man; and he had no backwardness in conversation, but was
as well-informed and intelligent as any newly-arrived squire could be
expected to be, or more so. If he did not shoot, or hunt, that was his
own affair: these were not men of the calibre to appreciate nothing
else; they felt they had got a sensible, honourable, practical man
among them, and accepted him as a fellow-worker for the welfare of
their county. If he did sell books elsewhere, that was nothing to them;
they felt he was a gentleman, and that was all they wanted.
Perhaps it was altogether more gratification than enjoyment, where
all was so new and strange; but the second evening was pleasanter
than the first, and the last breakfast made them like old friends. The
introductions during those two evenings had been very opportune, in
giving a little foothold among the denizens of the county before the
great gathering of the antiquaries.
Ewmouth had been selected as head-quarters, on account of its castle,
its church, and a bit of Roman wall, besides a Roman villa, and several
curious churches within distance for excursions. The names of readers
of papers were very promising, and included 'Medival Seals, by the
Reverend Christopher Harewood.' These lectures were to be given in the
mornings; in the afternoons the excursions were to take place, and one
evening there was to be a soire at Mr. Welsh's.
Tickets for the week cost a guinea. Felix took one apiece for himself
and Geraldine; and Wilmet, not caring for such things, made her ticket
over to Robina. This week would nearly finish William Harewood's
holiday. A few days later he was to meet a reading-party at a vast
old farm-house called Penbeacon, in the moors at the source of the
Leston--five miles off, but still in the vast straggling parish, whose
acreage little corresponded to its population.
Clement and the Harewoods, meantime, spent their leisure moments in
routing in Abednego Tripp's rubbish holes, and bringing out quantities
of fragments of lace-work canopies, heads of saints and demons,
and shattered Priors' coffin-lids. The black cloth came down; two
divisions of the three-decker were stored away in the hay-loft over
the vicarage-stable. The third and lowest was to serve Clement for his
sermon, and Abednego must make the best of a place in the choir. As to
the trumpeting angel at the top of the sounding-board, Felix was so
constant to it, that he carefully dusted it, proved it to be really
rather graceful, and set it up against the wall in his own bedroom.
Will Harewood declared it was the idol representing the Pursuivant,
and he rejoined that he only hoped that the Pursuivant might sound in
accordance with that trumpet.
[Footnote 1: The real word is too sacred for quotation. (Author)]
[Transcriber's note: "real word": 'Jesus', in the original hymn (J.
Proctor and I.D. Sankey, 'Nothing, either great or small').]
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
K. T.
'So black of hue,
With orange tawny Bill.'
Midsummer Night's Dream.
The town-hall at Ewmouth was a good fifteenth-century building. The
common herd sat on chairs and gazed at the speakers behind the table
on the dais. There were the Lord Lieutenant and the local peer (he
with whom Clement would not dine), Sir Vesey Hammond, and Mr. Welsh,
together with Geraldine's old acquaintance, Lord de Vigny, who was sure
to turn up at every sort of dilettante gathering in the kingdom,
made words on the benefits of local research, and compliments on local
hospitality; and then some wise man gave an excellent compendious
sketch of the history of the city and neighbourhood, notifying the
connection of the spots it was intended to visit, beginning with the
Castle that very afternoon. Meantime there was not much opportunity for
greetings; people were all in rows on the same level, looking into the
fabrics on the crania of their neighbours in front.
'That's the way with ladies,' said William Harewood; 'they'll go
anywhere to see one another's bonnets. That's the real point, whatever
the excuse may be.'
The remark was made in all good humour. Everything had been smooth
all these ten days. Had not Robina copied out his whole essay in her
beautiful clear script, and tied it up with purple ribbons? Had she
not toiled early and late at effective shaded diagrams of his father's
seals? had she not listened intelligently to his own supplemental
lecture on the unconscious poetry those queer devices expressed?
and had she not rescued an important letter of his from the slit in
Clement's S.P.G. box, which he was always taking for the post?
The lecture over, there was a dispersion to lunch at various houses or
hotels. The Underwoods were of Mrs. Welsh's party, where Geraldine was
made much of under Lady Hammond's kind protection, and Robina remained
in enviable obscurity at a side-table. Lady Hammond's age obliged her
to ascend to the Castle afterwards in her carriage, and she insisted on
taking her lame young friend with her. Every one else walked--Robina
with her brother and Will, for both the Major and his father had fallen
in with old acquaintance and gone their own way.
Other parties debouched from other streets; and as Robina climbed the
Castle hill, she was aware of Lord Ernest de la Poer in the act of
greeting her.
'You here!' she exclaimed.
'I am at Eweford with Milwright.'
'But your reading!'
'Here I am, improving my mind.'
'Hardly in the needful manner.'
'Nay, but why is this holiday month to be all play and no work to every
one but dis here unlucky nigger?'
'You've not earned the right to play.'
'Nor ever shall at home. You know what a farce it is to "call it either
work or play."'
Felix did not wholly like the tone of this dialogue, but just then a
brother of the press entreated a few moments' conversation. It was to
ask for a recommendation, which he was now in a condition to give; and
he was obliged to leave his sister to Will's care, intending speedily
to overtake her.
Meanwhile, Lord Ernest went on, with somewhat less of reserve, 'Now
I put it to you, which is which under the K.T. influence--Greek or
croquet?'
'The last is not her influence.'
'No, nor her nature, but her uncle's drill into complaisance. She is a
victim to filial piety, and drags me to the same shrine.'
'Just what she does not want to do.'
'No, but now you are gone, the games would never end if one didn't get
her through a hoop occasionally.'
Robina averted her head, for there was a general halt and a silence,
and a voice made itself heard, explaining that here was the Roman
masonry.
The Castle was a large place, containing the county hall, and having
likewise a small garrison of artillery to take care of the sea
defences, on which modern science had of late been busy. The lecturer
led his flock literally from pillar to post, stopping to expound all
points of interest, and handing round drawings and photographs. There
was nothing to do but to follow, and hope to fall in with some of the
others. Of Geraldine there was no hope; old Sir Vesey had tucked her
under his vigorous arm as soon as she stepped out of the carriage; Lord
de Vigny had claimed her as an acquaintance, and her lameness gave her
brevet rank for the nonce, for she was thrust into the forefront
among the dames of high estate, and had a near view of everything.
Felix had vanished; and Will, whose arm would have been very convenient
to Robina in the throng, hung a little aloof, wearing an almost
quaintly desperate air of surliness, while Lord Ernest hovered close,
speaking to her at every pause in the lecture.
This uncomfortable trio were far in the rear, and a good deal jostled
about, without very clear ideas where they were going or what they were
seeing. Now it was along a moat; now out on a rampart with a green
slope open to the sea, a very living looking cannon in the embrasures;
now gazing up to a machicolated turret, then dragged up its spiral
stair to be handed out on a leaden roof, and get a grand view, and
a general impression that one of the King Henrys had done something
there; then diving down to a doleful dungeon, where somebody had been
starved to death, but as it was not true, it did not signify who it
was. Such were all the ideas that Robina or either of her cavaliers
could have given of their perambulation of Ewmouth Castle. It was lucky
for the Pursuivant that they were not its caterers.
By the time she had ascended a dusky stair into the great hall of
columns, which had never been a chapel, Robina found that the tour was
ended, and moreover that Will--as well as all the rest--had been lost
in the throng, and that no one was near whom she knew but Ernest de la
Poer.
'I wonder where they all are!'
'We had better stand near the door,' he answered; 'they must pass this
way.'
They waited while the stream of people flowed past; and when an
acquaintance came, who was going to shake hands with Robina's companion
as one of the many brothers, she piteously asked for tidings of her
party.
'I saw Miss Underwood in Lady Hammond's carriage at the other door.'
'That accounts for it,' said Lord Ernest; 'I saw there was an eddy in
the flood. Shall we go across?'
The move was a relief, and Robina hoped to find Felix waiting for
her at the other door, for the hall was emptying fast, and they were
the last to make their exit by the opposite porch. Not only were
the carriages gone, but the foot-passengers; and the policemen were
shutting the doors behind them, so that there was no returning across
the hall.
'I will go round to the High Street again,' said Robina. 'Some of them
will be sure to come back to look for me.'
'Where did you have luncheon? Will not they be there?'
'At Mr. Welsh's; but I don't think we were to go back there. We were
to get in at the inn where the carriage was to be put up, only I don't
know the name of it. My brother drove there after setting us down.'
Lord Ernest applied to a policeman for the name and locality of the
principal stables. 'The Antelope,' he said; but it proved to be in the
opposite direction to Mr. Welsh's, and so distant that Robina doubted
whether Felix could have gone thither. She begged not to delay her
companion; and he answered, as she knew he would, that he was quite
at her service; indeed, she was quite at her ease so far as he was
personally concerned, and if it had been any other town in the kingdom
except perhaps Bexley, Oxford, or Minsterham, she would sooner have
trusted to him in a difficulty than to any one whose name did not end
with wood. He was too considerate to worry her with talking during
the quick walk, and with some difficulty he caught a busy ostler, who
averred that Mr. Underwood's carriage had not been there at all--no,
not the horse, which he knew perfectly well. He evidently thought the
new Squire's family rightly served for deserting their ancient haunt,
and he ran away instead of answering whether there were other yards
nearer Mr. Welsh's.
Nothing remained but to retrace their steps up the steep High Street
that climbed the Castle cliff, meeting many a load of happy people who
had found their carriages. Presently they came full on Mrs. Fulbert
Underwood, who had been one of the callers in the last week, but who
would have passed without recognition, but for Robina's despairing
entreaty, 'Could you tell me where our carriage can be put up?'
'What! Rosina Underwood! I am surprised!'
'I have missed the others in the crowd at the Castle. I thought I
should have met them at the Antelope, but our carriage has not been
there.'
'We always put up at the Antelope,' said Mrs. Underwood; 'there may
be inferior stables, but I do not know them. I have not been to all
this lecturing--I don't like such things for ladies; but I can go round
by Vale Leston, and set you down.'
'No, thank you. I could walk if that were all, only I must find the
others, for they will not go without me.'
'Oh! if you are better off--I did not see that you had a beau. Mr.
Harewood?'
'No,' said Robin, in her fiercest straightforwardness, 'Lord Ernest de
la Poer. You know I am his sisters' governess. He is kindly helping me
to find my brother and sister.'
'Oh! I leave you in good hands. Good-bye. If I meet any of your party,
I will mention that I have seen you.'
Robina had been reddening all the afternoon. She was crimson now, but
she was resolved not to make things worse by visible discomposure.
'Who was that obliging lady?' asked Lord Ernest.
'The last Mr. Underwood's daughter-in-law,' said Robin, so angry as to
disclaim connection as much as possible; 'perhaps one is well off to
have only one odd sort of relation.'
'I see a man who dined with Milwright yesterday,' exclaimed Lord
Ernest. 'He may not be above all inns but the Antelope.'
He charged across the street, and brought back intelligence of a Fox's
Brush in Castle Street, and of a short cut through a narrow alley and
the churchyard; but there seemed risk of another miss, and besides,
something like a waggonette was discerned near the top of the hill. It
proved to be a break full of strangers; and by that time Robina, though
bravely breasting the hill, was so tired and breathless that Lord
Ernest offered his arm, but was refused with a certain weary sharpness.
At last the corner of Castle Street afforded a view of another hopeful
looking vehicle a good way down; and at the same moment, Felix, very
pink, hurried up from one quarter, and Will Harewood, fiery red, dashed
down from another.
Felix had been to the Antelope by the by-street, and had met Mrs.
Fulbert, then had posted after to overtake them; Willie had been all
round the Castle, trying every gate in vain; Mr. Harewood was on the
quest in another direction.
Robina thanked her escort, Felix did so more coldly, Willie gave
a savage little bow, and they parted. Cherry was waiting in the
waggonette, with the Major, who might not be overwalked, sitting on
the box, holding the horse; and as Will was about to plunge after his
father, Cherry called, 'Pray put on your hat! you look like a mad
hatter instead of the March hare.'
'Enough to drive one mad,' muttered Will, sharply, pulling his hat
nearly down to his eye-brows, and disappearing just as his father came
soberly back from inquiry at Mr. Welsh's.
This time it was decided to drive down the High Street--always a slow
operation, since it required a drag; and Felix left the reins in John's
more practised hands, through the difficult navigation. They drew
up at sight of Will in confabulation with Mrs. Fulbert, not much to
the improvement of the serenity of his manner as he bestowed himself
within the vehicle. Geraldine begun taking all the blame on her own bad
chaperonage, and pitying Robina for being heated and tired.
'Well she may!' said Will, 'after galloping all over the place with
that donkey.'
'A four-legged donkey might have been convenient,' said Cherry,
laughing; 'but how came you to be left to him? I thought you safe with
the Squire.'
'The Squire was called off to speak to some one,' said Robina.
'And I am afraid you were remiss, William,' said the Librarian.
'She seemed well satisfied,' he growled.
'I think you forget yourself,' said his father, gravely, as if his
first-class son were still a little boy. The most courteous of men
himself, he was always trying to teach manners to his family, but had
egregiously failed excepting with the Major.
That Robina's adventure was relished by no one, might be gathered from
the fact that none of the five alluded to it, and no objection was
made when she came down the next morning in a stay-at-home garb, and
announced her intention of remaining to assist in preparing for 'the
spread' of Wednesday.
Cherry could not help remembering Wilmet's allegation that Robina was
apt to attach much importance to ordinary attention; but at least if
there were an error, it was on the side of precaution; and Cherry had
so many qualms of conscience at taking her pleasure and devolving the
trouble on Wilmet, that she was glad to leave so effective an assistant.
The day's entertainment was Mr. Harewood's lecture and another in the
morning, and then a sort of picnic at the Roman villa. Lord Ernest
found the Vale Leston party out, and Cherry thought he looked a little
blank; but he took to cultivating her, and in the absence of her
more distinguished cavaliers, made himself very pleasant, though she
discerned that he cared not a rush for its baths and mosaic pavements;
but she liked him so much, and thought him so genuinely kind and
attentive, as to acquit him of all but humane courtesy to his sisters'
governess, only hoping Robina so understood it.
That night Felix was dutifully writing his summary of the proceedings
of the day, when a knock came to his study door, and as his boding soul
anticipated, it was the prelude to Robina's entrance. With a solemn
directness, not unlike that when she had dealt the death-blow to his
early dream, she thus addressed him: 'Brother, are you very busy, or
can you speak to me?'
He felt a cold dismay, and only said, 'Well!'
'It hardly seems right even to tell you, but I have this letter, and I
want you to help me.'
'A letter!'
'Troublesome ass!' was at the tip of his tongue, but he was thankful it
had gone no further, when Robina answered, 'Yes, from Lady de la Poer,
and from Grace. You brought them from the second post.'
'You are in no scrape, I trust?' he said, somewhat relieved, but not
enough for warmth or encouragement.
'Not that I know of,' said Robina, 'though I don't know whether I shall
be able to go back after this.' And the tears came into her eyes.
'And what is this?' said Felix. 'Don't be afraid to tell me, my dear;
I know you mean honestly.'
She seemed to have some difficulty in beginning, and finally put a note
with a coroneted cipher into his hand. He read--
MY DEAR MISS UNDERWOOD,
I hope you are in full enjoyment at home. I believe Grace keeps
you fully informed of the doings here, so I will not waste
time over the wherefore of the inquiry I feel constrained to
make--among other reasons, to satisfy myself of the children's
truth. Cecil has told Lady Caergwent, on Susan's authority,
that his brother Ernest told you that K (or C) T were the two
most troublesome letters of the alphabet, an unmitigated bore
except in cricket. As you know, Susan always holds fast to
Cecil; and for their sakes we trust to you to tell us what was
said or misunderstood. We should, of course, apply to Ernest
himself, but he went on Thursday to the Ballford cricket-match,
and we do not know how soon he will return: otherwise I should
not disturb your holiday. Susie and Annie seem lost without
you; and I rather suspect that idleness was in this case the
mother of mischief, though some foundation there must have
been, and I am sure you will let me clearly understand what it
was.
Yours very sincerely,
FRANCES DE LA POER.
Felix drew a long breath; then smiled, and asked, 'What does it all
mean?'
'Don't you see? K T. Katie--Lady Caergwent.'
'And did you really receive this extraordinary confidence?'
'Not quite like that.'
'Is this your Countess in her own right, who was said to be engaged to
one of the De la Poers?'
'To Lord Ernest, yes;' and to Felix's satisfaction, there was no
shrinking from his eye--she looked clear and innocent. 'The slip you
sent me from that paper was altogether impertinent and premature. There
is no engagement yet, but there is to be.'
'In spite of this opinion about the letters of the alphabet?'
'That is no more than one of Bear's growls. You must know, Lady
Caergwent is an odd girl. She is only twenty, very clever at any
headwork, but curiously childish about anything real. Her uncle
and aunt, with whom she lives, were obliged to go abroad with Mrs.
Umfraville's sick brother; and she is a ward in Chancery, and could not
go, so she has been at Repworth all the summer. I believe the elders
have settled it. Colonel Umfraville says if she does not marry young
she will never marry at all.'
'Are you in his confidence too?'
'No, but Lord de la Poer talks to Lord Repworth, and he tells Grace.
They are all open-hearted; and, except Lady Fanny, none of them can
help talking.'
'Well, I didn't know mariages de convenance went on still.'
'No, indeed; they really like each other. No one could doubt it some
time ago, when they were not thinking about it; and there is a sort of
understanding that it will be, though it is not to come on formally
till he has done with Oxford. Well, that understanding has spoilt every
one's comfort.'
'I should think so!'
'Will you not see, Felix, that they really care for one another, only
he is a little ashamed of the good match, and its all being made up
for them. Then this summer has been unlucky: he was to read with Mr.
Crichton, the Curate, a very clever man, a friend of Lord Repworth, who
teaches Cecil and some of the girls Latin.'
'Is he married?'
'Oh dear yes!'
'Then he is a K T?'
'Twice over, by name and nature. It would have done very well for Lord
Ernest to read with him, as he did last year, if they had been let
alone. Not that Lady Caergwent wants to interrupt. Her uncle has taught
her a good deal of those kind of things; indeed, she spurred Adelaide
up to it, and only wanted to work with her and her brother.'
'Spurring leads to recalcitration--eh?'
'If you would only understand. She is not at all what you are fancying.
She is a sort of intense child. She is slight and feminine, a great
coward, as nervously excitable as Cherry, and showing it more, so
that her eagerness quite overdoes people. Then, she is very shy, and
so much hates to take the initiative, that people think her proud and
ungracious. I soon found the only way to set her at her ease was to
behave as if we were two girls on equal terms. It is so provoking, when
she has just been the life of the whole schoolroom, to see her shrivel
up as if a stranger was a blight--especially a shy one. And the more
she makes a conscience of being agreeable, the worse it is, for the
nervous fright paralyzes her. There never was any one with so little
presence of mind. She can't get on without being under somebody's wing.
And another unlucky thing is that she has no dexterity of hand, and
hates all games that turn on it, like croquet. There's no keeping out
of them, for there is a garden-party at Repworth to all the neighbours
every Tuesday in the summer; and there would be quite a fuss among the
natives if Lady Caergwent did not show herself. I believe her uncle put
her under a solemn promise not to sit in the pollard in the park with
Addy all the afternoon. So she plays like a martyr, infinitely worse
than among ourselves, and some one always has to get her through to end
the affair. The last day before I came home I had stayed in with little
Susan, who was upset with the heat, and had been naughty enough to be
kept in as a sort of sedative penance. I thought she was asleep on her
board when Lord Ernest came in. Now, Lady Caergwent had been all the
morning poking out some dates and marking some books she knew he would
want; and she had left them with me for him to take when he came in for
the two hours' reading he always was to take before dinner, and which
she never let him off. If I had seen at first how hot and fuming
he was with the bother first of her croquet and then of her hints, I
should have put off executing my commission; but unluckily I gave my
message, and he broke out, "Crichton, croquet, (pronouncing the t,) K
T for ever--the most intolerable conjunction in the alphabet--nothing
tolerable spelt with them." I laughed, and said, "Is cricket in that
category?" and he answered, "The only one that is not an unmitigated
bore."'
'But, Robin, what would Wilmet say to your having him gossipping in
your schoolroom?'
'It is not my schoolroom, it is Miss Oswald's, and the brothers are all
tame about her like their sisters. Indeed, this was a mere accident;
and when I found he meant to stay and grumble, I made an excuse about
looking for Annie, and left him. Now hear what Grace says:--
"We have an awkward mess just now, and I hope you can help
us out of it. You know how Papa dislikes that cricket mania
which makes playing at a match a sort of public duty, to which
everything is to be sacrificed; and how the boys say he would
not mind if Colonel Umfraville had not worked him up. At any
rate, as it was understood that Ernest was reading, and could
not play in matches, the Breretons need not have summoned him
fiery-cross fashion to their Oxford eleven. Kate broke out in
the middle of breakfast, that it was a great shame, and she
hated bondage; and he was provoked to answer, 'So did he.'
Mamma hushed it down; but Kate's blood was up, and she never
knows when to let a thing alone, so she hunted him into a
corner after breakfast, and argued with him; and you know no
man could stand that."
'No, indeed,' said Felix. 'It is quite enough to have to marry a
Countess!'
'Don't, Felix! If you could only see the slight clinging thing! It
all comes of her eager faith in her uncle. It is imploring, not
domineering.'
'Well, go on; was that what drove him here?'
'Gracie goes on--
"They must have been very near a quarrel, for she rushed off,
and unluckily came full pelt upon Papa. She did not speak,
but he had seen tears in her eyes, and that brought it to a
crisis. He accused Ernest of trifling with her, and amusing
himself with everybody else; and Ernest made some answer that
I am afraid was very foolish, and went off to Ballford. I met
him in the hall, and he said things were past endurance, he
should like to enlist as a private soldier, and he did not know
when he was coming home, but I thought he only meant whether
it would be Saturday or Monday. Kate was vexed, but would not
show it; and when she found Cecil dawdling in a fit of the
nothing-to-does, she suggested some sensible employment, and
that exasperated him into telling her Ernest had gone away
because he said that all K Ts were horrible. I don't think
Kate would have mentioned it; but she turned white, and Addy
was there, and was furious with Cecil, and it came to such a
row that Mamma came in. Cecil stood out that Susie heard him
say it to you, and Susan added that it was because Kate is so
tiresome at croquet, and set him such a long lesson. Mamma
thought she should have it out with him if she went to fetch
him home from Ballford and had him all to herself; but when she
came there, he was gone, and none of the Breretons could tell
where. I fancy it may be to Eweford, for Mr. Milwright wanted
both him and Repworth for his ecclesiological meeting. If you
see him, pray talk to him and send him home, for Kate has been
in great trouble about it, laying the blame on herself, (as
well she may,) and she has actually written to her other uncle,
Mr. Wardour, to propose going to him. It is very horrid. Papa
feels keenly that she has been--what he calls insulted in his
house by his sons; and yet we can't do much, because--oh why
is she not only Kate Umfraville? The light is gone out of her
brown eyes, and she looks as she did before the Colonel came
home. She wants to be too proud to show it to us, but there is
no pride in her, and she can't act it. If you could only get
at that boy and send him home, it would all come right. There's
the whole story: I hope it will not spoil your pleasure; but if
you have a scrap of time, write, and comfort your poor loving
G. DE LA P."'
There was an odd look in Felix's face as he said, 'Poor young man!'
'It is too bad of him!' said Robina, hotly.
'And are you armed with a long whip to send him back to his Countess
and his book?'
'Please, Felix, be in earnest! It is a serious matter.'
'Because it concerns such exalted personages.'
'No,' said Robina, the tears burning in her eyes, 'because Grace is my
friend, and Kate Caergwent a dear bright girl, who must not have her
life spoilt--nor he either. Felix, you never were unfeeling before!'
'Have you let them know where to find their truant?'
'I had begun a letter this morning, but had no time to finish.'
'But you can give your evidence on the K T case by to-morrow's post.'
'Yes, if you can get my letter to Ewmouth before nine o'clock.'
'I will take care of that; and then you will have done all that ought
to be expected of you.'
'Oh! I must speak to Lord Ernest.'
'Really, Robina, I am so thankful to see you so well out of the scrape
that I don't see why you should thrust yourself into it. Surely, when
the boy's parents know where to find him, they are competent to act.'
'Don't you see, they will not get my letter till the day after
to-morrow, and by that time Lady Caergwent will have gone. Now, if he
would only go back to-morrow of his own accord, it would have a much
better grace. Why do you laugh, Felix?'
'I profess not to understand lords and ladies,' said Felix, recovering
his gravity; 'but I doubt the effectiveness of the remonstrance, and I
greatly fear your burning your own fingers.'
'There's no fear of that,' she said, with dignity. 'It is a duty to
friends who are dearer and kinder to me than any one here believes!'
And the tears started on her cheeks.
'Of your duty you are the best judge. I see you must have been
discreet, to have earned so much affection and confidence. I own I
should have thought the fewer who meddled in such a concern the better!
and that--though I daresay it is very shocking--there was something
rather wholesome in the poor boy's exertion of free will.' He was near
laughing, the whole affair struck him as so ludicrous, especially
Robina's look of dismay.
'Oh! His sisters! Lady Caergwent! His mother, and all! Oh no! If I
don't try my utmost to get him home, I should feel treacherous--as if I
were encouraging him here.'
'Honestly, do you think your being here has anything to do with his
coming?'
'N--no! At least, I think the sight of you all so bright and pleasant
at the station put it into his head. He is very much amused with
Angela; but--oh no! I am certain he does not come after any one--least
of all me!'
'There is one person who seems to think otherwise, if I may judge from
his manner,' said Felix, tentatively.
'It is very unjust and unfair!' cried Robina, flaming up. 'He ought
to know and trust me better. I will not heed such unworthy fancies. A
son of the house, indeed! He ought to know that if there were no other
reason, I should think it dishonourable.'
'Yet was it not on that account that you stayed at home to-day?'
'Yes,' she said more softly; 'but that ought to content him. I cannot
give up a duty for unworthy suspicions.' And her neck bridled, and her
eyes shone with hurt dignity through her tears.
'Well, Robina, you know best. You understand your own affairs, I
suppose, and I see you are really trying to act rightly and honourably.
I will give you any opportunity I can of speaking to this youth,
though, for your own sake, I should strongly advise your only giving
him his mother's letter, and letting it speak for itself.'
Robina shook her head. It was useless to argue it further. Like a
woman, and a young woman, she was resolved to run all risks in her
friend's cause, deeming it ignoble to make any concession to William's
unfounded jealousy, and not appreciating Felix's doubts of any young
man, especially one in a chafing refractory mood, going back to the
yoke at the behest of his sisters' governess.
Felix did not like it at all, but he was always slow to act where he
did not understand his ground; and the tone of the two letters showed
such confidence in Robina, that he felt that her prudence might be
trusted; while as to William Harewood, an unrecognised engagement did
not deserve consideration from the family.
So he kept her counsel, and let things take their course, on the busy
confused morning that preluded the first attempt of the family at an
entertainment.
Breakfast was enlivened by a discussion whether precedence was to be
respected, and next what that precedence was. 'Ought the Baron, or the
Marquis's younger son, to come first and take Miss Underwood?'
'The Baron, I hope,' said Cherry. 'Old men are twice as nice as young
ones, though your friend is very pleasant, Bobbie. Which is it to be?
You are the experienced one.'
'Not I,' said Robina. 'Of course I don't dine late, and they go into
luncheon nohow, as I should say was the best way here. Let Felix take
Lady Hammond, and leave the rest to settle it. Depend upon it, they
know their places better than we do.'
'"Ladies and Gentlemen, sort yourselves," as the parson said, when he
had married five couple all at one go,' said Bernard.
'Don't they sometimes stick in the door-way curtseying? They do in
books,' said Cherry.
'Not out of them,' said Robin. 'If there is a choice, I think age gets
it more than actual rank.'
'There's nothing Lord Ernest hates like dowagers,' cried Angela, 'when
all the jolly girls are out of reach.'
'What do you know about it, Angela?' said Felix, rather sharply.
'I've heard him say so twenty times. We are prodigious allies, and it
was very sly of Robin never to tell me he was coming. Bear and I would
have got up Dobby for his special edification.'
'You will do no such thing, for him or any one else!' broke forth in
displeasure from Felix.
Angela shrugged her shoulders. 'Our Squire has grown very peremptory
since he came to his kingdom,' she said; and perhaps he thought so, for
he said to her at a quiet moment, 'Angela, perhaps I should have given
you credit for not meaning what you said. You must know the impropriety
of playing tricks on our guests, more especially when concerned with
the world of spirits.'
The words appealed to the more accessible side of her nature, and she
was silent. He considered whether to warn her about Lord Ernest, but
was deciding that it would only excite her to further mischief, when
he was summoned to admire the preparations that had absorbed the home
party all the previous day.
The screen, a high wooden carved one, entirely cut off the end of
the long room appropriated to the household prayers. The long table
was laid with the fine old damask, the wealth of plate, glass, and
old china, to which the substantial cold viands, and the jellies and
creams, compounded by Wilmet and her ingenious Krishnu, were now to be
added. The only failure had been in the unlimited lobsters, which had
been all absorbed by Ewmouth itself; but then, Marilda, hearing all
about it from Lance on his way through London, had actually sent them
last night two venison pasties and a grouse pie, ready made, besides a
great deal of her best fruit.
All stood admiring except Geraldine, who cried, 'Oh, that big
epergne! Oh, those dahlias! They are just like a pincushion, or
Protheroe's window! Stella--Bear--Bobbie--for pity's sake get me some
fuchsias--traveller's joy, Bougainvillia--anything trailing--and I'll
get a little of the stiffness out before Wilmet comes, and then she'll
never find it out! And where's my salt-cellar? Oh for Lance!'
When Wilmet came upon the scene, she found Cherry seated as the
centre-piece on the table, contending with the difficulties of adorning
without concealing the curious old salt, the table-cloth bestrewn with
green leaves and fallen fuchsia bells, and the epergne, the triumph
of her art, the subject of her distant admiration at the last dinner
party of the olden time, (Clement's christening feast,) relegated to
a much inferior station, its formal glories of purple and crimson
quilled dahlias obscured by loose streamers of passion-flower and hoary
clematis.
Other people besides Robina had something to bear that day, but there
was nothing in which John's influence was more shown than in the mutual
forbearance of Wilmet and Geraldine. The latter took the initiative
with a torrent of thanks and apologies; and Wilmet, remembering whose
house it was, submitted with a good grace, and concealed her vexation
by hurrying to the kitchen to take the jellies out of their moulds.
There at least she was supreme. Martha was only too glad to have her to
sympathize with her new glories, and for her sake could even bear with
'that there blackamore chap.'
Robina, in a nearly sleepless night, had decided on giving William a
word or two of explanation as to her having a message from home for
Lord Ernest; but in the rush after flowers, Angela had carried Bill off
to rob a wisteria of its second bloom, and by the time they came back,
Felix was hurrying his party into the waggonette.
Only the gentlemen went; the ladies had enough to do at home, since it
was only too true that Cherry's improvements had doubled their work,
and she felt herself the more graceless that she could not run about
to supply the labour she had created. Indeed, all were watching lest
she should overtire herself; but she was one of those who never feel
weariness while excitement lasts.
The last jelly was scarcely in its place, the last wine-glass adjusted,
when Angela announced a carriage turning over the bridge; and the long
approach up the lane, and down the drive enabled Cherry, by the united
efforts of her sisters, to cast her housewifely slough, don her white
dress and mauve ribbons, and seat herself in the drawing-room, with
Clement as her supporter.
Luckily Cherry had never been afraid of people, and she faced the
inroad with great composure. This proved to be only the advanced guard,
namely, Mr. Milwright, bringing Lord Ernest and a fellow ecclesiologist
with whom he wanted to hold a private discussion over the fragments
of a shrine in the south transept; and Clement went to show his
discoveries.
So cruelly were opportunities wasted, that Robina was in the far end
of the west wing, dressing herself and Angela, while Lord Ernest was
having a twenty minutes tte--tte with Cherry, whom he consulted as
to joining Will Harewood's reading party, and told her that the Vale
Leston choir was renowned as the best in the neighbourhood; and that
old Milwright, being unable to go in out-and-out for the medival, let
things alone, and was content with two fiddles and a flute. Wherefore
he should walk from Eweford on the ensuing Sunday, to this--simply
the most charming place he had ever seen. Whereupon Miss Underwood
innocently invited him to luncheon between the services.
Robina could only come down just as Felix returned, immediately
followed by the whole multitude, exceeding the expectations of the
family so much, that Marilda's pasties were a comfortable reflection,
and Wilmet's imagination fell to reckoning knives and forks. Places at
the table must be hopeless for many; and when Felix, in desperation,
offered an arm to Lady Hammond, he left a chaos behind which he hoped
would, as Bernard said, 'sort itself.'
People must have been quite as curious about the Underwoods as about
their Priory, for the most improbable guests had come, even the
undesirable peer, whose earldom complicated matters. He assumed,
however, that the eldest and handsomest bonnetless lady must be her
of the house, and accordingly gave his arm to Mrs. Harewood; Lord de
Vigny, who knew better, took his old acquaintance, Miss Underwood, and
dipped her once more in the dear old world of art; the others paired
somehow, and, as Robina had foreseen, Lord Ernest left himself behind
with the common herd, who, after the seats at the long table were
occupied, betook themselves to the cushioned embrasures of the windows,
and to catering for themselves at the side-board, where, happily, there
was no lack of supplies. It was great fun, and Angela agreed with Lord
Ernest in pronouncing it so much jollier than a wedding-breakfast, as
there were no wretched victims to be turned off. If there were any
victims, one was Robina, who was penned up in a corner by Mr. Henry
Shaw, doing his best to be polite; and the other was Will, who had
on his hands two ladies, a gushing mother and daughter, who had just
discovered him to be the author of those delicious songs, signed March
Hare!
The discourse, the occasion of all, began in the long room, Mr.
Milwright taking up station after station, while people herded round to
look at what he pointed out. This tour must be Robina's opportunity.
There were a good many stragglers from the troop of listeners; and
among them was Angela, keeping close to Lord Ernest, and delighted to
take him on a counter round, displaying all the charms of her new home.
This Robina had expected. She knew that it might be said that the
two young Miss Underwoods were running after that young man, and she
wanted to speak as soon as possible, to put an end to the pursuit. So
when Angela had led him to a shed where resided an owl captured in the
church tower, she took the bull by the horns. 'Angel, I have a message
from Repworth to deliver. I must ask you to leave us a little while.'
And she opened the door leading into the walled kitchen garden. Angela
shrugged her shoulders, but fell back.
'And so you have betrayed me? Could not you let a poor fellow breathe a
little free air for once in his life?'
'Read that!' was all her answer.
The effect of his mother's letter resembled that on Felix; he burst out
laughing, much more unreservedly exclaiming, 'Well done, Cecy!'
'But it is not what you said!'
'Wasn't it? Then my words fell short of my thoughts. What was it the
King of France said when he had got away from captivity or Catherine de
Medici (his K Ts, you see)--"I am yet a man and a brother."'
'Please don't make light of it. Grace is in such distress.'
'There generally is a commotion when a prisoner breaks loose. I thought
better of you, Miss Underwood, than to suppose you a detective in
disguise.'
'I only want you to realize how wrong it is that you should be here.'
'I assure you it is all for the family honour. Tout est perdu fors
l'honneur.--That was the fellow's sentiment--wasn't it?'
'I don't see the application.'
'Don't you? Sha'n't I be ploughed to a dead certainty if I go on trying
to carry this on at home!' said Lord Ernest, much more seriously. 'How
about l'honneur then?'
Robina could not deny the danger, and knew not how to answer. He
saw his advantage, and pursued it. 'Was not reading, under the
circumstances, a delusion? You won't speak treason? Never mind, I see
it in your eyes. You know that between all the K Ts within and without
doors, it was providential that I retained sufficient combination of
ideas to effect my escape before I was quite distracted.'
'I don't think you guess the distress you have caused,' said Robina,
gravely.
'What, Gracie has written you a deplorable letter? Gone to the bad
entirely, am I? My mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister
sobbing, our K T wringing her hands--' Then, as she moved decidedly
away, with a gesture expressive of deep displeasure, 'Nay--I declare
they are re-assured. Even if you haven't--I have written to my father;
and they know by this time that the vortex I have rushed into is
nothing worse than a conglomeration of antiquarian old fogies.'
'Oh! if you have written--' she began, feeling that Felix had been
right, and she herself more or less of a goose.
'Yes. I have written to explain that my brain won't stand being
beset within doors and without, and to propose joining Harewood's
reading-party.'
Robina fairly started. 'Do you know if he will have you?'
'I hope he can. He is a crack coach, you know, little as he looks it.
Wonderfully able man when he makes the most of himself.'
'I think he has as many pupils as he has room for,' said Robina, highly
gratified, but hoping to avert what might drive Will beyond all bounds.
'I hope not. Your sister seemed to think it might be managed.'
'What, Angela?'
'No; Miss Underwood--is she not? The one who was in the room first.
What a delightful countenance she has, by-the-by, it strikes me more
than Mrs. Harewood's. It is a rare thing to meet so much beauty afloat
in one family.'
However complimentary, he must not be allowed to run on in this way;
and his monitor returned abruptly to the charge. 'I allow that it is
hard to read at the Towers; but before you make any other arrangements,
I think you ought to go home this very evening and explain things.
There is a train at 4.11, at Church Ewe.'
'Have you got a policeman outside to give me in charge to?'
'No,' she answered, with some anger; 'but Lady Caergwent is going away
to-morrow!'
His first impulse was a little whistle of dismay; but he caught it up,
and coolly said, 'Joy go with her, a K T clasm! You have not let Grace
cram you with all that?'
By this time Robina was thoroughly sensible of the false position
she had got herself into, and had only to get herself out of it as
fast as she could, so she took the path between the espaliers and
scarlet-runners which would soonest lead back to public haunts, saying
decidedly, 'I do not want to hear anything about it.'
'It seems to me,' said her companion, with more of the man than he
had yet assumed, 'that having entered on this, you should allow me to
remind you that this is a free country, and these are not the days of
family compacts. I will not go home, to be badgered whatever I say or
do. I will strike out my own line, and work for myself.'
'But your father--!'
'If I know my father, he will like me the better for it. The Colonel
has a way of making him see things in his point of view, and it was a
tidy little plan; but there are not so many men in this world born for
prince-consorts, and they have not got hold of one of the sort. There,
now, you have discharged your duty! You may tell Grace what I say--the
whole houseful, if you like.'
'Very well,' said Robina coldly, glad to have nearly reached a door
opening upon a laurel path. 'It is of no use to say any more. You have
written, and I have no more to do with it.'
'I didn't think you were on the enemy's side!' he proceeded, as if
pleading with her displeasure. 'I know you are one to like a fellow the
more for having a spark of independence. Come, you may as well say so;
it is in your nature, I've seen it, and you owe me compensation for all
that you have rehearsed to me in the spirit of the K Ts.'
This was in a tone between warmth and raillery, that made it very
difficult to know how to reply; and all she could think of was, 'You
can be the only judge of what is right and manly.'
'There then!' as if he had done with the subject. 'Oh! don't open the
door. Let us have another turn. I want to tell you about my plans. This
is almost as good as losing ourselves.'
'I can't,' said Robina, with much repressive displeasure, 'I am wanted.
I only came to show you your mother's letter;' and she plunged into the
laurel-walk.
'Then I am much obliged to my mother's letter,' was the reply, in a
tone that conveyed more than the words.
Therewith, at the other end of the path, were seen Mrs. Fulbert
Underwood, Miss Martha Hepburn, and Mr. Harry Shaw. They met; Robina
shook hands; Lord Ernest moved his hat; but though 'Jane' made a low
curtsey, her observation was marked--'Oh! so you have lost yourself
again, Rosina!'
'My name is Robina, if you please,' she exclaimed, glad to have
something to contradict.
'Ah! I never can remember! It is so peculiar!'
'Peculiarly pretty,' said Lord Ernest. 'It puts one in mind of all
sorts of pleasant associations.'
'It is Scottish, after Miss Hepburn,' said Robina, severely turning
from him.
'Yes,' said Miss Martha. 'It is a very old name with us, but we never
called my sister by it; we call her by her name of Elizabeth, it is
less romantic but more sensible.' And Miss Martha, frightened at
speaking so like Isabella, laughed a little to diminish the stern
effects.
Robina hoped to shake off Lord Ernest by joining them, and said
politely, 'I did not know you were here.'
'Harry and I thought we would just come over to see what the learned
men think of the poor old place; but after all, it is only Mr.
Milwright, and one can hear him any day, so we came round just to have
a look at the old conservatories, which I used to dote on.'
'You have had some luncheon?'
'Yes, thank you, we got some cold pigeon pie. My dear, what a pity your
sister did not apply to me! I could have recommended her to Patakake,
who always did things for us. Whom could you have had?'
'Kerenhappuch,' said Robina solemnly, for, in spite of all her trouble,
she was awake to the fun of the thing, and she greatly tickled Lord
Ernest by the tone and the name.
'Well, so Miss Martha said, but I could not believe it. Done entirely
at home?'
'Yes.'
'Excuse me, my dear Ros--Robina, but it was a mistake in a position
like yours.'
'I am sorry if anything was not good.'
'Oh! that's not it. It is style that is the thing, especially in your
position. It will not do to fall short of it!--You agree with me, my
Lord, air is everything.'
'I much prefer good food,' he answered; at which Harry Shaw broke into
a hearty laugh, and Robina could not help joining. Perceiving, perhaps,
that his dictum would go for something, Lord Ernest gravely added, 'If
good food and good taste combined are the right thing, I am sure we had
it to-day. I never saw a more thoroughly pretty or graceful set out--so
well appointed too.'
And though the two ladies agreed that the poor young man was very
far gone, and that there was something artful about that girl, yet
it silenced the lamentations for Patakake. Mrs. Fulbert declared it
wonderful how those girls had managed it--but, of course, they had been
brought up to such things; and Miss Martha--more good-naturedly--made
it known that 'that young nobleman had never seen anything equal to it
for style and good taste!'
'Of course, simplicity was a relief after the jaded life of a man of
fashion,' added Miss Isabella.
'What, the Earl was there! What a pity those young people should get
into such a set!'
By the time the lawn was reached, the discourse was ended, and people
were scattered about on the garden-chairs, partaking of further
refreshments handed by Krishnu, who had assumed his white and scarlet,
and had an imposing effect, leading forth sundry footmen in diverse
liveries as his assistants. Lord de Vigny had detected Geraldine's
studio, and insisted on seeing her portfolio. She had somewhat flagged
since her object had been attained, and among the excitements of
the last year; and the old gentleman gave her a real scolding for
wasting such powers in little desultory half-finished memorial kind of
sketches. It was impossible not to laugh at the exaggerated feeling
of the kind old courteous amateur; but after all, the stimulus was
good for her. She did not exactly accept the assurance that it was
the first duty of her life to produce something every season for the
Exhibition; but the fresh eye, and the criticism, which had reality
in it, though it was complimentary, stirred her up; and she felt that
it was not doing justice to the gift of which she was a steward,
to shrink, as she had done of late, from the train of attention and
detail which the maturing an original subject cost her, besides that
contributions to the housekeeping were really felt by all that could
work for themselves to be almost due to him who toiled so freely for
them and for his conscience. As to the neighbours, they only then and
there discovered that the little lame Miss Underwood was an exhibitor
at the Royal Academy, and that the queer old nobleman, with the loose
grey hair, raved about her drawings. They regarded her the more or the
less according as they most esteemed genius or gentility; and as Miss
Martha Hepburn said, 'No one would ever have found it out.' 'As if they
expected me to go about in a white turban and a palette on my thumb,
like the pictures of Angelica Kaufman!' said Cherry, laughing, as
Angela reported this speech while the home party stood under the porch,
after seeing off their last guests.
There was plenty of indulgence in self-gratulations, and a universal
contribution of the observations each had received, almost all
resulting in declaring their house-warming a great success. In the
midst, some correspondence of eye between Robina and her eldest
brother, brought the colour into her cheek as she drew nearer to him.
He held out his hand to her, and when the others dispersed to their
rooms, they began to walk together under the wall.
'You spoke to him?'
'Yes. Oh! I wish I hadn't. You were right. He had written to his
father, after all!'
'Then it is off your mind?'
'Yes. No--it would be--' She fell into a terrible tangle of hesitation
and broken words, out of which he thus interpreted,
'You found the situation awkward?'
'Oh! I ought not to complain, for it was my own doing when you warned
me, and I don't believe he meant it; but--but--it just amounts to this,
that I can never freely say again that he never said, or tried to say,
a word like flirting--to me. And I suppose it is my duty to tell,
and--give them all up--'
'I suppose you had rather not tell me what he really said?'
'It was not words so much as manner--assuming that I was on his side at
heart, and half laughing at me all the time. Then, when he had told
me quite seriously that the family compact was all nonsense, he grew a
little more like that--wanted me to hear his plans, and stay away from
the rest--said it was as good as our being lost.'
'Is that all?'
'Yes; except that, when I said why I began, he answered, "Then I am
much obliged to my mother's letter."'
'Then, if there is no more, you had much better let things alone. If he
has written to his father, a post or two will decide his recall; and in
the meantime, such a confession, though quite conscientious, would only
make you ridiculous.'
'Yes, I see that. I had much rather not. Wilmet thinks I am always
fancying such things--but you don't, Felix! I only wish it were--'
'I don't think you so silly, my dear,' said Felix. 'No one can judge of
manner without seeing it; but so little as you have to tell seems to me
nothing to cry out about, and your confession might be misunderstood.'
'Of course I don't want to do it; but to keep it back when I write
seems treacherous.'
'Don't write!'
'Not to Grace?'
'She knows you are much occupied; and even if she do think you a little
remiss, really even such a dreadful idea seems to me preferable to any
fresh reports coming between this young man and his family, at what may
be the turning-point of his life.'
'I should not send a false report!'
'You could not help sending an excited one; and if it were the actual
short-hand notes of what passed, word for word, what could it do but
give all the ladies something more to talk about? If Lord de la Poer
be the same man in private life as in public, he and his son will
understand one another much better without the interposition of any
women's tongues, or pens, however kindly-intentioned.'
'So he said--that his father would understand, and like him the better
for being independent.'
'For my part, I could not understand what you told me!'
'He is so fond of Colonel Umfraville, and would be glad to see one of
his children like a son to him. I can't help hoping it will come right,
for poor dear Lady Caergwent's sake.'
'Then, once more, let it alone!'
She obeyed, with a sigh. It was a quiet evening, Felix and the
Harewoods went to the soire; and the next day was that of the
excursion to Stoneborough, for which Robina had not much heart, but
that dreadful imputation of being apt to make a fuss about nothing
prevented her from backing out. She did not understand William, who
had dropped his surly petulant manner, and was only exceedingly grave
and quiet, keeping out of the way, and looking dejected and subdued.
She longed to speak to him, but he specially avoided her, and this
time Felix made her his special charge, transferring Cherry to John
Harewood's guidance. Both understood, almost without even a glance,
that he wished to be free; and Cherry could not have had a more devoted
cavalier than her brother-in-law, who never left her, except when the
ascent of the Tower made Gertrude May hang back, declare she had had
enough of that, and beg to take Miss Underwood under her protection, to
rest in her sister's drawing-room.
And there Gertrude, in one of those curious accesses of confidence that
congeniality sometimes produces, poured out a great deal of what was
most individual to herself. Daisy had never set up a friend before,
and had always been rather contemptuous of intimacies; but this was a
case of love at first sight. Geraldine was about six years her elder,
and not in the category of 'tiresome girls,' and while her sister's
beauty was talked of, no one said much about her; so Daisy fancied this
a discovery of her own, and became devoted to her, especially when
she began to touch on Felix, and found that for hero-worship nothing
could rival the sister. Geraldine had her reserves, but to find such a
listener to the achievements of Felix was enough to open all her heart.
And when the interruption came at last, all Gertrude thought of was
when and how to meet again.
Nothing worth note befell Robina; and on the Saturday the only event
was Mr. Harewood's departure, and his son's disappearance immediately
after. It turned out that he was walking to Penbeacon to make his final
arrangements; and when regrets were expressed that he had not borrowed
a horse, John warned the proprietors against trusting a beast in
Will's hands; and Wilmet declared that, in mercy to his pupils, she
should drive over next week and see whether the rooms were fit for
anybody. Clement spoke well of them, but she had little faith in him.
On Sunday, just as the church bells were calling, and the Priory ladies
were proceeding to the bench they had placed in the south transept,
when leaving the chancel to the choir, there appeared the not very
welcome outline of an aquiline young profile, with loose shining brown
hair, peering about over the big oaken boxes that fenced up the central
aisle; and it was Angela who popped up her head to guide him to a local
habitation.
If it were true that Vale Leston rejoiced in the best choir in the
neighbourhood, Ewshire could not be well off, thought those who were
used to the Bexley organ and choir under Lance's presidency. Clement
had done a good deal in the past year with his boys, and had a good
schoolmaster as organist; but the best voices did not appertain to the
best men, and those best men, being the most imbued with Hepburnism,
viewed the gallery as a much more honourable place than the chancel,
and would infinitely rather have sung in a dissenting chapel than in
a surplice; but though they were little cultivated, and were still in
what their vicar called motley, his voice, with the Squire's practised
one, and Will's with its old chorister training, told enough to make
the general effect far above the country average, and to merit the
admiration with which Lord Ernest replied to Angela's exaggerated
despair at the dissonances.
On the way through the Cloister he contrived to say to Robina, 'I've
heard from Papa--it is all right.' She could only reply, 'That is
well!' with a real look of congratulation, though she felt that the use
of the strictly domestic appellation was another dangerous implication
of familiarity. After dinner she crept up to her own room, resolved to
give neither encouragement to him nor offence to William, thinking it
hard that the latter's last Sunday should be spoilt. The school would,
she knew, keep Angela out of mischief, and Cherry would look after the
guest if he deserved to be entertained. What had become of poor Lady
Caergwent?
Perhaps the sun was too hot in her southern room, for Robina grew
restless over her books, and wandered into Cherry's painting room,
gazing listlessly from the windows. Then she saw a sight that surprised
her--Will and Lord Ernest under the cedar, in a conference that lasted
till the smallest bell began to ring.
Felix was still more surprised by Will's address to him some hours
later.
'I just want to know one thing. Do you want that young fellow licked
into shape--that young De la Poer?' he added, meeting Felix's look of
blank amazement. 'He wants me to take him in hand at Penbeacon. I told
him I did not know if there was room--I really don't; but the real
question is--' and there he came to a dead stop.
'The real question is--' repeated Felix.
'Whether you think it a good thing?' continued Will, his head bent over
a cat's-cradle of string in which he had tied up his fingers.
'A very good thing for him, and pecuniarily not a bad one for you.'
'Botheration! that has nothing to do with it. Can't you see what I
mean? Is it good for--her?' and the poor little monosyllable came out
with a sort of groan.
Felix pitied him enough to help him forward with, 'For Robina, do
you mean? You are under a misapprehension, if you think it makes any
difference to her!'
'Then you don't approve of it? You don't want to put a stop to it?'
'There is nothing to put a stop to, that I know of!'
'Ah! then you don't know!' said Will, lapsing into deep dejection.
'I know she would consider what you imply as dishonourable and
treacherous!'
'No, no!' cried Will, vehemently; 'no such thing! Your sister in your
house--as well-born a lady as any in England--a match for any man in
the realm!'
'There are other reasons, besides her position in the family, which
would make her think it treason to encourage what, I believe, has no
existence.'
'Ah, then--you don't know what--' and again he stopped short between
dismay and oppression.
'What do you mean?'
'No, no; you shall not have it from me. I'm only sorry I said a word.'
And the poor fellow was going away.
'Hold, Bill! Tell me what you mean? I believe I can explain it!'
'There's only one expla--No; what am I saying? She has every right.
You'll hear it soon enough!'
He was turning the handle of the door, when Felix said, 'If you mean
that Robina spoke to him in the kitchen-garden on Thursday, I know all
about that!'
'Indeed!' His face altered instantly.
'She had a letter from his mother that she thought he ought to see. She
told me what she intended.'
'Queer people, to find such a channel of communication,' said Bill,
gruffly. 'And that was all?'
'The whole.'
'Well! I never meant to act the spy; but I'll tell you how it was,
Felix. I had heard all Milwright's prose, and was sick of all the
humbug; so I went into your study for a little peace, and there I heard
Theodore fretting awfully in the next room--'
'I know. You were so kind as to take him out.'
'He wanted you, and he wanted to be out; and he was plagued and
bothered at so many strangers about, and Sibby was nearly demented
with having to keep him quiet and wash up the thingumbobs. So this
watch--it belongs to John, came from his aunt's; but I've got it while
mine is refitting--and it plays all manner of tunes. Theodore will come
anywhere after it; so I got him into the kitchen-garden, thinking there
would be peace there, and into the old root-house, and there what does
he do but go to sleep on my knee!'
'Yes; he had had a bad night. I was writing later than was good for
him, and he was excited by the preparations.'
'So while I was pinned down, I saw--from the little window--those two
walking up and down at the further end of the garden,' and he made a
gesture of utter despair. 'It was no good showing myself--I was out of
hearing; but--And so,' he added, 'I thought if I could anyway conduce
to making him fit for her, it was all I could do for her.'
'Very kind! but you might have trusted her!'
'Trust! If I had any right!'
'She thinks you have!'
'She!' and the face lighted up. 'You don't mean that she holds to
that? Of course you know nothing about it, though? Some childish
nonsense passed years ago, but I never durst believe she remembered it.'
'She knows it ought not to bind you, but--'
'Bind! What should bind but the love of my whole heart, ever since I
knew I had one? I durst not speak again of it. When I came to perceive
what I had done, I thought it not fair towards her to renew it, till I
had the means to keep her as she ought to be kept; for you know I've
not got a preserve of old aunts, like Jack!'
'Quite right, Will!'
'And when she had been among all those swells, how did I know what she
might not be wanting to take up with--never being much of a fellow to
look at, any time?' he added wistfully.
'I think you might have known her better!'
'You see,' he broke out, 'I don't want her to be held to me only by
what took place long ago, when she was a child of thirteen. That would
be a downright shame, and I never meant to remind her till I had a home
to offer her. There have been times when I made sure we understood
one another; but to this hour I don't know whether she likes me a bit
better than John, and if she--likes--this young man better--she has
a perfect right!' concluded poor Will, with a great sob from his big
honest chest.
'That you had better ascertain!'
'Do you tell me so?' he exclaimed.
'I am not exactly the person to tell you to do so; but though I honour
your conduct with all my heart, I think the mutual uncertainty is
causing you both much unnecessary unhappiness and anxiety.'
'I can answer for one! But she? People always preach that long
engagements wear out a girl's life.'
'If you were sixteen and thirteen over again, I should say, "Don't!"
very decidedly; but having gone so far, I think you had best go on. I
really believe that not only would an understanding be a great present
relief, but that an avowed engagement would be a great comfort and
protection to her.'
'I'll never let her go back to that drudgery!' cried Will.
'That you must settle with her,'
'Then I have your sanction?'
'Yes; but I'm not your father!'
'Oh! he'll be jolly and glad! He never interferes with anything in
reason! I wonder how Wilmet will look!'
'That must be ascertained by experiment. We must shut up now, Will, or
poor Tedo will have another restless night. Good-night!'
'Pah! I should like to go out and halloo!'
'Write a poem instead, and work off the steam!' said Felix, turning
down the lamp to get rid of that most unpoetical-looking poet.
Will had announced an intention of walking to Penbeacon in early
morning, and when rallied by Angela on having overslept himself, the
great audacious slap-dash fellow proved to have turned as shy as
a girl. He kept on blushing up to the ears, looking sheepish, and
losing opportunities from sheer awkwardness. If the space had been
as small, or Felix as punctilious as at John's courtship, the crisis
could hardly have come on; but Felix had put off going to Bexley, to
see the affair through, and was resolved that the mutual infliction
of misery should last no longer. So finding matters in statu quo at
dinner-time, he ordered the waggonet, and declaring suddenly that he
would protect Cherry through the visits she had to return, he packed
in three sisters, declaring, with a twinkle in his eye, that he knew
Bobbie wanted to finish her sketch of the church. Clement was gone to
the far end of the village, and Bernard was fishing, so that the coast
was clear.
But the drawing went on in solitude under the cedar for a quarter of an
hour; and when at last a sort of irresolute saunter resulted in a big
loosely-built personage reclining on the grass at the sketcher's feet,
a good many more minutes were spent in pulling up tufts, while she was
too glad to have him there to suggest that he was doing the work of
a dozen chaffer-grubs. Indeed, she soon saw that he was ill at ease,
and her painting felt the influence of his restlessness, which began
to alarm her, though she durst not disturb it. He might mean to have
it out with her--he might be composing a poem--to which last opinion
she inclined when he at length lay prone on his back, his straw hat
entirely over his face; and she expected either a heroic utterance, or
a hasty demand for a pencil and a page of her sketch-book. Instead of
which, after a deep sigh, came the portentous words--'Double-distilled
donkey!'
'Indeed, I don't think he's quite that!' justice compelled her to say.
'There! I knew how it would be! Nothing but an unmitigated idiot could
have thought otherwise for a moment!'
'Thought what?' said Robina--not exactly liking to consider the
'unmitigated idiot' meant to apply to herself, the most obvious
antecedent.
'Why, I was ten thousand asses for coming out here!'
'Indeed!'
Something in the tone of that 'indeed' raised him to a sitting posture,
with his arms embracing his knees, a resolute and deplorable attitude.
'I say, Robina, tell me at once, and put an end to it, whether you care
for that sprig of nobility!'
'I!' she cried, her eyes flashing. 'How can you suspect me!' and
indignation made it sound like--'insult me!'
'Don't be in such a fury with a poor fellow that has been driven nearly
to desperation!' said William, putting an elbow on the chair where her
apparatus stood.
'It was your own fault!' said Robina; she meant it to be sternly, but
it was softly. 'I wanted to explain to you, but you never would let me!'
'I did not know that you--I mean, that I felt that I had no right to
ask!'
'O Willie!'
'Robina! Robin--dearest! Are you thinking of that evening?--Bah! what's
this?' as his start forward upset the chair against him.
'The water I was painting with! Let me wipe it. It is making a green
stream over your face!' at which they both laughed hysterically; and
what Will tried to do to the hands that were drying his face may be
inferred from--'Now, don't! Let me do it properly! Be quiet, let me
look!' And as he half sat, half knelt, she turned up his great freckled
face with her hand under his chin. 'There's a green drop still in the
corner of your left eye! Let me take it out.'
'The last drop of the green-eyed monster, I promise you, Robina. Now,
don't you know what they always do to good little boys, who have had
their faces washed nice and clean?'
'But you haven't been a good little boy! You were very naughty, making
me ever so unhappy!' and, smiling as she was, there was a tear not
green in her eye.
'Ah! You could never have been so wretched as I was; not knowing
whether what was my deepest earnest was child's play to you, and not
daring to ask.'
'Just like me!' she whispered.
'And now, is it not like waking out of a horrible dream, or getting out
of a mist of darkness, to find that we have had one another's heart
ever--ever since? my Robin--mine own--mine own!'
'Oh! indeed it is! I don't think we quite knew what we were doing then,
but it has only grown as we have grown older.'
'And will grow for ever, Robina!'
'I trust so!'
'Isn't this rest?' he said presently.
'After all those worries! Oh! I must tell you about Lord Ernest!'
'I don't want to hear a word about Lord Ernest, or Lord Anybody! Bless
me, I forgot! I was to let the fellow knew if I could have him up at
the farm; and in fact I was waiting to know whether you wanted him made
a man of for you!' and Will laughed merrily. 'I'd have done my best,
Robin!'
'I do want him made a man of, but not for me,' said Robina, stroking
his face, by way of reward for a generosity she could not speak of.
'You'll do it, Willie?'
'He'll be off with it, now!'
'Nonsense! that had nothing at all to do with it. He had been trying to
read at home, and it did not answer.'
'Never does!'
'He got bothered, and came to Eweford in a fit of temper. The family
did not know where he was, and I thought I ought to show him their
letters, and let him see how vexed they were. Felix said I had better
let it alone, and I found after all that Lord Ernest had written to his
father.'
'Felix knows about us. How is that?'
'I was uncomfortable at his not knowing. I once tried to tell Wilmet,
when I was afraid I ought not to keep the nid d'avis; but she said I
was a silly child, and would not listen.'
'How lucky! What a delicious time we had at Barges! It is like a
stream of sunshine in my mind. Won't we go there again some day! That
would have settled my business, even if there had been no summer
evening at home. I've got your sketches up in my rooms, and this one
will follow them.'
'If you haven't gone and spoilt it! Look! There's a great dab of blue,
that you made me make, half way up the church tower.'
'Make it Clement, in a sky-blue scarlet vestment, pronouncing a
benediction!'
'For shame, Willie! that's as bad as Angela. Besides, he isn't gone up
as high as that yet!'
'Make it a forget-me-not, then!'
'Up there! and as big as the window?'
'Make it something! I won't have it washed out. It marks the prime
moment of my life--when I came from darkness into sunshine. You must
come some day and do our Cathedral from the meads, and I'll show you
where I cut out our initials and 1861.'
'No! did you?'
'Of course; and all the more because you would not break a sixpence.
You will now?'
'With all my heart!'
'I declare I haven't got one now! Only a three-penny bit, again.'
'Here's one!' said Robina. 'Give me the three-penny, and then it will
be half from each.'
'That's not the right arrangement,' said Will, as he frowned horribly
over the difficulty of dividing the coin. 'I say, I'll get you a ring
to-morrow, though it won't be such a one as Jack's.'
'No, it will be much better!' said Robina, taking the scissors at her
chatelaine, (from a Repworth Christmas-tree,) and snipping a lock from
his head, while he was still struggling with the sixpence. 'There, I
shall make that into a ring! Yes it is the only one I will have--the
only gold I care for.'
'If you call that gold, it is decisive,' said Will, laughing, as she
twined the ruddy thing in her fingers. 'You must have something to set
it in?'
'Yes; I must wait till the chestnut horse comes home, for a few hairs
of his mane for a foundation--black would show through.'
Bill protested in favour of 'a real one,' but without much effect.
Was not the sixpence yielding at last? and had she not that precious
bird's-nest, which she had not dared to wear during his displeasure,
unwitting that this grieved him the more? They were very earnest over
the old-fashioned ceremony of the sixpence; they scratched a W and an
R on each moiety, and made a hole, and Robina undertook the finding a
cord for each. It was playfully done, but with great depth beneath.
'It has been the homely token of a great deal of simple trust!' said
Will.
'And I am sure we are poor enough!' added Robina.
'But you will never go back to that abominable harness?'
'Indeed I must! No, Will! Cannot you see how wrong and foolish it would
be to be living on Felix, with nothing to do, and no one wanting me?'
'No one?'
'Cherry is all the world to Felix, and teaches Stella. Angela takes the
parish work; and it would be a sin and shame to waste my education in
dawdling here. Even dear old Lancey is too much taken up with his music
to want me to keep house for him. I should only be in his way; and I do
not want to enter on all the questions about society there!'
'No; Bexley would not do for you!'
'And when I am getting one hundred pounds now, and am to have one
hundred and fifty after Christmas, when Miss Oswald goes, would it not
be sheer waste and laziness to come and prey on Felix, when I might be
earning a nice little nest-egg to furnish our house with?'
'That's to coax me; but I can't stand your working for me!'
'I might as well say I can't stand your working for me, you silly
fellow! You don't see me crying at your keeping pupils at Penbeacon.'
'Yes, but I'm the right one!'
'I declare you've been learning of my godmothers, who say it is
unworthy of a man to let his womankind work. A regular Mahometan
notion, isn't it? And I shall get my holidays whenever you are
available. Don't you see?'
'I see it exactly in Miss Hepburn's light. Men must work!'
'And women weep! Eh? I've no intention of weeping! I much prefer
working, and I do no more than is wholesome for any person's
well-being. I believe it is Green-eyes again?'
'No; I'm not afraid of you, my own, own steady-hearted Bird! I never
would have been, had I known whether you viewed that evening walk as
play or earnest. I've done with that sort of trouble; but I should like
to lift you out of all the drudgery of work-a-day life, and give you
all that heart could wish!'
'The heart of a bird of paradise!' said she, looking into his face;
'the heart of a robin red-breast gets much nearer what it wishes when
it is working--working for you, you know! Ay! that's so sweet, that you
want to get it all for yourself!'
'My sweetest Bird! before you have talked me quite out of my senses,
with your poetical way of putting it, let me say that you and I don't
work on equal terms. There's the rub!'
'Oh! You're ashamed of the governess?'
'No indeed, dearest; but that you--you--equal to any in birth--should
be in an inferior position!'
'Lord Earnestlypoor!' announced Amelia, in one single word, as she
advanced on them from the house, with the gentleman following. 'He
asked for Mr. Harewood.'
Up they sprung, holding out their hands.
'I thought I might walk over for my answer,' he said, with a sense of
interrupting something.
William gave a conscious laugh. 'I'm afraid I've not been up to
Penbeacon yet.'
'I think,' said Robina, rallying her powers, 'we had better make our
avowal at once. Lord Ernest, we want your congratulations. We have
been engaged this long time, and my eldest brother has just given us
leave to make it known.'
Good breeding and self-command might perhaps be what prevented all sign
of aught but frank friendliness. 'Indeed! I wish you joy with all my
heart. Does Grace know?'
'I am going to write to Grace.'
'She will be very unselfish if she rejoices.'
'I don't think it will make any difference for some time to come,' said
Robina.
'You see,' said Will, 'we neither of us have anything; and she will
have it that she is so happy among your sisters, that it is no hardship
to go on as she is.'
'My mother will say that it is as great a compliment as ever she
received.--Well, Harewood! when you can think of such sublunary matters
as pupils, will you let me know? I wouldn't have interrupted you, but I
had no notion anything so interesting was going on!'
He was so genuinely simple and hearty, that Will was impelled to try
whether he still wished to be his pupil, by asking whether he would
object to sleeping at a cottage. 'Not in the least!' he said, 'it would
be rather jolly! All I want is for you to work me up. I feel more bound
than ever not to come to grief, now they have let me take my way,' he
added, with frankness satisfactory to both.
Will entered into particulars of the accommodations, and Robina
interposed warnings against his statements till verified by her
sister's inspection. These two were really lovers of too long standing
to be overwhelmingly engrossed, but were rather like beings lightened
of a heavy load of suspense; and when the question between the two
gentlemen began as to the books he should write for from home, he
diversified it by saying to Robina--'I brought my father's letter.
Would you like to see it?'
Probably he had meant to read selections, and gave it to her only
because this was impossible, and he really wanted to justify his recent
words.
Lord de la Poer fulfilled the assertion that he would not be displeased
with his son's independence, provided he should persevere in exertion.
There was a kindly expressed but not the less real warning, that the
examination at Oxford would be the test whether this were a manly
spirit or mere restive impatience. Full permission to read with
Mr. Harewood, or any one he preferred, was given. Mr. Crichton had
perceived that the system of study at home did not answer. 'When the
class-list comes out,' wrote the Marquess, 'it will be time to consider
of the future; but I promise that you shall not find yourself withheld
from any suitable course, by any wishes that may have been prematurely
expressed. That whole subject may be considered as closed. If your
present plans are inspired by any other views, I trust to your treating
me with confidence.'
That was the only sentence in which any suspicion could be detected.
How Robina rejoiced that Felix had prevented the confession that would
have been so ridiculous now! Of Lady Caergwent there was not a word. If
Lord de la Poer knew of any grief at the defection, he regarded himself
as in honour bound not to betray her.
Robina was waiting to restore the letter for a pause in the discussion
of Greek plays and moral philosophy, which was the prelude to the
licking into shape, though in externals the tutor looked by far the
most in need of the process, when Amelia made another incursion,
and this time announced, 'Miss Hepburn'--who proved to be two of
the sisters--Bridget and Isabella; but introductions not being the
prevailing custom at Repworth Towers, Robina did not feel called on
to make any, and indeed William had been at Vale Leston as long as
she had. But they had never met face to face before, and the ladies
resented the omission, returned the bows stiffly, and when she said,
'My sisters are gone out to make morning visits,' the answer was, 'Yes,
my sister Martha saw them, and we thought you would be alone.'
'Thank you. Will you come into the drawing-room, or do you like sitting
out-of-doors?--Willie, please ring, and ask for some tea.'
'No, thank you! We will not disturb you. We did not know you were
engaged!'
Will took the word technically, and started; Lord Ernest kept his
countenance with difficulty; but Robina had sense enough to understand,
and say, 'I only stayed at home to finish a sketch. These afternoon
lights and shades are particularly becoming to the church.' And Lord
Ernest, bringing some chairs to the rescue, applied himself with ready
courtesy to make talk, though praise of the choir was hardly a happy
subject to start. He did his best with Miss Isabella, while Robina
faltered through ten minutes of cold commonplace with Miss Bridget.
About a quarter of an hour later, Major Harewood, who was working out
the problem whether prudence would allow him to exchange military
engineering for high farming as the Squire's agent, looked up at the
sight of his wife in hat and parasol.
'Are you going out, my dear? Is it not too hot?'
'Only to the Priory.'
'There's nobody at home. Kit saw "Uncle Fee" and all the aunties going
out in the carriage.'
'Not Robina. Miss Isabella Hepburn has just been here, to warn me that
she found her sitting on the lawn, alone with two young men!'
'Bernard and Theodore?'
'No, no; of course she knows them by sight. I shall go down. I expect
it is that young De la Poer; and either Robin does not know how to get
rid of him, and will be glad to see me, or else she ought to be!'
'Those are the ladies that are said to have but one tooth,' said John,
taking up hat and stick.
'There's no need to disturb you. Only I feel it the more expedient to
be near. I am much vexed at this beginning. I never expected it from
Robina. She is worse than Angel!'
'Poor Robin! There's been something amiss with her all the week, as
well as with Bill. I wonder if there is anything in the Bailey joke
about them?'
'Most certainly not,' said Wilmet; 'I am much more afraid of the other
thing. I always thought her choosing to stay at Repworth suspicious!'
'I don't believe it! I saw them come up after she had been lost at
Ewmouth, as innocent as lambs! Her manner was perfectly simple and
natural.'
'I don't understand Robina's manner,' said Wilmet.
Walking down the hilly slope of the path, they presently were aware of
a pair with arms and hands doubly interlaced, in the fashion peculiar
to the circumstances.
'John!'
'Wilmet! Was there never a blackberry lane in our lives?'
'Not without--Robina!'
They turned, but without confusion, without loosing of arms, or if
Robina had attempted it, it was checked.
'Oh! there you are, John!' exclaimed Will 'So you see we have settled
it at last!'
'I do not know what you mean,' said Wilmet, gravely.
'O Wilmet!' said Robina. 'I told you all about it, long ago, at
Barges.'
'If you consider that as any intimation--' she began; but her husband
interrupted her. 'I suppose Felix has yet to hear this?'
'Oh no!' both cried; Will adding, 'Felix created this vast solitude on
our behalf!'
'Your father?' added Wilmet.
'He went away a day too soon; but there's no fear of him, is there,
Jack?'
'You all seem to me demented!' said Wilmet aghast.
'Nay, Mettie, if you knew it at Barges, you can't say a word!' said
John, much amused.
'Always sending us up the mountains together!' added Will. 'No one ever
gave me such a happy time of it!'
'Giving me leave to keep the brooch!' continued Robina, chiming in with
their humour.
'Why, 'tis your doing,' summed up the Major; 'and I trust it is a good
work for both!' he gravely proceeded. 'I wish you joy, with all my
heart, though I fear I must wish you patience too!'
'And prudence!' put in Wilmet, but softening into sweetness. 'Dear
Robin--dear Willie--don't think I don't care!' as she gave a sisterly
kiss to each. 'It is because I do care so very much for both that I am
anxious!'
'Anxiety was your meat and drink so early in life that you can't shake
it off now!' said John, affectionately; 'and Harewood as I am, I should
share it with you, if I didn't know that Bill's choice much resembles
her elder sister!'
'You may say that!' observed Will. 'Why, she wants to go on in harness
at Repworth!'
'That is wise!' responded Wilmet.
'But, halloo!' cried John, 'did your friend see double, Mettie?--or
what have you done with your other young man, Robina?'
'Walked him to the little gate! He came to settle about reading with
Willie.'
'I say!' cried William, laughing, 'did the Grai go and send Wilmet to
put on her Gorgon's head, and charge down on us? I thought they were
looking as sour as verjuice!'
'You see,' proceeded Wilmet, 'we must all be careful! It won't do to
fancy one can do anything in the country. These old ladies don't do it
out of ill-nature, like Lady Price, but they are almost worse!'
'However, Mettie, as these poor things have been subjected already to
one Oxonian and two hags, I think you and I had better relieve them of
our presence, and let them finish their walk in peace.'
Putting things together, Robina thought she had not wholly escaped
doubt at Repworth, for she received no letter between the inquiry into
the K T case, and the answers to her own communication, and these so
overflowed with affection and cordiality, as to suggest that they were
a reaction. Lady de la Poer wrote warm congratulations, and spoke of
her eldest son's high opinion of Mr. Harewood; she was rejoiced at Miss
Underwood's decision to return to her post, and she gave a few words
of thanks for the explanation about the children's chatter: 'Susie has
been well lectured on Russian scandal!' was her conclusion.
Lady Grace was rapturous enough to think she had seen the future
dawning at the station. Poor Grace! she certainly was rather gushing,
and probably it was the contrast that made her so devoted to the
staid Robina. She let out that she was 'so glad to write again. Mamma
had advised her not, for fear of more misunderstandings, till it was
settled about Ernest; and now he must bring Mr. Harewood to Repworth
for her to see. As to Kate, she was still at the Towers; the Wardours
had the small-pox in their parish, and could not have her.' Grace had
evidently been put under some reserve as to the Countess; but there
was a note from herself--quaint and hearty, like all she did, and with
a little sadness in it. There was no such intimacy as to render it
necessary, and Robina interpreted the writing of it to mean that there
had once been bitter feelings towards her, and that this was their
recall.
MY DEAR MISS UNDERWOOD,
Gracie tells me you have been well employed. I heartily wish
you joy. A university tutor seems to me as mighty a power of
influence as any in existence, but I suppose it is your mission
to spoil him for that. Lucky girl that you are, to have work
and brothers and all! You don't know how much it saves you
from. One brother is all I would have asked, if only to prevent
me from signing myself,
Yours affectionately,
CAERGWENT.
The secret history must evidently wait for Robina's return, and before
that there was a great deal of conscientious hard work at Penbeacon,
the tutor resolutely refraining from walks to Vale Leston, except
when, on Sunday, he and his whole party marched down to what he called
'prayers and provender,' at Vale Leston. Also there was one, only
one, picnic given by the Penbeaconites to the Vale Lestonites, during
the week when the Squire inexorably went to Bexley, and sent Lance
to be the merriest of the merry on the last of August, and to make
acquaintance with the hares and partridges on the 1st of September.
At the end of that week, in the early charms of September, with the
sheaves glorifying the fields, the fruit glowing on the trees, the
pears drooping in russet drops, the apples piled in red and golden
heaps, the geraniums and verbenas flaming on the lawn, Felix brought
Mr. and Mrs. Froggatt, for what was probably as happy and exultant
a visit as ever they paid in their joint lives. To see Felix in his
glory was almost as much to them as if he had been their own child,
and they were intimate enough to make it possible to provide for their
entertainment perfectly to their satisfaction. The home-farm, which was
to be let to Major Harewood, with a tariff for the articles needed for
family consumption, afforded Mrs. Froggatt great amusement in studying
chickens and ducks; and the agent's house, a pretty cottage on the
opposite bank, was being improved at John's expense, so as to be ready
for occupation as soon as he could effect his retirement and break up
from Woolwich; and every one knows the resource house-building is to
the leisurely holiday-maker. Indeed, Mr. Froggatt wanted nothing but
his book and newspaper, and a little talk and garden fancying; and
the petting Cherry and Stella gave him. The tender reverent affection
all the young people showed to both, as to their true friends and
benefactors, warmed their hearts.
One state-dinner--in spite of his disavowal of dinner visiting--Felix
had always resolved to give, chiefly for the sake of the satisfaction
he knew Mrs. Froggatt would for ever feel in it. He had to pick the
other guests, but he secured a sufficiency. Dr. May had promised
himself and his two daughters. Of Mrs. Staples Cherry was afraid, but
Mr. Staples came, and Mr. and Mrs. Welsh, which was the more amiable
in him because there had been a time in his life when Mr. and Mrs.
Froggatt would have been far above him. Lord Ernest came down from
Penbeacon, and thus, with the Harewoods and the large home-party, the
numbers were quite imposing; especially with the display of all the
plate, champagne, ices, Krishnu, and even Cherry's abomination, a hired
waiter in white gloves!
It was not thrown away. Mrs. Froggatt was indeed a little awed in the
Bismarck brocade and blonde cap she would have been so sorry not to
have aired; but Dr. May found the way to her heart, even before dinner,
by admiring the testimonial inkstand which adorned the drawing-room
writing-table, and its story and all it led to lasted more than half
through dinner, and Gertrude caught echoes even while fraternizing
with Major Harewood over her brother in the engineers. After dinner,
good-natured little Mrs. Welsh, to the manner trained, took to
entertaining the old lady, and though the style was too electioneering
for Cherry's taste, it suited the purpose exactly, and made Mrs.
Froggatt pronounce her a very pretty and affable young lady.
Even if there had been less enjoyment at the time, that dinner-party
would have been one of the chief events of Mrs. Froggatt's life. She
never wearied of dilating on it to all the friends who called on her,
on her return. 'She should have thought it a privilege only to see that
dear young gentleman in his proper sphere; but for him to treat the old
people as he might any lord in the land, and show himself as attentive,
as filial, she might say, as if he still had his bread to earn!' and
there she always began to cry.
'One effect your dinner-party has had,' wrote Lance to Cherry, 'it has
wholly destroyed the small remains of Madame Tanneguy's peace of mind.
What she does not believe of the glories of the Priory it would be hard
to say. She angled full two half-hours for an invitation last time the
Squire was here, between her affection for you--and then poor little
Achille's health. And the effect upon that stony-hearted old Giant
was, that he sent two ten-pound notes to Miss Pearson, with a request
to take lodgings for her and the children at Dearport for a month.
Wherewith Miss Pearson trotted confidentially to me, to assure me that
she could not use them, since nothing on earth ailed Achille. I advised
her to keep and apply them; for not only do I know he would not take
them back, but it is no bad form of intimating that she may change to
any air save Vale Leston. And the absurd part of it is, that the more
she aspires, the more poor Lamb casts his hopeless sheep's-eyes at her!'
CHAPTER XXXIX.
FOUR YEARS.
'Yet there are some resting-places,
Life's untroubled interludes;
Times when neither past nor future
On the soul's deep calm intrudes.'
Jean Ingelow.
That Penbeacon pic-nic became an institution, and was one of the
pleasantest annual events in what were on the whole very happy years.
Care, exertion, and self-denial, were indeed still needful; but the two
latter were perhaps ingredients of happiness, and care would not have
been avoided if the Underwood view of duty had been the world's views
of what became Vale Leston Priory. A strenuous endeavour to keep up
appearances, and compete with grand neighbours on an uncertain three
thousand a year, would probably have been more wearing than living
on twelve hundred--partly earned by honest labour--and improving the
cottages, planting a school-chapel at Blackstone Gulley, hiring a house
for the purpose at East Ewmouth, and restoring the church by degrees.
As for exertion, to be an Underwood of the late type would have been
harder work to Felix than his hours of Pursuivant or days at the
office, though in truth the labour was sometimes considerable. It was
not immediately that the two young men at Bexley could get on without
constant aid and superintendence in the business: he was always the
working editor; besides which, he was already important at Bexley,
and soon was found too good a man of business not to have a good deal
of county administration devolved upon him. Trade and public affairs
did so far clash as to be a strain, but not more than was compensated
by sense of usefulness and consideration, and giving zest to the
delightful snatches of leisure in his lovely and cheerful home.
Self-denial? Felix and Geraldine would have disputed that. They
had grown up to a style that made simple plenty and moderate ease
luxurious, and superfluities never even suggested themselves as needs.
Perhaps the lack they were most concerned about was inability to 'keep
up the place' in the trim and dainty order it seemed to call for. The
smoothness of the grass in the park was dependent on the convenience
of John Harewood's dairy farm; and though the garden between the house
and river was always in beautiful order, in the shrubberies there was
a fine struggle of natural selection; the kitchen-gardens were made to
pay their way, and the ranges of conservatories were cold and empty,
except one necessary refuge for tenderer plants, and one maintained
at Clement's expense for Church-decorating flowers. Golightly was
greatly distressed at having no underlings but one old woman, one
small boy, and half the man who looked after the horse and pony, or
sometimes--what was worse than none--some subject to whom the Vicar was
applying the labour-test. The worthy gardener truly represented that
three men was the minimum for such grounds, and gave warning when he
found that justice could not be done them; but after Felix had found
him a much superior place, he declined; he could not find it in his
heart to leave the place to an untrained labourer, who would not even
know how to help devastating it. This sense of what was the garden's
due caused him to bestow an immense amount of personal toil on it; for
indeed it was observable that whoever worked for Felix always did so
with a will, stimulated no doubt by the master's example, as well as
by his hearty appreciation and acknowledgment of good service. In this
there was much real economy.
The farm did well in the hands of Major Harewood, who had adapted the
agent's house to his own needs. It was just on the other side of the
river and road; and a boat, commonly called 'Lord Ullin's Daughter,'
brought it within five minutes' reach, going round by the bridge taking
about three times that interval. The land was chiefly rich pasture; and
John was growing learned in short-horns, and Wilmet upon butter and
cheese, while Clement's wish was realized by a parish cow.
The calculations as to the scale of living were justified by the
result. Lighter household tasks were natural to the young ladies. They
kept their own rooms in order, dusted the books and ornaments, took
care of the household linen, and performed delicate cookeries, so as to
keep down the number of needful servants; and the occasions were few
and far between when their hospitality extended beyond the addition
of a few guests at their ordinary meals, or a garden-party, with its
pretty and inexpensive refections.
People who restored their church and built schools, without begging
for subscriptions either directly or through a bazaar, but continued
in trade, and cut off superfluous luxuries--servants, horses, and
dinner-parties--were a fertile subject for wonder and gossip in the
neighbourhood. Society growled, contemned, and remonstrated, by the
mouth of Mrs. Fulbert Underwood, and the defence of her misguided
family was a heavy charge to Wilmet for the first year; but no one
worth caring about really took umbrage, and after a time people
accepted them on their own terms. A beautiful lawn, full of sprightly
youth, of looks, spirits, and talents, above the average, could not
fail to be popular, and an old county name went for something.
Cherry was proof against dinner-parties. Health was no longer an
objection, for either Vale Leston had the virtues of native air, or the
Bexley potteries had merited Alda's vituperation, for Cherry's ailments
were more rare, and she had much advanced in strength and vigour. Felix
declared she was growing quite handsome; and he, though not exactly the
ideal squire, had acquired much more of the robustness of manhood, and
had lost the appearance of fragility he had shown in earlier years,
though he retained the fair youthful complexion which sometimes made
people hardly credit that his tens were three. He sometimes dined out
alone; but Cherry considered dress and reciprocity to settle the
question of abstinence for her. Angela was, however, so wild about
Ewmouth balls, that John victimized himself and his wife rather than
create a grievance, but even his tolerance was sorely taxed.
Was the blame to be laid on prosperity for the difficulty of dealing
with the two standing anxieties--Angela and Bernard? They had not
been the most docile subjects in the days of comparative poverty, and
their heads were certainly turned now. Bernard could not be convinced
that expensiveness was not the proof of being a gentleman, and in
three years at Harrow cost his brother more than Clement, Fulbert,
and Lancelot, all put together, in their whole nonage, had ever done,
besides the scrapes that Lance helped him out of. He had no sympathy
with Felix's purpose in economy; not that he had reflection enough for
a sceptical habit of mind like Edgar's, but he considered it a hardship
that the whole family should be stinted and impoverished for what he
was pleased to term Tina's maggots; nor could anything persuade him
that he himself was no richer than before, and equally dependent on his
brother's bounty. There was no positive harm in him, but as genius and
taste alike lay in the line of cricket, he cared not for distinction
of other kinds, but was content to scrape through the school without
disgrace. His farther destiny was a moot point, while he scorned cheap
colleges and halls, and Felix insisted that a distinguished one was
only to be attained through a scholarship.
Angela was a greater puzzle. She was still much what she had been in
childhood, alternating between the fast and the devotional. She was
Clement's right hand in the parish, in the schools, Sunday, day, or
night, and with even more than Wilmet's nursing instinct, the prime
doctress of the village, and enjoying the cure of a broken chilblain as
much as a waltz. To take a medical degree had become her ambition in
turns with the dukedom, the opera, and the Sisterhood. Therewith she
was the most saucy and idle of creatures. With less regular good looks
than most of the family, she was more sought after. Figure did much,
the hop-pole had become lithe and graceful, and her dress was always
becoming, as well it might be, for her bills were never within bounds.
She said she could not help it, and certainly her adventurous nature
and rapid movements occasioned numerous catastrophes to her wardrobe,
though not enough to account for the discrepancy between her accounts
and her sisters'. Her charm lay in droll dash and audacity, and the
irresistible glance of her eyes. Even Christopher and his little
brother Edward preferred her to all their other aunts--the night-school
was gathered by her as to a magnet, and better than all the Vicar's
arguments and the Squire's influence had her coaxing prevailed to get
the choir into surplices. She was by far the most formidable as well as
the most unscrupulous adversary of the poor Miss Hepburns, who viewed
her with pious pity and horror as the natural outcome of the system
they deprecated. Indeed, whether she were Clement's greatest help or
hindrance was doubtful. He could not have a friend to stay with him, or
obtain the assistance of a curate, without furnishing prey for Angela.
Fred Somers, after a six weeks' visit, went back to St Matthew's with
his peace upset, and an understanding that the two friends must never
meet again in the haunts of that dangerous siren. A few more such
experiments convinced the Vicar that unless he wished the village girls
to remark that 'Miss Angel was carrying on with another young man,'
he must do all the work himself; and his present amount of services,
Sunday and weekly, at the parish church, and Blackstone Gulley, were
quite up to the mark of any one man's powers, besides his attempts at
East Ewmouth. Here Felix had no property, and therefore could not check
the eruption of small tenements, which broke forth on some fresh field
every spring, containing independent, often surly inhabitants, always
changing, and rapidly outrunning the powers of the undaunted young
Vicar. The two parishes were so entangled that the difficulties as to
territory were endless, and the endeavour at a week-day service was
not encouraged or assisted by the incumbent of the nearest district,
who feared Clement's 'views,' and had been staggered by Angela's
ostentation of them.
Angela was the greater heartache to Clement, because she had been
trained in the same system with himself, and was inclined to carry it
to lengths that even he thought extravagant. There might have been
some disadvantage in his inexperience when she came into his hands
for direction only at the end of his first year of priesthood, and he
would fain have kept her in Mr. Fulmort's keeping; but difficulties
had prevented his insistence, and this he increasingly regretted. For
in spite of all his efforts, his relations with her were lapsing into
what he had always scouted as the popular notion of confession. It
was technical, as far as he could see devoid of repentance. Angela
contrived to separate the brother and the priest; she would go through
any formula, accept any discipline, but mechanically; but she would not
endure exhortation, and if he ever attempted to check her boisterous
spirits, she scouted him as Tina. Sometimes he wondered whether she
sought him only because the practice belonged to what she called an
'out-and-outer,' and Felix retained doubts of its universal expediency.
Did Angela suppress Stella? Never were sisters less alike. Princess
Fair Star, as the brothers called her, was still very small, with a
lovely little face, tinted like fine porcelain, and hair and eyes more
deeply coloured than those of most of the family; hair still snooded
and in shining curls, and pensive eyes shining with a lustre of their
own. She was the help and handmaid of the whole house, especially of
Geraldine, with whom she still did regular lessons; and she was very
diligent in all her doings, turning out her handiwork with delicate
finish; but she was not enterprising, the very pains she took rendering
her slow to undertake, though she spent much time in finishing Angela's
odds and ends. She still continued the family lexicon, for even if
she could not answer a query off-hand, she could always hunt it down,
and the reply was generally ready in the soft low musical voice. Her
laugh was noiseless and not frequent, for though never fretful nor
depressed, she was only gently merry, pensively gay; and though now
and then a quaint remark would drop into the whirl of family fun--and
she was no inconsiderable element in games--she was always as happy,
if not happier, in the garden or the woods with Theodore, their pets
and flowers. She was devoted to the garden, its trimness was in great
part owing to her; and as Golightly said, 'The bookets for the 'ouse
was Miss Stella's province, and them for the church Miss Hangela's;'
and of live-stock the twins tended a curious variety--rabbits, doves,
cats, dogs, canaries, dormice, and owls, besides wounded creatures,
rescued, cured, and released. Stella's quietness was a great ingredient
in taming them; John Harewood called her the only feminine creature
devoid of propensity for making a noise, and Felix, their silent Star
'Up above the world so high,
Like a diamond in the sky.'
Sometimes she would talk freely to Geraldine on any unusual excitement,
but if she conversed with any one else, it was with Theodore. No
one who watched the pair could doubt that they had more mutual
understanding than the boy had with any other person--even Felix, for
whom his love was like a dog's devotion to his master. The out-of-door
life and country air had been beneficial both to mind and body, and
Theodore was much healthier and stronger, made progress in the little
that he could be taught; could utter a few words, comprehended more
than he could pronounce, and improved in self-control. His conscience
was developing in some degree, and his delight in the Church services
and music less unintelligent.
Perhaps Stella was content to be the longer a child because each
advance into life was further away from Theodore; and she had never
yet shed such sorrowful tears as when Clement decided against
presenting him for Confirmation, in the inability to trace whether the
comprehension that Stella maintained, and Felix believed, were not an
illusion of their loving imagination.
Yet strangely enough, Theodore was confirmed after all. He was as usual
among the choir-boys, walking in procession with them, and materially
aiding them by his perfectly true though wordless chant. His nearest
companions were candidates, and he moved instinctively with them to
the step; nor had either brother the heart to interfere as they saw
him kneeling--for though he could not renew the vow, why might he not
receive the Seal? The tickets had been previously taken, so there was
no obstacle; and when explanation and apology were afterwards made,
they were met with encouragement not to debar the innocent from his
Christian privileges because of his lack of power of expression.
Indeed, the Bishop, who had been dismayed at the institution to the
family living of another Underwood, and he such a young one, was not
a little gratified and surprised at the changes he found going on in
Vale Leston--no longer one of the dark hopeless spots of his diocese,
though of course the work, both moral and material, was gradual. Felix
had done nothing in advance of the means that the great tithes brought
into his hands, and had begun with the needful repairs of the cottages
on the Rectory property, and the crying needs of Blackstone Gulley; but
the Church restoration was gradually going on--the Vicar, Marilda, and
John Harewood, all claimed a right to assist, and another year or two
of the great tithes would accomplish the full detail of the plan of
restoration he had set out with.
Meantime he had made many real friends. The one whom he had reckoned
had, however, been disappointing. Captain Audley had exerted himself to
leave his cards, but when he had reason to believe no one at home. He
was friendly when he encountered Felix, and sometimes on the spur of
the moment asked him to dinner; but the ladies he ignored, except that
once when Cherry and Angel were driving past his house in a shower, he
rushed out and offered an umbrella.
His son, however, soon haunted the Priory, as affording all that home
lacked. He was a nice lively lad, dark and brisk, and not the less
welcome because there was much to recall the Charles Audley who was
striving to bring light to the 'black fellows' of Carrigaboola. He was
avowedly Bernard's friend, but he was regularly tame about the house,
walking in at all times during his vacations, in a way that could not
be grudged to one whose home was so dull. Certainly it was a pleasant
house to young men; Wilmet sometimes murmured a little when all Will
Harewood's pupils appeared there at luncheon every Sunday of the stay
at Penbeacon; and the old ones invariably turned up again, especially
Lord Ernest, who had taken a second class and got into a government
office, and yet always managed to appear at each Penbeacon pic-nic.
The first shadow which came upon Vale Leston was good Mr. Froggatt's
death, a grief really deep to those who owed so much to his kindness.
It was a touching thing to see the four fine young men, who looked on
him like a kinsman, gathered round his grave. Felix and Lance were
far more to the widow than her own nephews; and when married nieces
wanted to take her home, and single ones to live with her, she--not
without misgivings as to the nature of the attraction--declined all,
preferring to face her solitude at Marshlands, in the security that
dear Mr. Lancelot would walk out to see her once or twice a week, and
that still dearer Mr. Underwood would come out whenever he could.
It ended in Lance doing more than this. He had been a partner ever
since he had come to years of discretion, and now found himself the
legatee of all Mr. Froggatt's remaining interest in Pursuivant or
business. Ernest Lamb had lately lost his father, and having come into
possession of a slender capital, was in condition to become one of
the house, as indeed he was excellent in whatever regarded the trade,
though incapable of more than the most mechanical newspaper work.
The new arrangement of Underwood and Co. had hardly been made than the
world was electrified by the announcement of Mr. Lamb's engagement.
That Madame Tanneguy had been adored by him ever since her arrival
was known to all; but hitherto she had only vouchsafed a distracting
smile at long intervals, and had laughed at him with her intimates.
Her opportunities were not extensive, but she was as pretty as ever;
and she turned the heads of one or two brothers of her pupils, had
at one time a promising little flirtation with a sentimental young
partner of Mr. Rugg's, and never ceased to dream of an invitation to
Vale Leston, which she was quite sure Geraldine alone withheld poor Mr.
Underwood from giving. But Gustavus and Achilles were growing rather
big for inmates of a young ladies' school, Madame Tanneguy was weary of
the drudgery, and no such positive release as Ernest Lamb offered had
come in her way. His mother's opposition could be set aside, between
coaxing and unwillingness to quarrel; and though he was some years
the younger, he did not look it, nor could there be any doubt that he
would be the best of husbands, and a kind and conscientious father to
the boys; and the aunts, though drawing up their necks a little when
they spoke of it in private, could not deny that it was a subject of
thankfulness--making their future retirement come within the bounds of
possibility.
'Guess the proposal I have had,' quoth Felix, when next he returned
from Bexley, and Cherry drove to meet him at the station with the
pony she had named Master Ratton, in that sort of tender defiance of
painful association found in those who own an exile.
'Eh! You don't look humbly cock-a-hoop, so I gather it was not to
stand for the borough.'
'Why don't you say the county at once? No, it was of a less public
nature.'
'Oh, then, I know! To give up the house to the happy pair. What? You
don't mean that it really was? That beats everything!'
'Well--it is undeniable that those are large quarters for Lance, his
cat, and his fiddle.'
'I do believe you have been and gone and consented! Well?' with a sigh,
as if she did not know what might come next.
'As it was purely out of consideration for Lance, I referred it to him.'
'Oh! it was all for Lance's sake--was it?'
'Entirely!'
There was a dryness in the last two replies, that pacified Cherry a
little.
'How Serious Mutton must be translated, to have the face--'
'He hadn't!'
'What? Alice did?'
'Yes. I believe that he had refused; but, you see, when Lance's comfort
was at stake, she was not to be withholden by a scruple or two.'
'Come--tell me how she managed it. Did she write?'
'No; she chose her time. Lance was gone to that Minsterham affair,
reporting--Lamb out of the way--when I heard a playful sort of little
tap at the office door, and there she stood, smiling and blushing.'
'Blushing!!!'
'I'll not insist, but so it appeared to me. I assure you she did the
thing to perfection--smiled and hesitated, and said she thought it was
a pity to let mauvaise honte stand in the way of what would be so
much better for Lance and all of us.'
'What, she wanted to have the house and do for him?'
'As one of the family!' then, taking no notice of Cherry's 'Faugh!'
he went on, 'It was curious to look at her as she sat there, and
think of the difference she was able to make; yet in many ways she is
superior to what she was then, and certainly prettier; but I own that
my feelings for her then seem an unaccountable infatuation.'
'Accountable only because you never spoke to anyone else, and did not
rave about the customers, like Lance. I am glad you were in triple
brass, though--and I can't help enjoying her having come to sue for the
shop that she used to despise.'
'Fie, Cherry!'
'I declare! I believe you have gone and consented, after all that
bravado!'
'I left it to Lance. Don't be furious, Cherry; the boy has had more
loneliness than is good for him since Dick Graeme has been in London,
and as he has his own notions about companionship, I was not sure that
he might not catch at it.'
'I have a better opinion of Lance.'
'And justly. But what he wants to do is to leave the old house
to Madame, and betake himself to Mrs. Froggatt. He says--truly
enough--that every evening he has free of his choir-practice, penny
readings, and all the rest of it, he should go out to look her up, and
that this would simplify the matter, and nothing would do the poor old
lady so much good as seeing him.'
'That's true; but to be going out there at all times, and in all
weathers!'
'That is nuts to him! Don't you know he has got a velocipede fever? He
has set up a thing that he calls Plato.'
'Un play toe, I should have thought.'
'It is Plato, because Mrs. Harewood announced that he and Bill had come
all the way to Minsterham, each upon his own philosopher.'
'I declare they make up things for that poor woman.'
'Or she makes them on purpose for their diversion; but at any rate,
Plato is lord of the ascendant just now, and demands exercise as if he
were flesh and blood. I own I was glad to see the boy in a craze again.'
'And letting Pur alone. It was very droll that the passion for making
that diurnal instead of weekly, set in with him just at the same age
that it did with you.'
'Yes. I am much obliged to Alda for nipping my plans in the bud.'
'The dignified weekly purr is not to change into a little petulant
daily mew!'
'No. It was a manifestation of restlessness, like his wanting new
stops for his organ, or being annoyed when there is a murmur against
over-elaborate music. I am afraid the fact is that he has outgrown the
whole concern, Cherry!'
'You never did!'
'That's nothing to the purpose. He has done all he can do with his
present means, and no doubt he is thrown away down there.'
'He never says so. And it is quite hard to get him here.'
'I wish I had not consented to leaving him there. That boyish coolness
and audacity that used to rush into all kinds of society are quite
gone, and there is no persuading him that he is not in a false position
among our neighbours.'
'He gets more into society at Bexley than ever you did.'
'Oh yes, he has quite made his place there; but there's no denying
that he has been left behind; and though he says not a word, there's
no doubt that since he went up to Oxford he has felt it a good deal
more. Well, in a couple of years at latest, the Rectory affair will be
settled; and if I can get Blackstone Gulley into my own hands, I may be
able to set him free.'
Lance had been to take a musical degree, and had spent a week with
William Harewood at Christ Church; and it might be true that the
vague spirit of enterprise for which Bexley afforded so little scope
had become remarkable since that time. However, no more was heard
of it during the preparations for installing the bride in the new
home. Robina came for the first fortnight of her holidays to take her
leave of the old rooms, and help in the removal of his belongings to
Marshlands, where the arrangement was as great a pleasure as poor Mrs.
Froggatt was capable of receiving. Moreover, Robina assisted in another
great change. Miss Pearson had--by Felix's management in conjunction
with some others interested in middle-class education--been enabled to
retire; the house and good-will of the establishment being made over to
the governing body of Miss Fulmort's school. Two ladies were provided
from thence, who undertook to make a home both for young teachers and
daily governesses, and were likely to raise the standard in Bexley.
They were old friends of Robina, and she did much to settle them in,
and pave their way. After this Robina went to Minsterham for one of the
brief visits that were never satisfactory, for Grace Harewood had made
a foolish marriage in the town, and Lucy did not improve, but became
louder and more daring, her native cleverness only making her more
unrefined and less simple than her mother. The Librarian never wondered
that his son soon escaped to his pupils at Penbeacon, and the Vale
Leston neighbourhood.
Before Robina had been many days at home, one Saturday forenoon when
she was undergoing Cherry's third attempt to satisfy unreasonable Will
with her portrait, while assisting Stella's German, Angela rushed
in--'One to make ready, two to prepare--one, two, three, if not four
swells--not away, but here--Hammonds, et cetera.'
'Here? Not imminent? Lady Hammond always sends notice.'
'Imminent? They are prancing up the drive! Only I cut across in "Miss
Ullin" to give warning. Shall I administer any orders to the dinner,
Cherry, before I make myself scarce?'
'No, thank you, there is quite enough. Just take my painting-apron,
that's all,' said Cherry, as coolly as Lady de la Poer would have heard
tidings of such an inroad; but when Amelia announced, 'Sir Vesey and
Lady Hammond in the drawing-room--and two more ladies, Ma'am--shall
I lay the table for them?' she quietly answered, 'Yes, I suppose
so.--Stella my dear, will you see if there is fruit enough in?' And
Stella stayed behind, while Cherry descended, aided by Robina's arm.
Felix was already in presence, and the moment the two sisters appeared,
a slight, brown, hazel-eyed girl in mourning exclaimed, 'O Miss
Underwood, this is just what I hoped!' and eagerly kissed her, while
Lady Hammond introduced 'Lady Caergwent' and 'Mrs. Umfraville,' the
latter a peculiarly sweet-looking elderly lady in widow's dress. There
were apologies for this sudden descent, telling that, on hearing how
near Vale Leston was, Lady Caergwent had been so eager to see the
Priory, that she had wrought with Sir Vesey, and prevailed.
Yet she did not seem to be profiting by the opportunity, for she
merely sat by Robina, looking, thought Cherry, neither like a
Countess nor a woman of twenty-three, but much more like a girl of
eighteen--petrified, all save her great eyes, by shyness; and Felix
regarded her precedence as not only unnatural but unlucky, with so
unconversible a subject, when he had to give her his arm, and seat her
at his right hand for the mid-day meal. Be it observed, that the veal
stewed with asparagus, and the pie that was to be cold for the morrow,
as fully justified Cherry's calmness, as did the pile of strawberries
and glasses of preserves her trust in Stella's handiwork.
Clement came in late and astonished, and with a very hazy idea who the
strangers were, just as Sir Vesey was saying, 'Now, Lady Caergwent, Mr.
Underwood will be able to answer your question.'
She coloured a little, and rather hastily asked whether there were any
tradition of French architects having been employed in the church, for
she had been struck with the foreign air of the tracery of the south
window. Not a little surprised, Felix soon found himself in the midst
of an architectural discussion, which taxed all his knowledge on the
matter, and stirred Clement on the other side into the ecclesiastical
aspect of the question; and all three fell into an eager talk, when
suddenly there was a general lull, and the young lady's voice was heard
saying, 'There is no heart or beauty in what is not symboli--' and
there she came to a full stop, and looked at Mrs. Umfraville with a
start of embarrassment, requited.
Appreciation of their church was no slight merit with any of the
Underwoods; and in the lionizing that ensued, the guest had eyes and
tongue full of architecture, romance, and history, even spying and
identifying a heraldic badge that supplied a missing link in the
history of the building. Angela thought it flagrant pedantry; but
Clement was so struck with her keen interest in all his arrangements,
and her real reverence, that he unlocked the grille of the chancel,
offered her to try the tone of his organ, and in spite of her total
ignorance on that head, he asked if 'Miss Umfraville' would not
like to see the choice needlework from St. Faith's in the chest in
his vestry. There she had no lack of ideas; she examined and asked
questions evidently with practical views, and could be hardly got
away to continue the tour, when she again satisfied him (and more) by
indignation on behalf of the monks--not sentimental, but evidently
straight out of Dean Hook's version of the dissolution of the abbeys;
and yet there was a quaintness and originality in the way she put it,
that amused Felix greatly.
In the painting-room an entreaty was preferred to see Miss Underwood's
drawings, which were indeed more worth looking at than when Lord de
Vigny had stirred her up. She always had at least one real work in
hand, and a good many studies. She was finishing a water-colour of the
scene in The Lord of the Isles, when Ronald's betrothal ring falls at
the feet of Isabel Bruce in the convent.
Lady Caergwent stood before this as if it touched some responsive
chord; but her aunt was busy with the portraits. Geraldine's emulation
had been fired by the cluster of miniatures in the drawing-room, and
she had undertaken to commemorate the present family in the same
style. She had produced very fair likenesses of Felix and of Wilmet,
besides her half-finished crayon of Robina, and a still better one of
Mr. Froggatt, which she was copying for his widow. Mrs. Umfraville was
delighted with these, and wished she could get anything as good of her
Kate, whom photography always represented as a fury, and portraiture as
a doll; but by this time Lady Caergwent had got Robina in the recess of
a window, asking, 'Are you still at Repworth?'
'Oh yes.'
'And how are they all?'
'Quite well, except that Lady Susan does not get over the remains of
measles.'
'Poor little Susie! What a monkey she was! but oh, I want to hear about
Gracie, and if she is more eager than ever.'
'She is very much sobered and subdued by reality.'
'And what's he? I always thought Grace would marry a great block, and
ripple and splash round him.'
'No, he is a little brisk satirical man, who laughs at her when she
gushes.'
'What chance is there for them?'
'Not till he gets preferment.'
'How tiresome! Ah! I forgot! Is not Mr. Harewood here?'
'At Penbeacon, but he comes here every Sunday. He knows Mr. Pemberton
very well.'
'Poor Gracie! Lady de la Poer wrote to Aunt Emily that she thought it
well that her steadiness should be tested; but it must have been hard
to see Addie go off with flying colours. How does Addie get on as a
chieftainess?'
'I had a letter from Gracie this morning. Do you like to see it?'
'Is she there? Do tell me how to say the name. I see there must be a
hideous roll in the bottom of one's throat.'
Robina gurgled. 'That was allowed to pass for it when we had a lesson
in pronunciation on pain of not being allowed to be bridesmaids.'
'Not a creature have I seen to tell me about the wedding.'
'Kate, my dear,' said Lady Hammond. 'No, you need not look so blank;
that is, if Robina will kindly let us take her home with us. Her
brother and sister are so good as to come to dine and sleep on Monday.'
For so it had been settled during the colloquy in the window, Sir Vesey
and his lady being no doubt very glad to find a play-fellow for his
younger visitor.
Colonel Umfraville had died after a long illness, rather more than
a year previously, and this was the first time his widow and niece
had come from home. The Hammonds were very old friends, but Mrs.
Umfraville still shrank from general society; so that when Felix and
Cherry arrived they found themselves the only other guests besides the
Harewoods, who had come earlier in the day.
No sooner had Cherry been conducted to the room, which, as usual, she
shared with her sister, than Robina said, 'You are going to be asked to
take Lady Caergwent's likeness.'
'My dear, I am not the sun, to do it in a minute!'
'And make a Brigand's Bride of her. No, you are to have her at the
Priory.'
'Are you gone crazy, Bobbie?'
'Be conformable, and you shall hear.'
'I'll hear, but I don't promise conformity.'
'Now listen. Nobody can do her fit to be seen; and Mrs. Umfraville
wants a nice water-colour like Mrs. Welsh's, which was exhibited. I
said I did not see how it could be managed; and then she asked if she
might not come to us for it; and Mrs. Umfraville let me know that she
would be very glad, for she has to go on into Wales to some old maids,
who would be horribly fussed if she brought Kate.'
'Well, we are old maids and old bachelors to boot. Why should not we be
horribly fussed by a live Countess running about the house?'
'Because she would be tame; and because you have common sense.'
'Oh, I thought you would say, because you were used to act keeper to
the species! In herself she may be inoffensive; but what sort of a tail
does she bring after her?'
'Six running footmen, eh?'
'Don't be saucy, Cock-robin. One grand maid would be bad enough,
scaring Theodore, and upsetting Sibby. No, no, Rob! leave countesses to
those who can live as sich.'
'You need alter nothing. You may do as Bear says you do--eat boiled
pork and greens every day at one o'clock--and she'll like it! She and
her aunt always do dine early; and as to her maid, she is a little
Repworth thing, just promoted from waiting on us in the school-room.
I'll answer for her. The very attraction is, that you'll leave her in
peace, and not beset her with dinner-parties.'
'She doesn't keep a duenna, then?'
'Duenna!'
'Well, heiresses in books always do. And in this case it seems to me
that the article would be desirable.'
'Oh, we settled all that! Wilmet is equal to as many duennas as you
like. She will come and do all the chaperoning.'
'Do you mean that she has undertaken it? Then I can only submit,
provided the Squire does.'
The Squire made a few wry faces, but consented, with all a man's
superior philosophy towards domestic disorganizations of which he
does not feel the brunt. Besides, both he and Wilmet were proud of
Cherry's talent, and the esteem in which Robina was held; and Mrs.
Umfraville had been confidential with Wilmet, saying how glad she was
to see her child willing to go among youth and brightness. The girl
had, she said, never made young friends except the De la Poers, and her
Wardour cousins, who had married, and gone out of reach. She had no
suitable neighbours, and 'circumstances' had hindered her being much in
London; and loss of her father-like uncle had not so much taken away
her spirits--for she was always bright--as given her a distaste to
society. She hated entertaining people or seeing strangers; cared for
nothing but her aunt, her books, her walks, and her poor; was oppressed
with the business of her property, and was altogether so studious and
indefatigable at three-and-twenty, and so averse to gaieties, that her
aunt feared she would never act up to her position, unless her habits
of seclusion were broken, and had therefore forced herself to come
on this journey with her. But there had been no real thaw till she
heard of Vale Leston and met Robina. Wilmet was not a little gratified
by hearing, at second-hand, Lady de la Poer's praise of the young
governess as a valued friend; and it was plainly to her charge that the
precious niece was committed.
When the visit took place, the Countess was soon forgotten in the
companion. At first, Felix was a little ceremonious, and she a little
shy, watching the family party as if they were acting a play; but as
the strangeness wore off, she began by being diverted, though silent
from long disuse of family chatter, and soon plunged in, with as droll
and eager a tongue as ever wagged.
Then Cherry found her face quite unlike her first reading of it, and
had to begin all over again. It was altogether, as Bernard said, a
jolly time. That young gentleman was, for the first time, smitten.
His devotion to himself and cricket had never before been disturbed;
and he had reached his eighteenth year without regarding woman as
intended for any purpose but to wait upon him. But bright eyes, merry
smiles, genuine fun, and mayhap the rank that gratified his vanity,
began to avenge the wrongs of the sex; and Bernard was enslaved enough
to amuse and edify his brothers and sisters--all the more, that the
simple-hearted Countess was perfectly unconscious, thought herself
immeasurably older than the great, handsome, idle fellow--half an inch
taller than the Vicar, by-the-by--stood on no conventionalities with
him, and when released by her task-mistress, would run down-stairs
to call him, nothing loth, to give her a row on the river, to blow
away the fumes of the painting-room. Quite unawares, she effected a
victory for Felix; for when she assumed that since he was going to
Oxford it must be to Keble College, and he found that she regarded it
as very stupid to do anything else, he entirely forgot all his former
objections, and was only too happy to gratify her.
Even Clement expanded more than usual, for he had never met a more
congenial spirit. Lady Caergwent's enthusiasm went much deeper than
externals, for she was well read in Church history, and a practical
worker in the present, being at Caergwent, that teacher, register
office, manager, letter-writer, &c., which the lady-of-all-work to a
parish must become, whether clerical or otherwise. 'There's Tina boring
her with shop!' would Bernard mutter, in a paroxysm of jealousy.
'Quite the reverse,' said Angela. 'She is the most thorough Goody I
ever came across, not excepting Clan Hepburn!'
It was not with any design of captivating sympathy, but because Lady
Caergwent had an unusual number of interests, and was intensely eager
about each in turn. Landlord cares were discussed with Felix, as Church
matters were with his brother. She was too headlong and unguarded not
often to say ridiculous things, but nobody more enjoyed having them
caught up and laughed at; and when Felix had made gentle fun of some
of her impetuous political economy, she looked up to him like an elder
brother. With the sisters she was soon as much at ease as in the De
la Poer schoolroom, making Robina her friend par excellence, but
apparently observing Angela, who, having no one to flirt with, was at
her best, and was drawn out by the 'Goody' sympathies.
'Robina,' said Lady Caergwent, entering her friend's room at that
confidential moment, near 11.0 p.m., 'you know all about everything!'
To which monstrous assertion Robina assented.
The next question was equally abrupt. 'Do you know that Angela wants to
go into a Sisterhood?'
'Oh! I thought that had gone off.'
'No, indeed! It is to be a very strict nursing one;' and as Robina
smiled a little, 'I cannot but believe I know the cause.'
'It always used to come on when she was going to be particularly
naughty.'
'Robina, I can't understand it in you; you do not seem like an elder
sister to pooh-pooh all higher aspirations in a younger one, or to have
no sympathy with deeper feelings.'
'You will only think the worse of me for not believing in the deeper
feelings,' said Robina; 'but indeed, I think I know Angela.'
'How odd it is! Then it is true that elder sisters never can do younger
ones justice!' said Lady Caergwent, looking at Robin in a meditative
kind of philosophical way, which made her laugh, and say, 'There, it is
no use to say anything!'
'I would not, but that I am going away; and I want you to promise that
if--if you see that any scruples hinder her happiness, you would tell
her how entire all that is at an end.'
'If I do,' said Robina, much pitying, but much diverted at the romance
that could ascribe either forbearance or self-sacrifice to Angela.
'He comes here, doesn't he?'
'He came down last summer, but I saw no symptoms of anything--to
signify,' added her conscience; 'in fact, I think he prefers Cherry.'
'I hope,' said poor Lady Caergwent musingly, 'that some day or other,
when we are all old women; Gracie, Addie, and I, may meet and smile at
all that is gone and past. I can laugh now, even while I am sorry, to
recollect my absurd presumption. I had the influence, delusion on my
brain, and believed mine the only right way, and dragooned every one
about wasting time. I am glad he asserted himself! What he has done
since showed how nonsensical I was. Does he like his work? no one tells
me.'
'You know what his chief said.'
'Oh! what?'
'To Mr. Welsh, the member for Ewmouth, so it is quite impartial--that
he never had a better fellow to stick to his work, or more
clear-headed. Yes! and we all think--here, I mean, as well as at
Repworth--that he is so much more of a man. Felix really talks in
earnest to him now, and so does his father. His nonsense is gone.'
'Oh, that's a pity.'
'I don't mean sensible nonsense, but you know his old absurd way.'
'Yes, of course that unlucky state of things was as bad as possible
for him. He would have been the poorest stick in creation not to have
broken loose. I have had a life-long lesson, and I hope it will save
me from getting hard and narrowly resolute, as authority makes single
women.'
'You could hardly do that with Mrs. Umfraville before you.'
'Hardly! dear Aunt Emily!' cheered and cheering all the while; 'as long
as I have her, nothing can go very wrong with me. I never thought I
could have enjoyed myself again away from her, as I have done here.'
'I am so glad, dear Kate!'
'If I could get any of you to Caergwent! But people are always going to
be married.'
On the Sunday, William Harewood, now a deacon, descended from
Penbeacon to church and dinner, with a train of five pupils, bringing
intelligence that the senior, who had been at the original pic-nic, and
was at Penbeacon for the last time, must leave it at the end of the
week, and entreated that he might not miss the entertainment.
There was a general acclamation. Lady Caergwent was wound up to
enterprise pitch, and, as an ardent botanist, was delighted with the
flora she was told to expect there; and Cherry only bargained for time
to make the pies and send for Lance. It was the only home-gaiety he
would willingly partake, because they always kept it to themselves
instead of making it serve as civility to the neighbourhood.
Lady Caergwent, after having much appreciated the Sunday-school in the
loose boxes, looked on, rather bewildered, at Angela's 'carrying on'
with four pupils at once, chattering, laughing, defying, and being
defied, in a manner, which, if it dissembled grief, was wonderfully
successful. To these was added young Charles Audley, coming up the
river in his skiff, for Evensong.
'Ha, Charlie, you're in luck! Hurrah for Penbeacon!'
'Are you going? Then the Kittiwake sha'n't sail! I've missed your
spread every time through that everlasting tub, and the Skipper shall
hear reason!'
'Oh, I thought nobody asked you!'
'As if your sighs had not been wafted on the breeze!'
'Puffs to swell the sails and transport bad rubbish!'
'What day is it to be?'
'Wednesday; but you've got no ticket. We are desperately select.'
'By-the-by, you've got a regular tip-topper, haven't you? Old Patakake
invited me under his breath to gaze at the Countess of Caergwent in Mr.
Underwood's carriage.'
'Ay! but we are bound by awful pledges not to regale the country
bumpkins with the sight of a real countess at feeding-time.'
'Then I shall repair to Harewood for an invite. Isn't this the girl
that was booked for young De la Poer?'
'Most ineffable bosh! It went the round of the papers, and my brother
sent it to Robin, who contradicted it flat. She'll never marry anybody,
and he'll never marry her!'
'Indeed! Why so?'
'He was wanted to. Isn't that enough?'
'He was wanted to?'
'Yes, poor wretch! till he cut and ran for dear life, and never thought
himself safe till he had got to the top of Penbeacon. That's the way
you swells doos it.'
'I'm no swell, thank goodness!' said Charlie, chucking a stone into the
river.
'No swell! A swelling at least! I always regarded you as a sacred
personage, condemned to noblesse oblige, and all that!'
'Catch it obliging me to what I don't choose!'
Such was the conversation, whose sounds would have amazed Lady
Caergwent, even more than did the sight: not that there was intentional
hypocrisy in Angela--she never acted a part, but showed herself exactly
as she felt at the moment, 'only more so,' and the moments were so
little in harmony.
Another person who was scandalized was Wilmet, who, in her capacity of
chaperon, was spending the evening at the Priory; and when she found
that this addition to the party was viewed as a matter of course,
sought Felix out, and declared that she would have nothing to do with
the affair unless it were made quite clear that Captain Audley was
aware of the extent of the intimacy.
Felix himself had once or twice doubted whether some steps ought not to
be taken, for the eldest brother having died and left only daughters,
Charlie was heir to the baronetcy, and old Sir Robert and his wife
had a reputation for haughtiness and exclusiveness. Their grandson
never went near them if he could help it, only enduring a duty-visit
by the help of shooting; and their son was even more slack, having,
in fact, never entirely forgiven their coldness to his young and
passionately-loved wife. If there should be anything more than fun
and froth in all the quips and cranks, jokes and pranks, among the
young people, there would assuredly be an explosion, and silence on
his part might justly be deemed unfair encouragement. Maybe, his was
an over-scrupulous mind, for he was already uneasy enough to make the
strength of Wilmet's remonstrance unnecessary. The fact of another eye
than his own having remarked it, was enough for him; and although he
gave Mrs. Harewood little satisfaction at the moment, the next forenoon
he jumped off his horse at her door, interrupting her unprosperous
attempts at making her eldest son remember six times four--
'Five minutes, Mettie!--Yes, Kester, you shall ride round to the
stables if you be off now.--I've asked Captain Audley to Penbeacon.'
'You don't mean that he will come?'
'Far from it; but it was the easiest way of suggesting that I wished
him to see for himself.'
'With what effect?'
'That of being civilly shown that I was a fool for my pains.'
'Do you mean that he does not care?'
'Not a straw. I can't make out whether he thinks the Somerville-Audley
blood beyond precaution, or whether it is all indolence, and dislike to
hinder the boy's amusement.'
'Did you speak plain enough for him to understand?'
'Oh yes, he understood--very nearly laughed at me, and changed the
subject. So now I must leave it; I can't forbid the young fellow the
house, and a warning to Angel would only precipitate it.'
'It is hard that one's sisters should be sacrificed.'
'My dear, everybody is not as much au grand srieux at that age as
we used to be. The Skipper, as Charlie respectfully calls him, may be
right, and there may be nothing in it; or if there should be, that
Angel of ours has quite strength and spirit enough for a struggle,
and maybe a disappointment. The truth is,' coming nearer, and looking
mysterious, 'we know nothing at all about it, and had best let it
alone.'
Wilmet's face of expectation melted into pardon for being teased; but
Kester, shouting, 'Uncle Felix, come!' put an end to the conference,
rather an odd one to be taking place at the moment when the Countess
was beguiling the constraint of sitting, by dreaming over Isabel Bruce,
and the magnanimity of rescuing the intended recluse by--Alas! she had
never had a ring to throw at her feet--only that whisper which Robina
seemed unwilling to convey.
CHAPTER XL.
A K T STROPHE.
'When shall we three meet again,
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?'
Shakespeare.
Lance did not appear on the evening before the picnic, and announced by
letter, the next morning, that he could not get away. Felix regretted
not having as usual changed places with him, but could hardly have
absented himself from such a guest as the present without discourtesy;
and Cherry, looking at the blunt brevity of the postal-card, feared
that the high-sounding title of their new friend was adding to
Lance's almost morbid sense of being in a different sphere from their
surroundings. However, she had little time to think; for their only
other guest, Gertrude May, had come by long promise to sleep at the
Priory the night before; and the party were collecting in the hall,
while the waggonet, a farm companion being allotted to the chestnut for
the nonce, the Harewood phaeton, and Master Ratton with his basket,
were marshalled at the door.
'The Vicar says there is going to be a thunder-storm,' said Lady
Caergwent, in rather a solemn voice.
'The Vicar always has a thunder-storm coming whenever it isn't a fall
of snow,' returned Bernard.
'Hush, Bear! Kate won't have the Vicar's name taken in vain,' laughed
Angela.
'Angela! Is not that expression a rebuke to itself?' whispered Cherry.
'There's not a symptom of a cloud,' added Gertrude, 'but the heat is
overpowering.'
'Yes!' said Cherry. 'Lance could hardly have gone in such scorching as
this.'
'We shall find mountain-air at the top,' said Robina, 'when once we can
get there.'
'And the storms there are magnificent,' added the deep voice of
Clement, as he strode out in broad hat and alpaca coat, pausing to put
his despatches into the letter-box, and inspect the barometer.
'Let that poor thing alone, Clem,' called out his eldest brother. 'We
mean to enjoy ourselves.'
'Are you affected by thunder?' the Vicar asked, seeing that Lady
Caergwent did not look very happy.
'Not affected really, but I don't like it at night, or out of doors,'
she answered; 'but I don't think there can be a storm to-day.'
'Never saw weather less like it,' added Bernard decisively, gazing up
at the sky, as if to dare it to thunder. 'Hollo, Charlie! what have you
annexed!'
For Charles Audley appeared walking up from the river, very hot,
and holding upon its back, like a baby, a huge blue lobster, which
impotently flapped its fringed tail, brandished its claws, and waved
its whiskers.
'What do you propose to do with that marine monster?' asked Cherry.
'Eat him, to be sure! He's my contribution. I bought him of old Jenny
as I came up. Take care, Kester! he'll grab you as tight as the Mayor
of Plymouth. Have you a basket, or anything to put him in?'
'He's alive,' said Cherry, recoiling.
'Of course. In civilian costume, you see. Of course the natives up
there have some sort of kettle. I've done dozens of lobsters in the
yacht.'
'What fun!' cried Angela. 'He shall go on the driving-box, to
be made lobster-salad of. Get a basket; Kester, let his whiskers
alone--ridiculous creature!'
'Oh!'
It was a soft little breath, but Charles turned round. 'You're not
afraid of him, Stella! See! his claw is tied. Don't you like it?'
'I'm not afraid; but I don't like it.'
'Like Kate's thunder-storm,' laughed Angela; 'not afraid, but she
doesn't like it.'
Stella stood her ground: 'I don't like keeping the poor thing in
misery.'
'Nay!' said Angela. 'Why don't you send that cruel boy to restore it to
its native element?'
'That would be nonsense,' steadily said Stella; 'but I think it would
be kinder to have it killed at once, than to jolt it all the way up
there.'
'Now, Charlie, it is absurd to yield to that child's
tender-heartedness. She is a perfect Brahmin, and can't believe that
those cold-blooded fishy things don't feel.'
'I believe the sentiment is general,' said Lady Caergwent, eagerly but
nervously: 'though I had not the resolution of Princess Fair-Star,' she
added, aside to Cherry; who rejoined, 'Not being sure whether it might
not be the native custom to consume raw lobsters. Oh! here come Wilmet
and Eddy; so let us pack. Lady Caergwent, do you prefer dignity or
landscape? for that perch by my brother is the best for the latter.'
'Landskip, to be sure. You delightful person!' cried her Ladyship,
springing to the driving-seat.
'May I invite you, not to our skip, but our springs, Cherry?' asked the
Major.
'No, thank you,' said Cherry, who had seen a pair of wistful eyes lose
one spark at the Countess's ascent, and another at this invitation. 'My
springs rival yours; and Gertrude and I mean to be snug behind Master
Ratton.'
Gertrude's face beamed delight as she took the other place; and the
Vicar ingeniously coiled his length into the out-rigger at the back
ready to spring out on any emergency of gate or hill, in spite of his
apparent absorption in the newest and most strongly-flavoured of Church
journals.
In consideration of Ratton's small capacities, he had the start, Cherry
leaving the rest to pack as they chose; and when, on the first long
ascent, she was overtaken, it was first by the Harewoods, the Major
leading his horse, and Wilmet and her youngest son in front, Stella
and Kester behind; and the foremost of the waggonet-load was walking
beside, with his hand upon the back-seat.
The larger vehicle was empty, all but the driving-seat, where Lady
Caergwent and Felix were talking so eagerly, that Cherry laughed, and
said, 'I wonder what nut they are cracking?'
'Is she not dreadfully clever?'
'Most curiously simple. Whatever is in her head, out it all comes.'
'Your brother likes it!'
'There's a great deal of it, to be sure, but it is so original, and
genuine, and funny; and besides, she is easily daunted. Robin says her
uncle kept her in great order, but she was devotedly fond of him; and
whenever she catches herself going too fast, she starts and stops, as
if he were looking at her.'
'In order? Not a spoilt child and heiress--a Lady Clara Vere de Vere?'
'No, indeed! Lady Clara took Tennyson's advice, and began teaching the
orphan boy to read, and the orphan girl to sew--operations she much
prefers to entangling simple yeomen. Eh, Daisy! did you think she had a
simple yeoman there?' said Geraldine, in an amused but rather indignant
voice, as she perceived symptoms of confusion.
'Oh no, never really! but when one's brother has a sister-in-law who
assimilates all the gossip of the place, one can't help hearing. If
mouths could but be stopped!'
'Which they can't; but they can be confuted.'
'How, by her marrying?'
'Certainly not,' said Clement, from behind, much disconcerting Gertrude.
'I thought him lost in his ecclesiastical organ,' said Cherry,
laughing. 'I believe nothing would have roused him but such an enormity
with regard to his live Countess Marilda.'
'I merely think,' he protested, 'that Lady Caergwent perceives how much
more she can do for the Church as a single woman.'
'I agree,' said Cherry, 'to the unlikelihood of her marrying--most
especially, I know whom it won't be, let them have their heads together
as much as they will. See them now--not a bit of the view will they
see! That's right! prod them with your parasols! Make them look round,
or they will miss the great view of the castle and the estuary.'
'Felix will never do that,' said Clement, 'He seems to me to value
people according as they appreciate the scenery of the Ewe.'
'He never got over Marilda's knitting all the way up the river.'
'Or Mr. Bruce's saying, "You've a snug little box here, Mr. Underwood,
if it wasn't so close to the river." Felix's face was a sight--just as
he had got to the turn down the hill, which he says comes as a fresh
delight to him whenever he comes home.'
'No wonder, there's nothing like it!' said Gertrude. 'Ah! they have
stopped to look.'
'Click, click! gee-up, Ratton! we'll pass them again.'
So they did, Lady Caergwent calling out, 'Ah! I pity you. You are too
low to see this glorious sight.'
'All very well talking,' called back Cherry; 'but who had to be poked
to make them look at all?'
'Ay! What do you think they were doing!' shouted Angela. 'Sounds
reached us about Casuistry and Jeremy Taylor.'
'You could hear nothing in the din that came up to us,' retorted Felix,
looking round.
Indeed, Lady Caergwent was in her element. She liked nothing so well as
a kind of discussion on character, a sort of fitful Friends in Council,
plentifully interlarded with historical or fictitious allusions; but
she did not often get the opportunity, for her historical tastes were
so much more vivid than most of her contemporaries, that she always
had to guard against seeming pedantic; but, thanks to Felix's habit of
keeping a solid book in hand, and always thoroughly getting up whatever
he had to write about, he was a man of great range of information, and
could reply to her bright crude fancies with depth or sportiveness as
occasion served, enjoying the tte--tte as much as she did.
Meantime, the horses climbed higher still and higher, rougher still
and rougher, till the final gate was opened; the wheels emitted only
an occasional creak on the soft bent-grass, and the breeze refreshed
the travellers, who were soon hailed by all the pupils and all the
dogs, and conducted to the Penbeacon saloon. This was a deserted
slate-quarry, where the mounds of rubbish were old enough to be covered
with hawthorn, mountain-ash, travellers-joy, and exquisite wreaths of
bramble, so as to afford shade at any period of the day; and around was
a delicious carpet of soft grass, thyme, eye-bright, ladies'-fingers,
and rock-rose. Beneath lay the whole panorama of the Ewe valley and
the estuary, the bridge spanning it, and the Castle jutting out into
the sparkling sea, where here and there a sail, white or umber, or
puff of steam, glided along the blue. The intense clearness of the air
rendered the scene a fresh joy to those who knew it best, and entranced
the new-comers, though they were told they would see it still better
when they had climbed to the top of Penbeacon, which, with tracking the
source of the Leston, was a regular part of the programme.
Operations could, however, only begin with preparations for the meal;
and while Felix, Clement, and Major Harewood drove on to deposit horses
and carriages at the farm, there was a general unpacking of hampers,
Cherry securing that which was to be untouched till dinner-time, by
sitting upon it.
'I say,' observed Will to Robina, as he opened one of the letters that
they had brought up to this unpostal region, 'here's a go! He may
be coming to-day!' and he signed towards Lady Caergwent, who, with
Bernard, was compounding a salad.
'Impossible! To-day?'
'That depends.'
'Knowingly?'
'Not unless it be through you.'
'I have not written since she came.'
'So the daily fire has slackened.'
'Mr. Pemberton enjoys that.'
'And once a week is deemed enough for me!'
'Old stagers such as we are! But, seriously, Willie, what can bring
him?'
'The scent of Penbeacon!'
'I thought he was in Scotland.'
'Yes, but his two months' holiday was up on Monday; and when he came
to London, his office was painting, or white-washing, or something, so
he got a week's grace; and London being a desert, he said he should
look in at Lady Mary's, and then run on here; but when he left,
doubtful.'
'Then it depends on how he likes it at Lady Mary's? Have you mentioned
it?'
'No, I knew I should catch it from you if I did.'
'Discreet boy! I have hopes of you. In the uncertainty we had better
keep it to ourselves. It would only put her into a tremor, and spoil
her day.'
'Poor girl! I hoped it had gone off, for I see small prospect for
her. He is getting on well, likes his work, and will hardly run into
thraldom again, since he broke loose in time to make a man of himself.'
'Don't you envy him?'
'Yes, when you fiddle for an hour over every knot in that string! Let
me cut it and have done with it.'
'Remember holy poverty, Sire, as the Lady Abbess said to Louis XV. over
the jam-pot; or rather, remember that this has to be packed up again in
six hours' time.'
'Don't make me remember six hours hence. This is my prime day of all
the year, and I can't recollect any end to it.'
'There then, can you carry that pile of plates without a catastrophe?'
'A K T strophe is what is apprehended.'
'Come, you two,' called Angela, 'affection is misplaced over the
crockery. Here are plates wanted to weigh down the table-cloth; there's
a ruffling gusty wind that gets under it.'
'Illustrating the earthquake theory,' said pupil No. 1, who was keeping
it down with his knee.
'Or thunder-storm practice,' responded Pupil No. 2.
'Not a word more about thunder!' cried Angela. 'Lady Caergwent hates
it; and as she views our Vicar as a mild embodiment of all the General
Councils, the regular Clementine prediction has upset her already. I
say! what are you doing? Apricot-tart at first course!'
'Apricot-tart, you don't say so! Three cheers for Miss Underwood!'
'Don't let blind enthusiasm put its foot into it.'
'Or you'll have to eat it all.'
'What a temptation!'
'Wasn't he already a greedy beggar, who stuck at no trifles! Don't
you remember his tucking in the apples at the fair that the elephant
wouldn't have?'
'And swallowing nineteen fresh eggs to clear his voice for the concert!'
'I say, Miss Underwood, what songs have you brought?'
'And what's to become of the Der Freischtz song without your brother
Lance?'
'Can't the Squire take his part? His voice is a capital one.'
'Oh yes--he is thrush to Lance's nightingale--not so high--fuller in
the lower notes--and he can't play such tricks with it,' said Angela;
'but whether you'll get him is another thing. That Countess of ours has
no more music in her than an owl!'
'Can't she be suppressed? Whoever heard of a Penbeacon picnic without a
song?'
The feast took place with all the merriment produced by the combined
forces of seventeen people, not one of whom had reached the middle
point of life; but when it was over, the sun was still so powerful, and
the air so sultry, as to bring to mind that this festival had taken
place earlier in the year than usual. No one was willing to quit the
luxurious nests in the bracken, and the ceremony of mountain-scaling
was deferred till after the songs for which the pupils clamoured, and
Lady Caergwent heartily said how unlike fine old songs in the open
air would be from the tiresome drawing-room performances, that seemed
to her an invention for interrupting interesting conversation. In the
pause of preparation, she made, however, some inquiries whether the
arrow-head she had been told about grew on the intended path, and if
not, how it could be reached.
'I'll show you the way,' cried Bernard eagerly. 'It is only down
there,' when he heard the place.
'Only!--my dear Kate! I don't let him inveigle you--it is nearer two
miles than a mile and a half,' said Robina; 'and all through stony
thickets and bogs--and in this heat! We will try to drive you there, or
send for it.'
'I'll go; I'll be back long before they've done singing,' said Bernard.
'What is it like?'
Lady Caergwent hesitated; but he would take no refusal, and having been
told it was white, had three roundish sort of petals, and arrow leaves,
and grew in the water, the lazy youth, who would seldom move an inch
in a sister's service, went striding down the hill side, with his coat
over his shoulder, and his pugaree streaming behind him. Cherry was
afraid he would incur Lance's fate; but Felix laughed, and said he was
glad to see he could do anything for anybody; and besides, the sun was
becoming less fierce.
So Cherry hastily sketched his retreating figure as a feature in the
drawing she annually made of the group at the quarry during the music.
Gertrude May had a fair ear, and good though not much trained voice,
and she was exceedingly happy, for even without Lance the Underwoods'
singing was a remarkable and beautiful thing. To make William into
Polyphemus, and hear him thunder out 'Ruddier than the cherry,' while
Felix and Angela served as his Acis and Galatea, was always a part
of the programme, and it was all Wilmet enjoyed, for were not her
boys--even though they were hers--boys of the period? Had not her son
Edward come, against her better judgment, because his papa wished it?
and had not his combined fatigue and restlessness come to a pitch where
there was nothing for it but to take him away to the farm-house, and
let him have the sleep he had missed in the forenoon?
Then, even in her first outline, Cherry missed three figures; and
when, after completing her general sketch, she returned to touch up
the individuals, Kester, who had been portrayed running up and down
a mound with the dogs, was asleep against his father; nothing was to
be seen of Will but a pair of black knees peeping out of the bracken,
and the head of Scamp's brother Chaff, who was sitting on his breast;
and Lady Caergwent had vanished altogether. She was further becoming
sensible that the shadows were less sharp, the light less clear, the
heat heavier, and presently that a great black cloud had mounted far
into the sky behind the quarry and the hill; and beginning to think
that Clement's prognostications might be justified she was waiting for
the end of Lance's setting of 'Mont Blanc is the King of Mountains,'
to call attention to the fact that Penbeacon was borrowing his vest of
cloud, when the announcement was made by a vivid flash of lightning,
followed with appalling rapidity by a peal of thunder. No one stirred
till the thunder had rolled itself away. Then everybody said, 'There!'
and started up, just as a few big rain-drops splashed down. Kester woke
with a scream of fright; and his father, throwing a plaid round him,
ran off with him towards the farm. Felix and Clement had both sprung to
Geraldine, and were helping her up. There was a mile of open hill and
stony road to the farm--a long walk for her under any circumstances;
and no one had any protection bigger than a sun-shade. There was
another terrific flash and burst of thunder, and the hail-stones came
rattling down, so large as to give sharp blows.
'She can never walk it,' said both brothers at once. 'Cherry, you must
ride!'
'Oh!' gasping, 'you can't.'
'Can't we? Haven't we often? There!' and in a moment the hands were
clasped, queen's-cushion fashion, beneath her, the necks were bent for
the arms to be thrown round them, even as had been done many a time in
childhood before, only then Edgar had generally been one supporter.
She hardly felt the beating of the pitiless storm; and when the wind,
hail and roar of the tempest came with a terrific deafening whirl,
she felt a strange sense of security; and even when the most fearful
of all the flashes seemed to burst into the ground close before them
simultaneously with the discharge like a thousand cannon overhead, and
she heard Clement's whispered ejaculation, her first feeling was, 'All
together--together!'
The others all darted past them in the general sauve qui peut.
Wilmet, watching in anxiety at the farm-house porch, received first,
half laughing, half panting 'Oh! isn't it jolly?' Angela and the
longest-legged pupil; secondly, her husband, with their little son in
his arms. 'This is like an Indian storm,' he said, and sat down, a good
deal spent, and breathing hard.
Then came, dashing in together, the main body--Gertrude May, four
pupils, Stella with Charles Audley; and they had no sooner recovered
breath, than in came William and Robina, who had been delayed by
Robina's attempt to secure the table-cloth, which had been blown so
entirely over her, that Will had had some difficulty in releasing her
from the flappings. They satisfied Wilmet that Cherry and her bearers
were quite safe, and at the entrance of the lane; and John thereupon
started up, and declared he should go and relieve them, but at that
moment they were seen at the gate, Cherry on her own legs, and Felix
and Clement, all in a glow, on each side of her. 'It was so nice,' she
said, as her sister anxiously met her. 'Only think of having two such
brothers! Oh no, I'm not frightened--no, nor in the least wet!'
Nobody was wet, for the hail-stones had rebounded, and one or two
that had been captured were wonders worth preserving, had that been
possible, looking like nitre-balls. Felix was drawing a pencil line
round one on a piece of paper, when Robina exclaimed, 'Where's Lady
Caergwent?'
'Didn't she come first?'
'I thought she was up-stairs.'
'No--no one came in before Angela,' testified Wilmet. 'Is every one
else here?--Bernard?'
'He must be sheltering down by Lang's pool. Never mind him! But she! So
afraid of thunder too!'
'Unpardonable!' burst out Felix, in dismayed self-condemnation, as he
again pushed his head as deep as it would go into his hat, and hurried
out again, Clement and William after him; John was going too, but
his wife caught him--'No, no, there are quite enough! Remember the
neuralgia. See, it has turned to pouring rain!'
And John submitted, for three strong men could do all that could avail
one young girl, even under possibilities terrible to think, not only
from the lightning, but among those dangerous places, steep slopes,
and sharp precipices, where a stranger, blinded by hail and lightning,
might so easily stumble. The farmer was at market, and his wife could
only offer her 'odd man' when he should have done milking; but Mr.
Harewood knew the place thoroughly by this time.
It rained in torrents as they set out, the thunder-cloud blotting
out all but the path under their feet, though the lightning was more
distant. They searched the quarry, and shouted, 'Any one here? Lady
Caergwent!' But the mocking echoes only answered, 'Here!' and 'Gwent!'
while they searched in vain--till 'Holloa.' Was it a response? Felix
shouted. Another 'Holloa!' but hardly from feminine lungs--certainly
not from any one suffering any damage. No--there was something tall
struggling up the hill through the rain. 'Bear! you've not seen her?'
'Who? Why in the name of wonder are you getting a shower-bath
gratis out here?' said he, panting up to them, his arms full of
something shiny, and battered, and green; and, as a word or two
explained--'Looking for Lady Caergwent! Every one missed her'--the
boy's eyes flashed so that Felix really thought he was going to knock
him down. 'Left her out here? Why, savages wouldn't have done it! If I
had but been there! Dear, sweet girl!'
Just then, something dark was seen lying under a rock, and slightly
moving; Clement silently pointed in horror, Bernard gave a sort of
howl, waved them all back as unworthy to touch her, and leapt forward.
He soon came to a stand-still. It was one of the rugs on which they had
been sitting, which had drifted there, rolled up by the wind.
'I begin to hope she may be in the cart-shed,' said Will. 'Let us go on
there.'
Bernard strode with a certain tragic authority in advance, as they
proceeded, scrambling over a low stone wall into a steep sloping field,
scattered with stones and sheep, not easily discernible from one
another in the downpour, save for some getting up and running away,
while the others remained motionless. At length appeared a fabric of
rough stones, rougher piles, and roughest slates, a kind of shelter
thrown over the angle of the wall. Through all the rush and roar came a
murmur of voices, and through the drifting streams of rain, two figures
were discernible, one heather-coloured, the other grey. So much the
others had seen, when Bernard, with a sort of tiger-bound forward,
shouted, 'You rascal!--Never mind, Lady Caergwent, I am here!'
'Holloa, Bernard!' said a cool voice.
'De la Poer!' and Bernard stood transfixed, not even joining at first
in the general clamour of, 'So shocked!' 'You here!' 'How could we miss
you?' 'I never was so sorry!' 'It was all my own fault!' 'Oh, never
mind,' &c.; but when his voice was heard again, 'Lady Caergwent, if I
had been there, this should never have been! These brothers of mine!'
'Not a word more till she is safely housed,' interposed Felix. 'Don't
you see how drenched she is?--Will you trust yourself to me after this
inexcusable neglect, Lady Caergwent?'
'I told you it was I who lost myself,' she said, with a most forgiving
radiance in her eyes, glancing through the dark hair that flew about
her hatless head.
They wrapped her in the cloak they had brought, and tied the hood
down over her hair with a handkerchief; but when Bernard would have
proffered his arm on the side unengrossed by Felix, he found himself
forestalled, and could only fume in the rear--such of his denunciations
of the general barbarous carelessness as were not blown down his throat
again by the wind being received by Will Harewood, with comical little
sounds that nettled him exceedingly.
The contention with wind, rain, stones, and torrents, was far too
severe for any one else to attempt speaking, while the blast swept
round the hill side as if trying to whirl them off their feet; and
even when the lee side of the barn was reached, Lady Caergwent was too
breathless to do anything but gasp out that Mr. Underwood must not
blame himself--it was her own fault, and all right.
A whole cluster of anxious faces crowded the deep porch, to receive the
dripping figures that came in, looking, as the delighted Kester said,
like the cats that became pools in Strewelpeter. Some used their first
breath for laughter, others for the long pent-up apologies, which were
cut short by Wilmet and Robina bearing the young lady up-stairs to be
dried.
The room was homely, for their hostess was not of the advanced order,
and had no fine daughters. She appealed to Mrs. Harewood on the
expediency of bed, warm water, and something hot; but the Countess, her
eyes dancing through her plastered elf-locks, laughed all to scorn,
only begging for the loan of some clothes. However--will she, nill
she--while struggling with the soaked adhesive sleeves of her jacket,
a foot-bath and big ewer, and a tray of various beverages, made their
appearance, putting her into fresh fits of mirth, as Robina tugged at
the refractory garment, and Mrs. Hodnet endeavoured to add lumps of
sugar at every polite refusal of the negus.
'Lady Caergwent, the bed or the negus?' said Wilmet, at last, with full
authority.
'The dagger or the bowl? The bowl then, if you please, when my hand
comes out. I'm like Agamemnon now. Oh!--there!--thanks, Copsey. I hope
the rest of the coats of the onion will come off easier. Thank you! oh,
so much, Mrs. Hodnet! That will be beautiful!'
Herself of the squarest proportions, Mrs. Hodnet was bustling about to
find something wearable by the tall slim girl. At last, after her best
violet silk had been found impracticable, a linsey skirt and a soft
silk shawl seemed possible materials; and she withdrew to superintend
the preparations for tea; and Wilmet departed likewise, from the
mixed motives of believing that the two girls wanted to be left to
a tte--tte, of uneasiness as to the whereabouts of her sons,
and desire to secure the swallowing of the like portion by Felix and
Clement.
The moment the door was shut, Lady Caergwent threw both arms round
Robin, and hugged her tight, with a long sob-like sound of 'O Copsey,
Copsey!'
'Then it was--'
'Yes--yes--yes! Did you know?'
'Willie told me he might possibly come; but it was too uncertain to
mention. We thought Lady Mary would be sure to keep him.'
'Mary was from home.'
Robina longed to ask more, but did not quite know how, and applied
herself to make the best of Mrs. Hodnet's toilette apparatus, in
dealing with the hair, which the tempest had deprived of every fragment
of head-gear. 'Shall I twist it, or do it up in long plaits?'
'Any way for me to get down again! Oh, how little I thought it!'
'Felix was in despair when he found you were missing; but you see the
first thought of all my brothers has always been Cherry.'
'Quite right--and you see I wasn't there at all. You know my ears
are stupid, and though there's more sense in your music than in most
people's, it did not put out of my head some marsh-cinquefoil I thought
I had spied as we went by; and I fancied, while you were singing,
I could creep off after it, without all the fuss of the gentlemen
wanting to get it for me. No one saw me, and I did find some delicious
things, only I'm afraid I lost them. On I went, from one to another,
like the bad folks in an allegory, away from the rocks and the singing,
lured by the flowers in the bog--till, sure enough, I lost my way, and
the sharp wall of rock above me, which I thought part of the quarry,
turned out to be no such a thing. There, to bring in the demoniacal
element, a horrid little black cow came up and stared at me. You know
what a goose I am about horned monsters; and I thought the whole herd
would be coming home to be milked, so I didn't stare the beast out of
countenance, as I am aware is the correct thing; but as there was a
high ledge, a sort of shelf in the precipice, I scrambled up out of
the way. I suppose the animal had never seen a young woman in such a
position, for not only did it stand in contemplation, but two or three
of its congeners came up and stood gazing at me, out of their spiteful,
curly, shaggy faces, with white pointed horns, like the imps of the
piece. Then it struck me that these were not quiet christianable kine
going home to be milked, but horrid Scottish cattle at pasture, keeping
no hours at all, but free to stand staring till I dropped on their
horns. So I put whatever dignity I had in my pocket, and squalled,
fancying you were all round the corner, but the only effect was to make
the brutes toss their heads and stare the harder.'
'Did you see the storm gathering? Behind the hill, as we were, we
neither saw nor thought of it till that first grand peal; I was so
sorry for you.'
'Somehow, I minded it less than I should have thought. The grandeur
and the solitude took some of the nonsense out of me; but the hail
was very bad; it knocked me about so; and the wind tore at me like
a human fury. After my hat was carried off, those hail-stones would
have been quite dangerous, but that there was a good thick bower of
traveller's joy (well-named) up above; and one comfort was, the demons
didn't like it, stuck up their tails, and galloped off. I thought none
of them could have the face to run at me in a thunder-storm, and I
tried to come down, but I found it was a Martinswand on a small scale;
and I could get neither up nor down. So I remained, the butt of the
elements, waiting to make another effort till the wind would let me
alone. At last, I saw a human being in the distance, battling with
the wind. I thought it was Bernard coming back, or if not, I was past
caring; so I called, and it came. I only thought of Bernard, and it
must have thought itself in for an adventure with an escaped lunatic,
or wild woman of the woods. "Trust yourself to me," he said; and then
I knew the voice. But it was like a dream, for I didn't seem surprised
at first. At least, I don't know; I think I must have made a fool of
myself somehow, for he was coaxing and comforting me, till somehow he
got me to the shed, and I came to my senses a little, and thought he
was only pacifying me; so I asked whether I had really been in such
a dreadful state, and said I was all right, and that he need not go
on. "Why should I not go on?" he said. Oh, I dare say it was very
nonsensical--but don't you and Mr. Harewood talk nonsense sometimes?'
'Egregious!' said Robin, laughing, and kissing her. 'Oh, I am so very
very glad, dearest!'
'He said, the longer he went on, the more he found he really did care
for me in spite of it all, horrid and disgusting as I had been.'
'Was that the nonsense?'
'No, you thorny Copse, but his pretending I was all right!'
'Ah, he has thought so this long time! I have been sure it wanted very
little to come right.'
'Oh, tell me! for while they were dragging me through the storm, it
came over me that maybe he was just surprised into it, and that I
ought--I ought not--'
'Who is talking nonsense now, Kate? No--if you had been at Repworth you
would have seen how altered he has been--ill at ease, as if something
had gone out of his life--only able to bear his restlessness by hard
work.'
'Ah! is it not a pity to spoil him for his work?'
'You will find him work enough.'
'Make him a land-agent!'
'A good deal more. You will give him power that he is much fitter to
use now.'
'Well, there's plenty to come before that. Dear Aunt Emily! I say,
Robina, nobody ought to be told before them all, you know. There,
thank you! what a deliciously queer figure,' as she looked in the
glass, 'and what a pair of cheeks! The farm-house port has flown into
them! Am I to put on these stockings? That dear woman's legs must be as
big as her bed-posts! I wish people wore peasant costumes here! A pair
of horse-hair butterfly's-wings now on my head, a striped petticoat,
and orange stockings! At least it is better than when I jumped into a
pond out of the way of the thunder, and Lady de la Poer put me to bed!
Dear people! I could jump, but for these elephant-slippers, to think of
getting back to them.'
'Oh, please--let me get that skirt straight.'
'Very well! Do I fidget horribly? I beg your pardon, Robin; but how can
one stand still when one is all fizzing with gladness! When I think of
the old ache, when he came here--and when I found it was not you, I
thought it must be Angel--I really came, hoping to find out, and--'
'Throw the ring at her feet!'
'You witch! only I never had the ring to throw! Oh, this is much better
than being magnanimous! Is that your ring? His hair? How charming!
Ernest shall give me nothing else!'
'Ah, there will not be time for yours to wear out! Mine has had two
renewals, though I always keep part of the old foundation.'
'Dear Robina! I wish--no, it's not right to wish that; besides, it's a
horrid place. I suppose Mr. Pemberton must have the first living that
is going at Repworth.'
'Yes. We think of a grammar-school, or a mastership, somewhere, when
Willie's five years at Christchurch are up, and we have made up enough
for a nest-egg.'
'That's what I should like! Ah! am I talking of what I know nothing
about?' and she gave an earnest kiss. 'There, I'm presentable now! May
Ernest only be in the farmer's leathern gaiters!'
'No chance of that, with so many gentlemen to equip him. But for your
feet, you would do very well.'
For the fault of Kate Caergwent's face was want of glow, and this was
fully supplied. The two plaits were picturesque, and Mrs. Hodnet's
shawl of crimson silk, and the dark skirt, made a becoming garb; but
walking was not easy, and the descent of the stair was a series of
flaps, as she came into a sort of vestibule, containing staircase and
big clock.
'Hermione descends to the sound of soft music!' exclaimed Lord Ernest,
springing up to meet her; and they both stood still to laugh.
'Hail, hail, all hail! was the music,' she said.
'Yes, Miss Underwood,' grasping her hand mightily. 'I give you infinite
credit for the mise en scene.'
'Undeserved!'
'Nay, stage-effect could not have been exceeded, though perhaps things
went rather to the verge of sensation.--Katie, you are flushed still!
Ought she not to be put between blankets, and dosed with water-gruel?'
'Then we ought "all to have a little water-gruel!"'
'There's a sumptuous tea-fight preparing in there. They've fetched the
hamper, and Mrs. Hodnet is producing all the delicacies of the season!'
'Is Lady Caergwent there?' and Bernard came forward to meet her; while
Lord Ernest paused to answer Robina's congratulating eyes. 'Yes, when I
found that it was her own self, there was no helping it. I forgot all
about earning her better opinion. I could only ask her forgiveness. I
shall tell my father I owe it all to you.'
'Nonsense!'
'I do, though. If you hadn't all been what you are, I should have made
an irrevocable ass of myself.'
'As--oh dear!--some one else is doing,' said Robina to herself, as she
caught the words Bernard was addressing to the Countess, standing in
the door-way of the great farm kitchen. 'I am only sorry for what you
were exposed to in my absence.--My brothers are dreadfully cut up about
it, but I know you'll overlook it. They are excellent fellows, but you
see they have never had any advantages.'
An ineffably funny glance passed between Lord Ernest and Robina, who
had a strong desire to take Mr. Bear by the shoulders and shake him,
only unluckily her head was only on a level with those same broad
shoulders.
'I never could have overlooked it, if they had left Geraldine to look
after any one else,' said Lady Caergwent, with some of the hauteur she
could assume, and very decidedly moving forward, but with the flowers
in her hand that Bernard had brought her.
The party far exceeded the capacities of Mrs. Hodnet's parlour, where
the lodgers usually sat, and were much more happily disposed of in
the great kitchen, one of those still flourishing in old farm-houses,
spacious though low, with a stone floor, a long oak table, and benches
and a dresser glittering with metal and fine old earthenware, a great
hearth with a lively fire, and a deep latticed window making quite a
little chamber, where stood the small round table and two chairs, the
leisure resort of Mr. and Mrs. Hodnet, the one with pipe and paper, the
other with work-basket of socks. A door opening into the serviceable
kitchen revealed a vista of garments hung up, a red glow behind them,
a girl of the farm-servant type scuttling about, and the more active
spirits of the party darting to and fro. In the room the long table was
laid for tea; Cherry and Will were chatting on either side of the fire,
Major and Mrs. Harewood were enjoying the delight of their offspring
in an oft-renewed fiction of being shut into the hamper, lost, and
discovered; and Felix was amusing Gertrude May with the mysteries of
Moore's Almanac on the wall, and the account of his own fruitless
endeavours to promote a taste for something less oracular.
He came up as the Countess scurried in, and said, with a frankness not
quite answering to Bernard's description of his despair, 'I am very
sorry for our neglect, Lady Caergwent, I am afraid it caused you to be
in a very unpleasant predicament; but my sister is so far from strong,
that she is apt to be our first care.'
'It would be a horrid shame if she were not,' said Lady Caergwent
brightly. 'I should not have been and gone and lost myself!--You've not
caught cold, Geraldine!'
'Oh no, I was best off of all, riding home in state. It comes, you see,
of taking such poor shiftless beings up to the top of mountains.'
'It was a grand adventure,' said Lady Caergwent, rather hastily; 'I'd
not have missed it for the world!' And then suddenly conscious of what
that might convey, her colour deepened still more, and she made her
way to the Darby and Joan nook by the window, sat down, looking out,
and murmuring something undeveloped about the weather. Lord Ernest
came to help her study it; Felix thought it expedient to continue his
elucidations of Francis Moore; Robina came up to the fire, and slid
her hand into Will's, and a look and smile passed between them that
Cherry comprehended as well as they did. Only Bernard came forward with
a footstool he had routed out from under the dresser. 'Won't you have
this, Lady Caergwent? the floor is cold.'
'Thank you very much.--Yes; and Addie finds her hands full?'
'She's the jolliest little lady of the house!' and Lord Ernest found
himself a perch on the round table, with one foot on the other chair.
Bernard returned to the charge. 'Here's one other flower not beaten to
pieces,' he said, after applying to the green things he had left in the
porch.
'Thank you,' but hardly turning her head from Lord Ernest, who was
describing some one as 'Yards high, of course; three inches beyond what
any one need be in reason,' meaning of course the Scottish chief; but
Bernard was not quite sure whether this was not personal, for conceit
in a state of irritation can make strange appropriations.
While he was standing just so far away as his sense of good breeding
required, grim and discomforted, Angela darted in, crying, 'Mrs. Hodnet
is teaching us to make furmenty. Come and see.'
'Too many cooks may spoil furmenty as well as broth, Angel,' said John,
as no one seemed disposed to move.
'How stupid you all are!' she exclaimed. 'Come, Kate, don't you want to
study furmenty?'
'I can't study anything but sitting still till I get my boots,' said
the Countess, with languid decision.
'Bootless toil,' murmured her cavalier.
'You'd better come, Lord Ernest,' persisted Angela, 'Enlarge your mind!
'Tis a classical dish, always made on wake days.'
'Thank you, I never presume to enter those penetralia,' he answered,
likewise with unconscious distance in his tone--excited, perhaps, by
the familiar abbreviation of the young lady's name.
'If you are so curious about it, Angela,' said Felix gravely, 'I wonder
you do not attend to it!'
'Oh, it is stirring! I left Charlie at it, to console him for the loss
of his lobster. I only came out of pure and unrequited philanthropy.'
And she sprang back to the outer kitchen, philosophizing, 'What a queer
thing it is that when two swells get together they must be on their
dignity, and act as if they came out of some other planet.'
'Better be a swell than a cinder,' said Charlie. 'Mrs. Hodnet, is this
stuff stirred enough? I've been at it like a galley-slave till my arms
are ready to drop.'
'I'll stir the infirmary!' loudly declared Kester, intercepted on his
way by his uncle Will, who hoisted him up, in an ecstasy of amusement,
as a 'true grandson of his grandmother, which he wasn't.' The two rooms
resounded with merriment, and Felix regaled Gertrude with a few of Mrs.
Harewood's proverbial malapropisms; but the pair in the window remained
utterly unconscious of all that was passing.
'The odd thing is,' said Angela confidentially to Charles Audley, 'that
I know those two regularly hate each other.'
'It looks very like it!'
'Oh, that is to keep up appearances before the outer barbarians. I know
what each thinks of the other. You clumsy boy! those plates will all be
down, then what will you say to Cherry?'
'That I am overcome by appearances. What hollowness do you not reveal
to me! I say, Bear must be overcome too! What makes him stand there
like a grisly monument?'
Kester and Edward were, at that moment, permitted to summon the company
by a performance with the bright warming-pan, as if they were hiving
bees; and as Lord Ernest jumped off the table, with a look of fury and
dismay Bernard pounced on Stella, who happened to be near him, and
almost dragged her out into the porch. 'I can't stand it any longer,
Stel. Say I'm gone home.'
'Are you ill, Bear?'
'Ill? no; but that confounded puppy--'
'He isn't lost, Bear, he is fast asleep under Cherry's chair. You need
not go after him!'
'Hang it! Didn't you see? That brute of a fellow has been and squashed
all the flowers! I'm sure he did it out of spite, and be hanged to him!'
'Hush, Bernard, don't!'
'A man can't mince his words when he's driven distracted! When I
went through fire and water to get them for her, and it was all his
jealousy, because he saw her pleased.'
'But I don't think those were your flowers.'
'Weren't they, though!'
'I thought you went to get arrow-head?'
'Well--'
'And that is great water-plantain on the table. There are quantities of
it by the churchyard.'
'She never said it was not right.'
'Perhaps she would not vex you.'
'Bosh! You don't know anything about it, Stella; I'll soon find out.'
So Bernard stalked back, followed by his little sister, just as seats
were being taken, with no further exclusiveness, but with the Countess
on one side of Felix, and Gertrude on the other, and Lord Ernest by
Geraldine's side. They had tried to get Mrs. Hodnet's company, but she
would not consent to do anything but fry rashers for them.
'Lady Caergwent,' said Bernard's voice, 'were those the wrong flowers?'
A silence. 'You were very kind to get them for me.'
'Then they weren't arrowhead?'
A still more awful silence. 'Oh! let me see, where are they? Perhaps--'
'Lord Ernest de la Poer sat down upon them,' returned Bernard, in
such a tragic voice, that convulsions of suppressed laughter began to
prevail; 'but here are the remains, such as they are.'
'I am very sorry,' said the Countess, more than half choked as the
faded, squeezed, limp water-plant was extended to her; 'but I can't
flatter you that it is--no--it is not arrowhead.'
'Arrowing, isn't it?' of course muttered the witty pupil.
'But it was just as kind in you,' proceeded Lady Caergwent, conquering
her paroxysm, and looking up with great sweetness in her hazel eyes.
'You went all the way for it, and were caught in the storm, and I am
just as grateful to you.'
'You shall have some before I sleep!' and he was off like a shot.
'Oh! he isn't really gone!--Stop him, Mr. Underwood!--Stop him,
Ernest!--How can you all sit there laughing!'
'It will do him a great deal of good.'
'Felix!' cried Cherry reproachfully from the other end of the table;
'when the poor boy has had nothing to eat!'
'And he's got my new boots on,' ejaculated Pupil Number 2. 'They'll
punish him.'
'It's a great deal too bad,' said Lady Caergwent, flushing up. 'Cherry,
what can I do? Indeed, it wasn't on purpose.'
'Don't you think he could be stopped, Felix!' entreated Cherry, tender
over her boy. 'Is not there some short way to the garden?--Willie!'
'Impossible, Cherry,' said Will. 'No doubt he will go home instead of
coming back here.' And to his neighbour--'Don't distress yourself.
It is the first time I ever saw Bernard stirred out of the grand
simplicity of his self-devotion.'
'Where's the Vicar?' broke in Lord Ernest, while Lady Caergwent looked
far from consoled. 'You've not sent him after any water-weeds, have
you?'
'No, a vicar never gets a clear holiday in his own precincts.' said
Will. 'I've rigged him out to go to some cottagers up here--and if they
know him for their shepherd, it's a pity.'
For besides being a shorter and more loosely-built man, the Oxford
tutor, though not unclerical, had not the peculiar ecclesiastical look
of the Vicar of Vale Leston.
'What have you done to Bernard?' said the voice of Clement himself, as
he came in, certainly a good deal transformed. 'I met him galloping
down the lane, and saying he should walk home, and you were not to wait
for him.'
'You didn't turn him back? O Clement!'
'He hasn't quarrelled with any one?' said Clement, anxiously surveying
the ranks; 'he wouldn't tell me.'
'Only with humanity in general,' said Felix. 'He brought Lady
Caergwent the wrong plant, and has rushed headlong to repair the
mistake, without knowing a bit better what the right one was. It is
his first essay in chivalry, and he is having it strong,' he added,
smiling, as he turned to the lady.
'Never mind, Kate,' added Angela, with her usual questionable taste,
'it's only a bog and not a whirlpool that you've made him plunge into;
besides, it isn't the Ewe, so he isn't due to it!'
'Will you take his place in the waggonette, Lord Ernest?' asked Cherry.
'Where's your bag?'
'My bag--I declare it must be at the bottom of the Lady's Rock! We'll
charter a boy to go and look for it.'
'We will stop as we go by. There are plenty of relics to pick up.'
'For hospitality's sake,' said Will, 'I might mention that the room
next the Apple-chamber is at your service.'
'Thank you, since you are so kind, Miss Underwood, I'll come. I want to
see your picture. What are you doing now?'
'A little portrait work,' said Cherry, smiling and blushing, and
looking towards her subject.
'There,' quoth Lord Ernest, to Robina. 'Did not I tell you it was a
Kit-Cat-astrophe!'
'Oh!' said Gertrude, little aware of the by-play, 'I forgot to ask if
you had been going on with Edith of Lorn?'
'The maiden all for-lorn,' was another aspiration of the witty pupil.
'That's just the usual aspect of the Maid of Lorn,' said John, 'only
Geraldine hasn't done her at all, only the last flutter of her cloak.'
'Quite right,' said Lord Ernest; 'that young person always struck me as
taking the oddest way of reclaiming her young man, by charging down the
hill at the head of all the stable-boys, grooms, and helpers.'
'I confess,' said Felix, 'I should have been harder to seek after that
exploit than when all the bridesmaids were singing.'
'No doubt,' said Will, 'he knew best. How often had she scratched his
face in Artornish Hall?!'
In the midst of the laughter a low silvery voice was heard saying to
her neighbour, 'Please read it. You really ought.'
'Only one does get it so thrust down one's throat in the Hebrides,'
returned Charles; 'but I'll try.'
'I agree with you, Stella, it is almost profane of them,' said Lady
Caergwent; 'only one plays with what one loves best.'
'The maiden all forlorn got the best of it at last,' said Angela.
Which made some of them blush, and others make a move to recover the
remnants of the feast. Wilmet wanted to take her boys home to bed,
since the rain had ceased, and the carriages were brought out.
'Shall I offer Master Ratton to those two?' asked Felix of Robina, 'or
is it too barefaced?'
'As yet, till the elders know.'
'Then you must come with me in the basket, Bob. I shall make Clem drive
the waggonette home; he knows the ground better than I do.'
There was a good deal of summer lightning all the way home: but Lady
Caergwent, tightly packed into the waggonette, never started at the
shimmering sheets of pale light. Nay, she loved them all the rest of
her life.
And the arrowhead, which she found in a jug outside her door in the
morning, received full justice, and was in fact the last botanical
specimen ever added to her collection.
The proverbial 'dull elf' alone could fail to figure the ensuing days,
with the semi-concealment of what everybody knew, but no one was
supposed to know before the authorities. How Lady Caergwent sat up at
untimely hours, pouring her heart out to Robina; how Bernard became
melancholy and misanthropical, when cruelly snubbed by Lord Ernest--'I
could have had some pity on him,' was the reply to a remonstrance,
'but for that speech about his brothers.' Angela, on the other hand,
made such endeavours to rescue poor Lord Ernest from being bored, that
Cherry, in constant fear of her exposing herself, told her how matters
stood, when she became furious and scornful at his supposed weariness
of toil, and the succumbing of his resolution. Clement endured it much
better, being quite willing that any one but the clergy should marry,
and knowing Lord Ernest well enough to believe that he would only make
the lady a stronger pillar of the Church.
After a few fresh touches had given a new and different reading to the
portrait, and after a Sunday of bliss that cost Will and Robina some
gulps of envious philosophy, there was a return to the Hammonds, and a
tremendous croquet party to kill off all the neighbourhood before Mrs.
Umfraville's return.
That lady's thankful comfort was only alloyed by sorrow that her
Colonel could not see the fulfilment of his chief wish, while she felt
that the four years' estrangement had improved both in manliness and
womanliness, in forbearance and humility, and the matrimonial balance
would be far easier of adjustment.
Of course invitations and promises to attend the wedding were made in
the heat of the moment, and these were kept in October by Felix and
Geraldine as well as Robina, who a second time dazzled Lady Vanderkist
by her appearance in the list of bridesmaids. It was the last thing
before she, with the whole De la Poer party, went abroad for the winter
for the sake of her little delicate pupil, Susan, who had been ordered
to spend the winter in the Riviera; and ever considerate, when Lord De
la Poer asked his daughter Grace's Mr. Pemberton to join the travellers
at Christmas, he also asked William Harewood; and Robina was the best
off, for the curate could not come when the tutor could.
Mrs. Umfraville made a great deal of Mr. and Miss Underwood at
Caergwent, and they much enjoyed their visit; but it was always a
subject of regret that these outer interests seemed to make Lance feel
at a greater distance from them. Something was amiss, though it was
not easy to make out what it was, and he never allowed that he was
uncomfortable, nor weary of his bicycle or of Mrs. Froggatt.
CHAPTER XLI.
CHESTS AND HEARTS.
'Waketh a vision, and a voice within her
Sweeter than dreams and dearer than complaint--
Is it a man thou lovest, and a sinner?
No; but a soul, O woman! and a saint.'
Frederick W.H. Myers.
One snowy November night Lancelot caught cold, and aggravated the
ailment during his organist's duties on Sunday so much, that though
he resigned himself to Mrs. Froggatt's attentions on Monday, she soon
found herself obliged to supplement them by Mr. Rugg's; and her letter
on the Wednesday caused Felix to bring Angela to nurse him through a
sharp attack of pleurisy, complicated with bronchitis.
All went well, and by the week before Christmas he was fit to be taken
home, uniting in persuading Mrs. Froggatt that her care was necessary
to him en route, chiefly because he and his brother could not bear
to leave her to her widowed Christmas. She came, but nothing would
induce her to stay beyond Christmas Day; nor would she even wait till
Felix returned with the New Year to Bexley, to busy himself with the
accounts, about which Lance was concerning himself too much for his
good, writing such characteristic notes that when, half way through
January, Felix came home, he was disappointed to find so little
progress made towards recovery. The great musical brow, big blue eyes,
straight nose, and brown hairiness, seemed to have lost the cheeks
from among them: there was a weary yearning look in the eyes, and the
whole demeanour was languid and dejected. Lance just crept into the
painting-room at noon, and spent the afternoon by the drawing-room
fire, talking a little at times, or amused by Wilmet's baby; but her
boys were too much for him; and though he liked Stella's music, he was
fretted by Angela's careless notes, and had not energy to play for
himself. His voice indeed was scarcely serviceable even for speaking,
and its absence always made him unhappy. A reader only in the way of
business, books and newspapers were distasteful; and though he could
not be ill-humoured, he was evidently a heavy burden to himself; sad
and listless; he neither ate nor slept, and yet the actual symptoms
were not unfavourable.
'He does not get on,' said Felix, as he and Clement stood consulting in
the library.
'He sleeps so badly, and has two hours or so of bad cough in the early
morning, and that seems to exhaust him for the day.'
'So you wrote, and I told Rugg, who said that would wear off gradually;
but I cannot see that he is mending.'
'Nor does he think so,' said Clement.
'Rugg declares that there is no reason he should not entirely get over
this, and he never gives any encouragement he can help. I shall not
rest till May has seen him.'
'I should have sent if you had not been coming.'
'So he is low about himself, dear fellow! Have you had it out with him?'
'Nay, he seemed to me quite willing it should be so. If he is not, I
don't know who should be! He never seems to have been from under the
shadow of his cathedral. I believe he rather puzzled Miss Isabella the
other day!'
'You don't mean that she has been at him?
'Yes, she affected an entrance when no one was on guard but poor little
Stella, who was dreadfully upset, and told Cherry all about it. It
seems the good lady is shocked at our all deceiving him.'
'And took it on herself to warn him?'
'And to inquire if he were a Christian, and into the foundation of his
hope--all which he seems to have received as a kindness. Stella says
he answered that he was quite aware of his condition, but he did not
think there was much need to grieve himself or others over it. Indeed,
she--Miss Isabella--told me herself that he is a heavenly-minded young
man.'
'Yes, they met in the inmost heart of things, without battling on the
outworks. When I look back at that boy's life, I do not feel as if I
deserved him; I ought not to have let him sacrifice himself to that
life at Bexley.'
'It was his own doing, poor fellow! and he sees his mistake.'
'None of us could realize at the time the force of contrast,' said
Felix; 'indeed, I should have thought him the last person to have been
affected by it.'
'I did not mean that only. I meant the higher service,' said Clement,
making Felix suspect that his consolations had been so applied as to
deepen the depression, and resolve the more to write to Dr. May.
So two days later, with a certain passiveness, as though the
physician's visits were a matter of course, Lance, who had just
finished his tardy toilette, obeyed the summons into the library, and
submitted to the examination, which ended in an assurance that there
was no tendency to pulmonary disease, and that care and patience would
soon subdue the remains of his illness.
'Thank you, Sir,' in a perplexed half-incredulous tone, as he leant
back, not troubling himself to ask a question as to the treatment.
Dr. May waited a little, then looked steadily into his face. 'Now,
Lance, we doctors ask startling questions. You've not fallen in love?'
'Not particularly,' said Lance, without a particle of blush, even if he
had had cheeks to blush with.
'What does that mean? Generally?'
'I never let myself go in for it. It was of no use.'
'Without letting yourself, then?'
'No, indeed!' returned Lance, almost petulantly; 'I never had the
chance. How should I? It would have been something to care about.'
'This fellow does not half believe in me,' muttered the Doctor.
'Lance, do you remember consulting me before, when you thought your
brains were addled by the sun-stroke?'
'They might as well have been, for any good I have done with them.'
'I thought you were one of the lights of Bexley.'
'A nice sort of light, and place too,' muttered he, with scant
courtesy; but the Doctor caught an idea from the dull weary tone.
'It must be a dullish sort of life,' he threw out.
'Can't be helped,' in the same tone, almost conveying that it was
merely his own affair. 'It was my own doing; and I've been like this
before, and come round.'
'Your chest has been as sound as a bell before!' said the Doctor, with
a little wilful misunderstanding.
'My chest,' with a sound of contempt.
'If not your chest, what?'
'My--myself. The Everlasting Everything,' said Lance, with a sort of
impatience, covering his face with his hands, as though--had twenty
years been subtracted from his age--he would have begun to cry.
'My dear boy,' said the Doctor, 'never mind me. Have it out. You don't
like to complain to your brother, and you can't stand the life you are
leading?'
'No use to say can't,' said Lance, looking up, with his brow
contracted; 'I must and I will, if I am to get well. I got over it
before, and I shall again, I suppose, when my strength comes back. I
made my bed, and must lie on it.'
'You mean that you chose your present business?' said the Doctor,
trying another leading question.
'Ay. My brothers, as soon as they could, both offered me to go to the
University and take Holy Orders! but, as Clem said, my hurdy-gurdy was
a new toy, and I was as proud as Punch of it, and thought life offered
nothing better; besides, I was always a dolt at classics, and thought
they would split my head.'
'Are you ever reminded of that sun-stroke?'
'Less every year; but summer sunshine still makes me sick and giddy,
and now and then extra work brings on a racking headache.'
'Take my word, your instinct was right. You could not have stood
college work.'
'So I thought; but if I had scraped through, it would all have been
over now.'
'Very likely,' was the dry answer.
'Well, it would have been worth dying for. I did not know what I was
giving up.'
'In position?'
'Partly. I was a mere boy, and did not see the difference as I do now
I have been with Will Harewood at Oxford, or when I come here. I keep
out of it as much as I can, for it's just a mockery to go and mix with
their friends here, and talk to a pretty girl, when I know she would
not touch me with a pair of tongs at home.'
'More shame for her, then. Have you no society at home?
'Oh yes, plenty of nice fellows--professionals, I mean, and a dinner
with the upper-crust now and then,' said Lance, laughing; 'not much in
itself, but making me cock of the walk in our own line--trade, I mean.
Nice girls there are, too--if one had seen nothing else--but then, they
keep out of the way, and the others make themselves such fools. It was
good fun once; but one gets sick of it, as one does of everything else.'
The vein of confidence had been found at last, and a mere demonstration
of sympathy was enough to draw him on. 'I seem to have got to the end
of my tether with everything--Pursuivant and all. Even the organ, I
can do no more with it as it is; and it is no good crying out for more
stops, for nobody cares. I have worked at the science as far as Miles
or my own study can take me with my present means; and as it is, I know
more than there is any power to use in my squirrel's cage, yet I can't
go on into what there is beyond without giving my whole self to that
and nothing else.'
'Is that out of the question?'
'It would bring in no return; and I am not a gentleman at large, nor
am I sure of the right and expedience of it after all, nor whether the
craving is to praise God or please myself. What I have seen behind the
scenes at musical festivals--ay, and before them too--has made me doubt
whether the most perfect music gets put to its full use.'
'Or ever can be here.'
'Ay. Practically, the anthem, chant, and hymn, have the direct
devotional use; and that they may serve it, they must not too much go
beyond the average musical capacity of your congregation.'
'Quite true. You have thought it all out,' said Dr. May. 'I wish more
organists saw it so.'
'That's just what the St. Oswald's people say I don't! Well, you see
what it is. My poor brother Edgar told me how it would be when I would
not be a regular professional.'
'How what would be?'
'Why, that it would all get intolerably slow and flat, and that I
should not be able to bear it. It is true enough, but I got over it
once.'
'And as you say, you will do so again. The life you embraced upon
principle may for a time be distasteful, but the restlessness under it
can only be a trail. If I understand you right, Lance, your motto has
been
"If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,
Let my right hand forget her cunning."'
'Stay, stay, Dr. May. I don't regret that first decision--not at
all--but the other--when they offered me to study for Holy Orders. I
find I was like a soldier, who thought playing in the band was fighting
in the ranks!' And Lance lay back in his chair, and shaded his face
with his thin hand.
'And that has been preying on you all this time?'
'Perhaps. I am for ever coming on facts about crime, misery,
ignorance--here, there, everywhere; and I know that with a little
perseverance and resolution I might have been a priest, doing the only
work worth doing--and behold, all I have done--has been--to gratify my
passion--for music--and call it--dedicating--' He had begun to cough
distressingly, and could not go on.
'If I had not known it was more spirits than lungs, I would not have
let you go on,' said Dr. May, when Lance could hear again. 'Your
present life is irksome, and you think you may have done wrong in not
making an effort for the higher service?' Lance nodded assent. 'But
remember, non-commissioned officers are as much needed as commissioned
ones, and your Pursuivant is no mean weapon. It is really easier to
find clergy than thorough-going lay-men in a position like yours;
and from all I can gather, if you had tried to fight your way to
Ordination, you would only have broken down, and done nothing. So be
content, my boy. You have honestly put the higher duty foremost, and it
will come right somehow.'
'Only--'
'Hush! If the thermometer gets above 50 degrees, take a turn in the
cloister. Fresh air will do sleep and spirits the most good; only
lay up entirely, and blister on any symptom of return of pain. But
go about the house, and get back to family habits as you feel up to
them, not troubling yourself as to what is to come after. I'm wrong!
You are never to ride outside a velocipede in the rain again. That
pleasure is for ever forbidden! Somewhere about the end of the east
winds you may go into questions of the future, though to me it seems
that your post is one of rare value and influence. While--as for
the "not impossible she," for whom it is worth while to go in in
particular--depend upon it, she is waiting for you, and will fall in
your way yet, even if, as Captain M'Intyre felicitously expresses it,
your veins were filled with printers' ink! I should be ashamed to think
it could be otherwise. Now rest. Don't speak.'
'Only one thing. My voice--will it come again?'
'Your voice? Of course. You spoke very well before I let you wear it
out.'
'For speaking--oh yes--but singing?'
'Singing? Your throat was a good deal affected. Your voice--what kind?
High tenor, did you say? Ah! those are very soon damaged; but one can't
tell; don't go trying experiments on it too soon. Happily, it is not a
vital question with you.' And as he saw the lip tremble, and a tear in
the eye, 'Don't fancy I meant to prepare you for its loss; I dare say
you would rather lose a good deal besides.'
'I believe I had.'
'Let it alone then, and guard your throat.' And with a few more
counsels as to the treatment, Dr. May left him, and much consoled
Felix and Cherry by assurances that the lungs were fast recovering,
and that the spirits would probably follow them. And he then proceeded
to give a message that he was to deliver contingently upon his
patient's state--namely, the offer of a visit from Gertrude. His little
granddaughter, Margaret Rivers, was at Dawlish, in so sad a state of
suffering, that he and Ethel were to go and be with the parents; but
Gertrude was not wanted, and would gladly bestow herself upon Geraldine.
'You'll take care of her,' he said, with the solicitude that fathers
never lose for their youngest daughter. 'You have no young lords nor
precipices to put in her way, I trust.'
'Lords, precipices, and thunder-storms, are equally improbable just
now,' said Cherry; 'the tithe-dinner and school-treat are the most
brilliant entertainments in prospect.'
'I shall tell her to mind you like an Ethel the second. By-the-by,
Ethel says she never saw any one so good for the child. She was our
spoilt one--at least, so Ethel says; though I'm an old fool of a
father, and never saw it, and you are said to have put the womanliness
into her.'
'I'm afraid I don't deserve the compliment. "I speks it growed."'
'To tell the truth, so do I,' laughed the Doctor.
Geraldine in her secret soul thought the development in maidenliness
due to something besides age, for she knew what was the great bond
between herself and Gertrude May; and bethinking herself of the entire
extinction of all remaining sentiment for Alice Knevett, she could
not but speculate on the possible results of the coming visit, and
recollect that to shrink from them would have no such excuse as in the
former case.
The announcement was not received with acclamation. Angela did not
like Gertrude May. Both were high-spirited free-spoken unconventional
girls, in whom something of womanly grace was as yet slow in coming;
but Gertrude was more essentially a lady, though louder voiced and less
naturally graceful; nor had she a particle of flirtation, but disliked
young men, and was unpopular from irony and exclusiveness; whereas
Angela was thoroughly the girl of the period in a highly stimulated
state.
'Bother!' she exclaimed. 'She is nearly as bad as Miss May herself.'
'Indeed!' said Felix, in a much offended voice.
'As good then, and that's as bad!'
'Stuck-up, like all the Mays,' put in Bernard.
'They have been very good-natured to you,' said Felix again, in a tone
of reproof.
'Soup tickets,' muttered Bernard.
'Take care, Bear,' said Cherry. 'Small minds repudiate gratitude.'
'Then Bernard's bound to entertain her,' said Lance.
'Catch me,' quoth Bernard.
'Perhaps she may alleviate his pangs for the faithless Countess,'
suggested Angela.
'She!' The unutterable contempt of that monosyllable set all laughing,
and he indignantly reiterated, 'She is stuck-up enough for ten
countesses and duchesses to boot.'
'The monotony of Bear's ideas was always striking,' said Felix.
'He's got but one pole to run up, poor Bruin!' said Angela. 'Now, I
could have found ever so many objections.'
'Only that it would be a queer way to welcome Cherry's guest,' said
Clement, in reprobation.
'As if you liked her yourself, Clem!' exclaimed Angela, 'when
Stoneborough is altogether in the rear, and not one of the whole crew
belongs to the E.C.U.'
'Is it impossible to be courteous to any one out of the E.C.U.?' said
Clement so gravely, that the laughter was renewed; but Cherry had the
uncomfortable certainty that if there had been a show of hands it would
have been on Bernard's side. Clement and the Mays had never harmonized;
and Lance, who was always reluctant to face his sister's young-lady
associates, now had no escape, and was ready to feel everything an
oppression, so that his silence was an act of forbearance.
It was a good sign, that when Clement came in unobserved from Evensong,
he found Lance at the piano, making twilight beautiful with something
wonderfully yearning and mournful, but with a deep underkey of
resolution ever waxing stronger and stronger. Clement leant on the
settee, listening till his eyes grew moist; and when the cough forced
the musician to desist, and come back exhausted to the sofa, he asked,
'Where did that come from?'
'It is a Largo of Beethoven's in C Major. I fell in love with it when
we had C---- at Minsterham.'
'Dr. May has done you good.'
'I don't know. I see he thinks my voice done for.'
'I would sooner have your fingers than your voice, Lance,' said
Clement, appreciating the grief as Dr. May could not, never having
heard those notes.
Lance shook his head. The trouble was too deep and real for speech.
'Sooner or later we shall have our voices in perfection,' said Clement.
'Meantime, who knows how good it may be for you to be parted from that
beautiful thing!'
'My golden idol!' Lance broke out in a sort of laughing coughing sob.
'At least, you have the comfort of knowing you never prostituted it
to any ungodly purpose,' said Clement. 'You always treated it as His
goodly gift.'
Lance made no answer. Perhaps he felt at that moment that his voice
had been the chief thing that made his dull life pleasant to him, and
that to be either dumb or an offence to his own delicate ear was a lot
to which he could hardly resign himself. Clement went to the piano, and
softly sung 'Angels brightly shine forth.'
Angela came into the room with a light as he ended; Lance started up,
and hastened out of the room.
He was rather worse than better for the next day or two, and shuddered
with annoyance when Gertrude May's wheels approached. He would not,
however, vex Cherry by shirking the early dinner, where Gertrude, a
bright mixture of blue merino and swans' down, was making fun of her
precise brother Tom's inclination to escort her on this her first
solitary journey, when she knew it was only 'because of his friend at
Ewmouth, who is equally crazy about microscopes and such unpleasant
things.'
'As microscopes?' said Felix.
'That depends on what you look at. Now Tom is making perquisitions into
the germs of all kinds of diseases and infections, and is never so
happy as when he gets an excuse for driving over to Ewmouth.'
'Is there anything so scientific there?'
'Mr. Elsted, the chemist. He was a fellow-student of Tom's, but he
hasn't nerve enough to practise; so he is a kind of stickit doctor,
though he has science at his fingers' ends--the right place for a
chemist, you'll say--so very sensibly he took to that line.'
'We must make friends with him,' said Felix.
'Do! It would be a great kindness. He is really very much of a
gentle--' where she awkwardly stopped, and caught herself up, colouring
to the ears.
'Which cannot be said of all medical students,' said Felix, greatly
helping her out.
'No! And as Tom could not come himself, he has given me a precious
little box to carry, which the post would squash. Don't be afraid; it
isn't the plague, or the small-pox, or anything--'
'I thought of going to Ewmouth this afternoon if you like the drive,'
said Cherry.
'You don't trust me! You want to be rid of Pandora's box.'
Of course there was more fun about it, resulting in the timid being
only half certified that it contained only some slides of glass; but
Lance took his part in the teasing, nor did he forget--what Cherry
took care to tell him on her return--that Gertrude had shaken hands
cordially with the chemist under the very shadow of his purple jars.
Gertrude's spirits were not much affected by her niece's illness; and
she had been so seldom from home, that this was a new experience, from
which she derived as much freshness as she brought. The Squire was
always her hero, and with him she was always on her best behaviour,
as if trying to redeem her performance on the Kitten's Tail; while he
treated her--like all his sisters' friends--with the gentle playful
courtesy that had first begun with Alice Knevett. A musical evening
seemed to have thoroughly fitted her in among the inhabitants, and in
the forenoon she repaired quite naturally to Cherry's painting-room.
'That's right, I have designs on you.'
'Me, myself me, or in character?'
'In character. I catch every one. One gets so tame and unreal without
fact.'
'But you'll let me write to Ethel. It feels so queer without the old
thing. I'm not sure that my head is on the right way.'
'Pray write. You ought to be doing something.'
Just then a pair of slippered feet came noiselessly to the door, and
with 'Good morning, Miss May,' Lance came in, his sister exclaiming,
'How early! You have not had your sleep after breakfast.'
'No, but I slept a good deal later this morning, which is a better
thing,' he said, advancing to a big arm-chair. Gertrude had hoped for
a snug morning with Cherry; but he looked so wan, pinched, and shadowy
in the morning light, that there was no grudging him the content with
which he sank into his place, nor the anxiety with which Stella was
sent down to hasten his beef-tea.
'Have you made your capture, Cherry?' he asked.
'I was beginning when you came.'
'Then Miss May has not seen your contribution to the "Rights of Woman."'
'I have only escaped from the subject at home. Mrs. Harvey Anderson has
been getting up a meeting for the Ladies' Suffrage, and wanted Ethel to
come to it.'
'O for her likeness!'
'What can you want of it?'
In answer, Cherry produced two cartoons. One was a kind of parody of
Raphael's School of Athens, all the figures female, not caricatures,
but with a vein of satire throughout. The demonstration on the floor
was an endeavour to square the circle; some of the elder ladies were
squabbling, some of the younger furtively peeping at themselves in
pocket-mirrors, or comparing ornaments; some in postures of weariness,
one gazing eagerly as if responding to some signal, another mimicking
her teacher, a third frowning at her rival's success. There was no air
of union or harmony, but something of vanity and vexation of spirit
pervaded all.
The companion was arranged on the same lines, but the portico was
a cloister, and the aisle of a church was dimly indicated through
a door-way. The figures and occupations were the same, but all was
in harmony. The maidens, though mostly in secular garb, wore the
cross; the central figure, in matronly beauty, was portioning out the
household tasks, while in the place of the harsh or sour or tyrannizing
disputatious ladies were women, some in hood and veil, but others
in ordinary dress, all dignified and sweet, while the damsels were
smiling happily over their employments, for the most part the same
as before, but in a different spirit. The demonstration on the floor
was no longer impossible. It was the circle of eternity spanned by
the Cross; the quizzing and teasing had ceased, the loiterers were at
their needlework; the rivals were united; the girl, whose glance down
the grove had been furtive, was now standing in the door-way, openly
watching for the little male figure in the distance. Both were in rough
bold outline, almost scrawled, and here and there dashed with pen or
Indian ink; but Geraldine's masterly hand showed wonderfully in the
grace and expression.
'I don't know whether I shall make anything of it,' she said. 'I
sketched it in a kind of frenzy; and Felix is bent on my going on with
it.'
'It would do for Punch, if for nothing else,' said Lance.
'For shame!' exclaimed Gertrude.
'No, it is a great compliment,' said Cherry; 'but what the Squire wants
is to have them in the Exhibition. Now I mean No. 1 to bring out--'
'The lesson of Tennyson's Princess,' interrupted Gertrude.
'In part, but going further into life. I mean that while woman works
merely for the sake of self-cultivation, the clever grow conceited
and emulous, the practical harsh and rigid, the light or dull, vain,
frivolous, deceitful, by way of escape, and it all gets absurd. But the
being handmaids of the Church brings all right; and the School of St.
Sophia develops even the intellect.'
'You'll have to write a key,' said Lance.
'I leave that to you gentlemen of the press. I don't expect that many
will enter into it, but if only a few do it will answer its purpose,
and be worth doing. I want to know whether it conveys its meaning to a
fresh eye.'
'Let me see,' said Gertrude. 'Woman working every one for her own hand,
is all nohow, either grim or silly, the laughing-stock of gods and men;
while working for the Church makes all harmonious, and sets each in her
place.'
'It might as well be man as woman,' said Lance.
'More so, I believe,' said Cherry; 'because marriage gives woman a
head; so I think the married ones at least do not suffer so much in
character from misbelief. Family life affords a sort of religion
to those who do not know the truth; and so while man kept them in
subjection, they did not need to think it out, as the single ones must
do now.'
'The Church provides ties and object for them,' said Gertrude. 'Ethel
would like that.'
'Clan Hepburn would more than ever warn one against making an idol of
an abstraction,' said Lance. 'I couldn't help asking them what they
thought of the Bride in the Revelation, and they warned me against
taking the figurative literally; but they are deeply good old girls,
though your St. Sophia has not had the training of them.'
'Not consciously,' said Cherry. 'They did her work, though, in the dark
times; and if she had thorough hold of them, they would not be meddling
with the clergyman's province.'
So saying, she produced two more finished copies, the building
elaborately put in, and some of the faces and figures worked up
evidently from the life. Wilmet was the lovely matronly presiding
spirit; Stella, the damsel in the place of one of the beautiful boys
in the foreground of the School of Athens, though it had been hard to
make her look naughty enough for the first. Gertrude, to her great
amusement, recognised Lady Caergwent: 'So that's the use you make of
your countesses?'
'It arose a good deal out of a talk with her about the dedication of
our powers; and she sent me a horrible photograph to do her bad self
by.'
'I declare you must have got Ethel's nut-cracker photograph for the
original of that forbidding astronomical female with the compasses.
Why! her improved state is Ethel herself, only not quite sweetly odd
enough. Did you mean it?'
'No; I only found it coming like Dr. May.'
'She shall sit! And I'll be one of the wicked ones, whenever you
please.'
'Then you must be a good one too.'
'Oh! I don't promise that. It is much flatter. Let me be the one who is
taking off Urania Ethel's gestures. I declare you are too clever; the
constellation you've turned up on the globe is vulpecula et anser.'
'No, you fancied that, Gertrude.'
'No such thing! See the stars really make a little W just like it in
the sky, and observe the moral. Instead of a he-fox running off with
the goose, the vixen will thus run away with the gander.'
Cherry had not laughed so much for weeks, Lance not for a year.
Stella's shoulders shook over her German exercise, and her voice
suggested: 'It ought to have been in the Southern Hemisphere, for the
world turned topsy-turvy.'
'The Southern Hemisphere is stupid, where it got out of sight of the
dear old funny folks that named the stars. What shall we have in the
world set right?'
'Andromeda on the rock,' said Stella, 'and Perseus coming to let her
out!'
'There's Perseus then coming down the walk,' said Gertrude.
'I hope that's me!' said Lance.
'Then you must be Anser!'
'Anser!' said Cherry. 'If he appears at all, it must be as Athene's
Owl.--What great eyes you have, my dear!'
In a moment she dashed into her first draught an owl, comically
resembling Lance; 'the twinkling blink in its eyes looking out of that
indefinite bushiness,' as Gertrude said.
'Against the beard movement, Miss May?'
'There's only one moustache in the family!'
'Diplomatic,' laughed Cherry.
'Not wholly,' said Gertrude. 'One does go by one's brothers; and I like
to see people's expression.'
'But,' said Lance, 'I trust at least I'm the owl of the church tower,
though I can't hoot any longer.'
'Athene's ought to be prying down with superior contempt upon the
ladies in the Academy.'
'Inspecting them!' said Cherry. 'Hearing them pronounce vicissim
we-kiss-im in turns, and making a note.'
'I declare,' cried Gertrude, 'I've got the very man for the bad owl.
How lucky I brought my photograph book!' She flew back to her room, and
returned in a moment with her album. 'I brought it to show Geraldine
our New Zealand children, and Leonard's pupils,' she said; 'but just
look here. Transplant him, Cherry!'
The photograph represented a handsome, complacent looking,
gentleman-like man, with certainly large eyes and an aquiline nose, and
bushy beard, but nothing else owl-like about him.
'Who is he? What has he done?' asked Cherry.
'Done! He's a school inspector! Don't you have inspections here? Not
under Government? O thrice happy people! If ever you do wish to
see my dearly beloved sister Ethel in the position of a toad under a
harrow!'
'But why, you have got her harrow in your book?'
'He isn't our proper district harrow,' said Gertrude. 'He's badderer
and wusserer nor that! He's my sister Mary's brother-in-law, and Tom's
bosom friend!'
'Worse and worse!' said Cherry, laughing.
'Exactly, for he comes down for Sundays! He is the youngest of the
Cheviots by a good many years, born after they had got prosperous, and
cockered up beyond all measure--went and got everything a man could go
in for at Oxford--horrid fellow--and then turned school inspector, and
writes smart articles in Harvey Anderson's Magazine.'
'Rupert Cheviot; I know the fellow's style,' said Lance; 'but may I ask
why he is in your book?'
'Because Mary gave me the book, and stuck him in so fast there's no
eradicating him; but I shall paste him over before long. Luckily, he
generally talks to Ethel. They are always fighting, and I believe she
likes him; and he doesn't know what to make of such a clever woman
being so narrow, you see.--Now, an' you love me, Cherry, put him up
there--an owl, inspecting the Academy!'
Just then, Angela burst in to say that Major Harewood wanted Felix to
come and see about the new barn, and Felix had sent to ask if Miss May
would come out before the warmth of the short day was past.
'That's hard,' said Lance, as she went; 'you'll lose the light.'
'Never mind, there will be plenty of time. The pensive face is what I
want. It can be rather fine.'
'Rather!' in an indignant tone.
Lance slept in the third room in the corridor, opening into Clement's,
as Clement's did into Felix's--an arrangement convenient in the earlier
stage of his convalescence, and enabling Clement still to take care
that his fire never was let out.
'I say, Clem,' he said, from his bed, the next morning, 'you haven't
such a thing as a spare razor--mine were left at Marshlands.'
'No, I haven't.'
'I wish you would see if Felix has.'
'Are you mad, to want to begin shaving now?'
'Not at all. It had better be done before it gets thicker, and I have
to go out.'
The application brought Felix in, demanding, 'Are you gone crazy,
Lance?'
'I thought I might as well titivate myself for the tithe dinner this
evening.'
'You need not trouble yourself about that. You'll not dine with us; and
if you did, the farmers would excuse you. I thought you were only too
glad of an apology for cultivating that furze brake.'
'One may as well be fit to be seen.'
'Exactly my sentiments,' said Felix; 'but you must submit for the
present. If you say any more, I shall lock up all my razors from the
raving lunatic.'
'Yes,' added Clement. 'Would you like an axe at the same time, to cut
off your head?'
Lance subsided; and Felix walked back to his room, and smiled to the
risk of his own cheeks over his shaving, as he muttered, 'Tithe dinner,
quotha?'
The tithe and rent dinner were always combined soon after Christmas,
and the Squire and Vicar had agreed that it was best not to make it
a wholesale entertainment at the Rood, but to have a civilized party
in the Priory, bringing the guests into the drawing-room afterwards.
The numbers of superior tenants were not sufficient to make this
unmanageable, and the compliment was appreciated. One or two elderly
men might have preferred devouring the value of their tithe at the inn,
and enjoying subsequent tobacco and spirits, but most liked the being
treated as gentlemen; and the evening was always an odd mixture of
boredom, amusement, and gratification.
The audit occupied most of the day, and the dinner was at the primitive
hour of six, the ladies of the house appearing thereat. Gertrude, who
was worked up to think it capital fun, was warned to deck herself in
her best; and she rejoiced that Ethel had enforced preparations for
possible gaieties, so that she could appear in a pink silk, presented
to her for Mrs. Rivers's last public occasion, and a wreath of clematis.
Her splendours were not thrown away, for the Squire met her on the
stairs, and exclaimed, 'That's right, I'm grateful to you;' and next
moment she saw Mrs. Harewood uncloaking, and revealing the black velvet
her husband always urged on her, and a set of pearls that had not seen
the light since the last old aunt retired into old-maidenhood. The Vale
Leston opinion was that Mrs. Harewood was the finest woman to look at
who had existed since her great-grandmother, Lady Geraldine.
Lance was in the drawing-room when the ladies came in after dinner,
shaking out their plumes and relating their experiences. Angela had
talked hunting with a young farmer whom she wanted to allure into the
choir, though Cherry doubted whether Clement would like to have him
there. Cherry had given Mr. Hodnet an account of the Caergwent wedding,
in which Penbeacon had had so much share, and had received a lament
over Mr. Harewood's absence that winter. 'He was a gentleman that was
strong in the pulpit.'
'That's his tincture of Irish eloquence, and the go that he has in
him!' said Angela.
'I believe the poor people do prefer his preaching to Clement's,' said
Wilmet.
'On the variety principle, I believe,' said Cherry.
'Of which they never get enough,' said Angela.
'After all,' said Cherry, 'inherent poetry does tell more than one
guesses upon an audience.'
'Ah, ha!' said Lance; 'I've got a novelty in that line for you.'
'From Will? You don't mean that you've been revelling in the second
post?'
'Ay! Some one fetched it from Ewmouth, just as your knives and forks
began to clatter. I was just thinking what notes predominated, when in
came this budget from San Remo. It is satisfactory to hear that while
my Lord and my Lady think it the dullest place in the world, our two
lovers find it simply delicious.'
'Is that the subject of the poem?'
'It might be,' said Gertrude.
'Only it would be hard on my Lord and my Lady,' said Angel.
'The question would be,' said Cherry, 'how long it takes to be so used
to one another that localities cease to be indifferent.'
'How long does it take, Wilmet?' saucily asked Angela.
Wilmet did not choose to answer; and Stella's voice quietly mentioned
how Lizzie Bruce and her lover broke off their engagement after being
shut up together for a whole wet Sunday.
'How very lucky for them!' said Gertrude.
'They agreed it would be impossible to spend life together,' said
Cherry. 'But what is the poem, Lance?'
'The Song of the Electric Wires.'
'Nonsense!'
'They do sing,' said Gertrude. 'I have often wished one could make
something of those olian-harp sounds.'
'Have you?' said Lance. 'I've tried ever so often to get them on the
violin. I'll show you.'
It was the first time he had spoken of touching his instrument; but
Wilmet intercepted Stella, who was going as a matter of course to
fetch it, by saying the sound would make the farmers expect a dance.
'So much the better,' said Angela. 'One waltz with Harry Palting, and
my victory would be complete.'
'It seems,' proceeded Lance, 'that poor Bobbie held herself ready to
start off with Bill in case I had been worse; and when the telegraph
relieved their minds, the reaction showed itself in these verses.'
'Which Bobbie was there to secure,' added Cherry. 'I wonder how many
of his get lost for want of her to copy them out, and make him polish
them.'
'When a man hasn't a spark of vanity he misses a very good working
machine,' said Lance.
'Spurring machine, you mean,' said Gertrude.
'Let me have them, Lance; you can't read them,' interposed Cherry.
Strange as was the subject, there was a wild airy grace about the
lines, by turns joyous and pathetic, and really going well to the
fitful music of the winds upon the wires. Lance went up to the piano,
and struck a note or two; and that wonderful power he possessed over
the instrument brought the very expression, if not the sound, and made
Gertrude exclaim with delight, 'Oh! do make a song of it with a piano
accompaniment; I am sure you can.'
'If you tell me I can,' said Lance, flushing and smiling, though
perhaps aware of more technical difficulty than she knew; but the
opening of the dining-room door, and the warm greeting of his brother's
tenants, broke off his promise.
He worked so hard and so merrily the next day in preparing the
Christmas-tree for the schools, in spite--foolish fellow!--of warnings,
chills, and catches of breath, that at the moment of projection, he
was quite overcome by the throng, noise and glare, and forced to beat
a hasty retreat to the drawing-room, whither Miss Bridget Hepburn soon
pursued him.
Finding him for the first time on the sofa, looking worn out she viewed
his assurances that he was really much better as a melancholy delusion,
and warned him against being beguiled by false hopes out of that
blessed frame of mind. John Harewood, divining what she was about,
presently came in to the rescue; not that he could remove her, for she
was burning to communicate a semi-confidential piece of information,
namely, the intended marriage of Mrs. Fulbert Underwood to Mr. Smiles,
whose sickly wife had been dead about a year. The other two sisters
were communicating the same intelligence to any one they could catch in
anything like privacy all the evening. It was not at all unsatisfactory
intelligence, for on the strength of Clement's appointment having
caused his resignation, Mr. Smiles had expected him to supply all his
most pressing needs, from educating his son to paying for his wife's
funeral. The worst of it was that it was hardly credible that Mrs.
Fulbert would be so foolish as to bestow her handsome jointure upon him
and his seven children; but as he had just taken a curacy in a popular
watering-place, there might be attractions; and at any rate, Clement
would be exempted from finding funds for his move.
Lance could not help feeling that if to be weary of everything and
indifferent to the future were a blessed frame, he had certainly lost
it, and it made the subsequent night of pain and distress all the
less endurable, as well as the captivity to bed and blisters that
ensued; nor was it till Sunday evening that he could return to the
painting-room, where all the family collected as they dropped in one
by one from Evensong and the subsequent choir-practice, and stood and
lounged about in the Sunday gossip, deaf to all to the manner born.
Felix came in last, having been looking at his letters, for he never
had time to do more than glance at a few of the more interesting in the
morning.
'It is true,' he said quietly.
'What, about Mrs. Fulbert? Has she written?'
'Yes; a great deal about the love she always had for Mr. Smiles's dear
little family, and an entreaty to me not to deprive her of the three
hundred a year that she was to forfeit by remarriage.'
'Was she? cried Bernard. 'How jolly!'
'So it seems, though I had forgotten it. She keeps all the settlement,
of course.'
'I remember about it,' said Clement. 'Her husband begged his father to
do something for her; and he detested her so, poor woman, that it went
very much against the grain with him, and by way of some solace, he
must have made this charge on the estate contingent on her remaining a
widow.'
'You'll never go on with it, Felix!' exclaimed Angela.
'I hope it will not break off the match,' added Cherry. 'There are some
people whom one would willingly bribe to keep out of one's way.'
'They do it knowingly?' said Gertrude.
'I imagine so; Smiles managed to know most things.'
'Ay!' said Angela. 'But you see he went on precedents. He knew what
Alice Lamb had effected, and had some personal experience of this
Vicar!'
'Felix! you are not going to be so absurd!' expostulated Bernard. 'Why,
it would keep a hunter!'
'Or a curate,' said Angela.
'Still more amusing to you, Angel,' retorted Bernard.
'But, Felix, do promise me you'll do nothing foolish. For my personal
satisfaction,' pleaded Angela.
'That is a promise no one can be warranted in giving, Angela.'
'He's afraid of himself!' cried Angela. 'She has only to get him into a
corner--like Alice.'
'Then it is well I am going away to-morrow.'
'Very unreasonable,' muttered Lance.
'What, to be so soft--I think it is indeed! I don't care for the money,
but how those critters will triumph!'
'He never said they would have it,' said Cherry.
'Oh! if he is only teasing.--What are you going to do, Felix?'
'I do not know. I must look at the terms of the will.'
Gertrude looked triumphantly at Angela, as much as to say, 'Could you
not trust his common sense and justice?'
But Felix put a stop to the conversation by asking Lance whether the
usual Sunday evening hymns would be too much for him.
'Not at all,' he said, 'provided Angela would sing nothing she had
not studied;' and then finding Gertrude took this as a hint, he was
dreadfully distressed, and nearly implied that dissonance from her was
better than harmony from any one else. She, on the other hand, was
as ever, greatly impressed with the sweetness of Felix's voice, and
refused, as they went down to supper, to believe that Lance's could be
better.
'I do not know that it is in what you heard to-night,' said Cherry;
'but Lance had some notes that none of them could come near, except--'
and there she paused, thinking of the voice that still at times she
longed for with inexpressible longing.
Gertrude was full of pity, though disappointed to find that Mr.
Underwood was going away so early that he bade her good-bye as well as
good-night, in spite of her protestation that she should be up to see
him off, and binding over Stella, who was always the morning star of
early travellers, to wake her in time for his 6.30 breakfast.
It was not far from that time when Felix, coming into Lance's room, was
struck with his refreshed and brightened look even at this his worst
time, a sort of indefinable look of hope and recovery.
'You have had a good night?'
'Yes; I slept till just now. I believe this last bout of mustard has
done me a power of good. The tightness is gone as it never went before.'
'That's the best news I've heard yet.'
'Better than Mrs. Fulbert?'
'Oh, I was coming to that. I have looked at the abstract of the will
this morning, and I don't feel myself in the least bound to continue
the annuity. Then I have been going over things this week; and what
with the falling in of the Blackstone lease, and the winding up of the
Rectory business, I shall be likely to get into smooth waters sooner
than I expected. So if you can hold on to the end of the year, I will
then, if all goes right, do whichever you please--give up the concern
at Bexley to you, or let you have an allowance to enable you to go on
with your music.'
'Have I been grumbling?' said Lance.
'Can't one see a thing without its being grumbled at one? It is a hard
life, yours, Lancey. I did not understand how hard till I took this
taste of it, and I am heartily grieved at having let you go on under it
till you broke down. I must try some other plan for you when you can go
back.'
'No, no; don't upset Mrs. Frog. Summer will be coming, and I prefer her
to Mrs. Lamb any day. Give her my love, and tell her I'm mending. Not
that I see any sense in your going,' he added, but somehow a little
less freely than usual.
'You want to see Lamb's report of the speeches at the sessions? Any
commands?'
'Yes; I want some music-paper, and my portfolio of violin music. If you
are sending any books, it might come at once. And tell Ellis he had
better not attempt that anthem from the Creation next Sunday, unless
Speers is come home to take the tenor.'
'I might do that.'
'You don't mean to stay over Sunday?'
'It is of no use to be always running backwards and forwards; I like a
Sunday at the old place now and then,' said Felix. 'Good-bye, Lancey;
let me find you twice yourself when I come back!'
'I could not thank the old Giant,' said Lance, when Cherry looked in on
him; 'but will you tell him, I feel as if he had taken out the stopper
that bunged me up from everything. Only it is absurd of him to go into
banishment just when this place is so uncommonly pleasant?'
Cherry thought she could guess, and that it was not so entirely
distrust of Mr. Lamb's capacity as it was convenient for the family
to suppose. And after all, Lance was protesting from dutiful habit of
unselfishness, but it may be doubted whether he really was quite as
sorry as usual to part with his brother.
The early rising to see him off had been effected; but his absence
did not disturb the good spirits of the party. Lance was gaining
ground quickly, and resumed more of the ordinary family habits every
day--sustaining his spirits the better when left behind on their all
going out, because Gertrude May did not unite with Angela in abusing
the weather for not bringing a skateable frost, and far less in running
wild after a sight of the hunt. Nay, she decidedly snubbed that great
handsome idle fellow Bernard for abusing Felix and the Fates for not
mounting him, and sat soberly at home at her music lesson, when he
and Angela went off upon the chestnut and Ratton, to see the meet and
bemoan themselves. Gertrude had been slow to exhibit her music before
the Underwoods, and had good-humouredly justified Angela's exaggerated
excruciation, owning that she had never had any teaching worthy of
the name. Lance had diffidently offered a few hints, and they were
not accepted as Angela was wont to receive his criticisms; so they
developed into instruction, delightful to both, even though much of it
consisted in unlearning!
And when the little niece had rallied, and Dr. May fetched his daughter
home, Lance did not flag, but was once more the bright Lance of former
days, and spent his time between Pursuivant work and labour over some
musical achievement, dividing himself between a blotted score, his
violin, and piano, using by preference Theodore as a critic, with
Stella to interpret his gestures.
CHAPTER XLII.
A HALCYON DAY.
'They had been much together; and one for ever bears
A name upon the loyal heart, and in the daily prayers;
The other but remembers, when the pleasant hours are past,
That something has been sending them so sweetly and so fast.'
S.M.
On Whit-Monday forenoon 'Mr. Underwood' was announced in the
drawing-room at Stoneborough, and Gertrude May's face, which had
at first clouded at the pre-prandial intrusion of any visitor,
brightened at the name, but lost a little eagerness when the entering
visitor proved himself to be only Lancelot, shaven now all but his
moustache, and with an air of entirely recovered health, justifying his
declaration that he had no desire to see the Doctor professionally,
and had been quite well ever since his return to Bexley at Easter.
He was now on his way to keep his holiday at home, but had made a
deviation 'to show that I have tried to obey you,' he said, proffering
to Gertrude a roll of music, the stiff paper cover beautifully and
delicately adorned with a daisy border, with pen-and-ink etchings in
the corners illustrating the receipt of telegrams for weal or woe, and
the first bars were made to resemble the wires and posts, the notes,
the birds perched thereon, the whole being of course William Harewood's
poem set to music. So beautiful and elaborate was the finish, that
Gertrude was startled and confused; the meaning flashed on her, and the
sudden recoil roused the contradictoriness of her nature. The earnest
look abashed and frightened her, and with a sort of anger she coldly
said, 'Very pretty, very nicely got up.'
'I think it may suit your voice,' said Lance wistfully.
'Thank you' (more nervously, and therefore more coldly), 'we will order
some copies.'
Lance, after a moment's pleading gaze, dropped his eyes, coloured, and
stammered, 'Not that.'
Ethel came to the rescue with praise of the etching, but this availed
little; Gertrude spoke not a word, and Lance, though making some kind
of reply, clearly did not know what he was saying, and presently took
leave, in spite of Ethel's entreaties that he would stay to the early
dinner, and to see her father. He made answer in a bewildered voice
about not meaning--and getting home; shook hands, and was gone.
'That was not gracious, Daisy,' said Ethel.
'I'm sure I didn't want it,' said the spoilt child.
'You need not have hurt him.'
No answer but scarlet colouring.
About half-past three he was at the Priory, just as the whole party
and Charles Audley besides were standing on the lawn, with rugs and
cloaks betokening boating intentions. His first impulse was to shrink
away like some wounded animal, but he had been spied, and was eagerly
hailed--'O Lance! just in time! Here's the four-oar coming out! Clem
and Angel want to go up the river to Tranquillity Bridge, and we are
taking them.'
Lance would have done anything rather than betray his wound, so he took
his place in the boat, and tried to shake himself into the present;
but Felix thought he looked tired, and would not let him take an oar
against the stream. Then it occurred to Cherry to ask whether he had
had anything to eat. No, he believed not; but he was resolute that he
wanted nothing, not even a draught of cider, which Angela mischievously
recommended as they passed the 'Hook and Line,' a little tea-garden
public-house, a favourite Sunday resort of Ewmouth idlers, and a great
scandal and grievance to the Vicar, but secured, like other abuses, by
a lease. A boat, belonging no doubt to some holiday-makers, was moored
at the steps; but as it was the day of a great Maying at East Ewmouth,
most observers of 'tide time' were likely to be there absorbed.
Angela amused herself with wild proposals to Charlie Audley to repair
thither in disguise together, talking nonsense that greatly annoyed
Clement, and was far from pleasing Felix or Cherry; but she was in so
reckless and defiant a mood, that they could only hope that she might
work it off at the oar. Her arms were strong as well as long, and
rowing was a pastime she loved, having been franked as an A B S ever
since she had taken lessons at a swimming-bath. The day was delicious,
with clouds chasing one another so as to make fleeting lights and
shadows on Penbeacon and the hills beyond; the clear brown water
sparkling in ripples or lying in deep pools, shadowed by the woods that
came down to the bank in the early green of spring, flowering may,
mountain ash, and wreaths of blushing eglantine overhanging the margin,
or where the space was open, revealing meadows all one golden sheet of
buttercups, while the fringe of the stream was the feathery bogbean and
the golden broom, mixed with tall sword leaves of the flag and the reed.
Shaded at length by a picturesque high-backed one-arched bridge, the
boat waited while Clement and Angela went on their cottage visiting.
Charlie did not, as Cherry expected, invite Lance to promenade the
bank with a cigar, but applied himself to helping Stella in collecting
a grand nosegay of every sort of flower and grass within reach.
The others remained in the boat: Lance leaning over the gunwale
dreamily watching the ripples, apparently half asleep, lulled by the
monotonously sweet humming of Theodore, and the songs of the birds in
the woods; Cherry was sketching, and Felix rested musingly.
'Tranquillity Bridge,' he said. 'I always fancy it must have been named
by some pious builder imbued with the spirit of the Pilgrim's Progress.'
'An unconscious poet,' said Cherry.
'Yes. Such a tranquil rest, amid such perfect peace and loveliness,
without one discordant element, is one of the choicest boons of life.'
Lance swallowed a sigh; and Cherry answered, 'The very movements and
sounds are all peace, though full of life.'
For a gold-billed moorhen was swimming among its little ones at the
margin of the reeds at the bend of the river, and a sapphire kingfisher
darted across the arch.
'Halcyon days,' said Felix.
'Oh no! Halcyon days precede storms.'
'Maybe they give strength for them. Times like these are surely
foretastes of perfect bliss.'
'How does that prepare for storms?'
'Not only by calming nerves and spirits, but by giving some experience
of the joy beyond--ay, and sense of love and confidence in Him who has
made all so exquisite for our delight.'
It seemed to come from his heart, drawn forth by the grateful enjoyment
of that sweet Whitsun hour.
Cherry held up her finger as a ring-dove began to coo from the thicket,
making fit answer to one thus resting in the Feast of the Comforter;
Theodore cooed in return, and the bird seemed to be replying. Even the
tumult of pain and grief in Lance's breast was soothed by the spirit of
the words and scene, while he felt the contrast, like an abyss, between
himself and the others.
But when the rest of the party came gaily back with talk and laughter,
inaction had become intolerable to him. He wanted to take Angela's oar,
but she would not hear of giving it up, and Felix resigned his, while
Cherry owned that she preferred having him at the helm when going down
the river.
Theodore, with a shout, held out his hands for Stella's flowers,
and she gave the whole into his hands, Charlie for a moment looking
disappointed; but as the twins sat together, and the little fellow drew
out the flowers singly and dropped them into his sister's lap, while
she whispered their names, it was evidently perfect joy to both. Some,
such as the bright spires of broom, he greeted with a snatch of nursery
song, though otherwise the pair were scarcely audible as long as the
nosegay lasted, and that was for a long time; but when Stella had made
it up again, only leaving the broom to him, he returned to his usual
hum, and this time with the tune of 'The strain upraise,' which had
been practised that morning for Trinity Sunday, and which met the sound
of the bells ringing for Evensong.
'That's rather too much!' exclaimed Angela. 'We shall be taken for some
of the pious, a singing of hymns.--Come, Tedo.'
'No, no,' said Felix, 'I'll not have him interfered with.' And he
hummed the tune.
'That's always the way when Baby goes out with us,' muttered Angela,
audaciously singing out at the top of her clear soprano--
'Six o'clock is striking,
Mother, may I go out?
My young man is waiting,
To take me all about.
First he gives me apples,
Then he gives me pears;
Then he gives me sixpence,
To take me round the fairs;'
thus effectually silencing both the others, the one from sense of
discord, the other from serious displeasure. At that moment, shooting
from behind the bend of the river where stood the Hook and Line,
came the other boat. Excited probably by the song, the young men in
it shouted 'Come on! Who'll be first! We'll take a couple of your
sweethearts aboard, to make fair play! We'll have your nightingale!'
'Next he gives me bacon
And eggs to fry in the pan,
And no one there to eat them
But me and my young man.'
sung they lustily, as on they came, as fast as the current, assisted by
twelve vigorous arms, could carry them.
A few strokes would have gained the garden landing-place, but the
pursuers' velocity was reckless. One moment as they passed the eddy of
the junction of the Leston, and the end of the four-oar swung round
into the middle of the river, there was a shock, a shriek of many
voices; and just as John and Wilmet Harewood were crossing the lawn to
return to their own cottage, they beheld both boats upset, and fifteen
persons struggling in the midstream.
Even as the collision took place, Felix had seized Theodore, and after
both had been drawn down for a second, rose again, making vigorous
strokes with one arm for the bank, reaching that of the churchyard,
where it was built up high and steep; but with one of the violent
efforts of a supreme moment, he grasped a branch of the overhanging
willow tree, swung himself up by one arm till his feet had a hold, and
he could launch himself partly over the iron rail, and deposit his
burthen on the grass, when climbing over, he reached down and dragged
up Geraldine from the arm of Clement, who had closely followed him.
By that time both the other sisters were safe; Charles Audley,
thoroughly at home in the water, had directed himself more skilfully,
holding Stella by her shoulder, to the garden landing-place, further
off, but of easier access. Indeed, she had not lost the power of
helping herself, when Wilmet's arms clasped her on the steps; and only
a few moments later, Angela, who had kept herself afloat, was likewise
landed, with very little aid from Charles.
Lance's rescue was harder. He could not swim at all, sank twice, and
rose the second time a little way down the stream, where John Harewood
grappled him and brought him to the steps, helpless and at first
unconscious. Of the other boat's crew, two reached the bank alone,
another had saved his fellow, a fifth clung to his oar, and was guided
ashore by Clement, a sixth was drawn out insensible by young Audley;
the last was still missing, and John, Charles, one of the other lads,
and old Tripp, were all striving to find and rescue him. Four figures
lay insensible, three more were struggling back to life--the servants
rushing down; Wilmet, supporting Lance in his gasping efforts, took
the command. 'Angel, Stella--don't wait, back to the house. Change
instantly.--Amelia, go with them, give them something hot, never mind
what, and put Miss Underwood to bed.--Yes, Clement, carry her to her
room; and you--don't do anything else till you have changed--Felix,
we'll take Tedo to the laundry; it is hot, and flannels can be warmed
sooner.--Golightly, you and Martha take this one.--You two the
other.--Follow Mr. Underwood--Yes, dear Lancey, you are better. They
are all safe. Shall I help you up? That's right. Lean on, my dear, more
than that; don't be afraid, I'm strong enough; there, you get on very
well.'
Before they had made many steps, a shout proclaimed that the last
sufferer had been found; and while he was carried between his friend
and Tripp, Wilmet hastily insisted that her husband should hurry home
and change his clothes before doing anything else, and relinquishing
Lance to Charlie to be helped up-stairs, hastened to the scene of
action in the laundry, where the four lifeless figures were stretched
on the ironing tables. The other three young men were sent to be
between blankets till their clothes could be dried; and Felix, after
having laid down his unconscious burthen, lingered for a moment, till
Wilmet ordered him off to change his dripping clothes, when he obeyed
without a word.
Clement, half-dressed, was finding garments for Charlie, and insisting
that bed was the place for Lance, when there was a sudden call at
his door, and as he opened it Angela stood before him, exclaiming,
'Come this instant!' and as he followed her flying steps, he beheld
Felix on the stairs, sitting propped against the balusters, holding a
handkerchief to his mouth covered with blood. He had been standing,
supporting himself against the post at the bottom, when Angela had
first found him, and had so far helped him up; but the effort had
evidently been agonizing, and increased the bleeding so much, that she
had tried to place him safely, and hurried for aid. He could do nothing
for himself, but Charles Audley coming to their assistance, they
brought him to his room door, where Angela, crying, 'Ice! ice is the
thing!' dashed away to the offices, where she heard voices.
'Miss Angela, you mus'n't come here.'
'Quick, Martha, the key of the ice-house.'
'Hice-ouse! bless you, Miss Hangela, 'tis 'ot as is wanted.'
'It is ice for the bleeding. It's a blood-vessel! It is Felix. I must
have the key.'
But Martha, always despising Angela, and now all the more with her hair
streaming below her waist, simply did not hear, and hurried away with
her flannels. Angela rushed after her, but only heard, 'You can't come
here.'
As she was raising her voice for a more peremptory cry, she saw John
Harewood returning. He understood in a moment, made entrance, obtained
the key, and while she fetched the ice, he hurried to the scene of the
most pressing and grievous need.
By the time she brought the ice, the drenched clothes had been removed,
and Felix was in bed, and the remedy she had obtained did at last check
the flow of blood, but there was not only exhaustion but evidently very
severe pain. 'Where?' He put his hand to his right side; and at that
moment, to their infinite relief, they found among them Dr. Thomas
May, the professor, who--on his way home from a visit to his friend
the chemist--had been met in the village and brought to their aid even
before Page, who was out on his rounds.
The verdict of the first moment was that the hmorrhage was not from
the lungs, and indeed the patient showed no difficulty in speaking
after the first faintness. Had he felt the hurt on throwing himself
over the rail? He thought so, but could not recollect; it only
became disabling when he tried to go up-stairs, and that brought the
bleeding--'but Theodore! Pray go to Theodore!'
There was no withstanding his anxiety, only the Professor directed
the unsuccessful endeavour to make the posture easier, and ordered
fomentations as the only present alleviation, except perfect stillness.
No judgment could be formed as yet, and he therefore gratified the
ardent desire faintly breathed forth, while the great drops of pain
stood on the brow. 'Please, see Geraldine! And when Theodore comes
round, bring him here! Clem, see it is so; he will be pacified in sight
of me.'
Clement promised, and made it plain that it would be better for both;
and then he took the young doctor first to Geraldine, who, once in
bed, could not leave it without assistance, and was chained there
in terrible anxiety, with Stella as her messenger; but her agony of
suspense was her chief ailment, and after saying all he conscientiously
could to soothe her, Dr. Tom was guided to the laundry, where he
vanished.
Long, long was news watched for from thence. Even those who went in
quest of hot water learnt nothing, till at last Charlie heard that one
of the young men was reviving, and presently he was carried up to the
spare room.
Another quarter, another half-hour dragged by. Felix renewed his
entreaty for Theodore's presence, but messenger after messenger
returned not. First John went and came back no more, then Clement was
called for and never returned, and Felix became so restless under the
impression that Wilmet would choose to put the child to bed unhappy
in Sibby's room, that Lance could only carry down his mandate to the
contrary. Then when the next access of watching and anxiety was visibly
increasing the suffering and danger, Angela left Stella in charge,
and went herself to represent that the dire suspense must be relieved
before it did further harm.
The ear was in a state of agonized tension, and caught a sound. 'Open
the door, Stella. Hark!'
She obeyed. There were voices; Wilmet's--Clement's. 'You go!'--'He will
bear it best from you!' they said.
She heard no more, for Felix had started up on his elbow, and the blood
had again rushed to his lips. She called for help. All were about
him, there was no checking it, for seconds--for minutes. His face was
deathly, his hands cold. Clement, holding him on his breast, whispering
prayers, felt him more prone and feeble every instant; all believed
that a life was ebbing away far more precious than the little feeble
spark so easily quenched.
When a respite came, it was with a hand on the pulse, and with an
anxious face, that the doctor durst signify to them that this was
relief--not the end as yet; but as Clement laid the head back the
furrows of pain had cleared, the brow had smoothed, the breath came
without the stifled groans, the position was less constrained, and when
Angela ventured to say, 'He looks more comfortable,' there was an air
of assent and rest, the worst of the pain was evidently relieved for
the time.
Stella stole away with the tidings to poor Geraldine, whom she found
sitting up in bed, trembling so that the whole framework shook,
and totally unable to move from it, without the appliances that
assisted her lameness. Before long, Wilmet was able to attend to a
representation of her condition, and could bring her wonted remedies,
and what was even better, her strong soft arms to enfold the little
frail quivering frame, and her sweet, steady, full voice to assure her
that Felix was undoubtedly better, and not suffering near so much.
And when Cherry was quieted, and Wilmet would have returned, the
little handmaid said, in an imploring voice, 'Where is dear Tedo?
mayn't I go to him now?'
'My dear child!' exclaimed Wilmet, in pitying consternation, 'then you
don't know?'
Cherry saw what was implied! How else could the helpless darling have
been left by all!
'It is so?' she said.
Wilmet bent her head.
Stella gave a kind of moan.
'Yes,' Wilmet said, 'It is nearly three hours since. The Professor
said there might be hope for two. One young man is getting better at
last, Page is with him. We went on trying--John says for two hours and
a quarter, and Sibby is going on still; but there is no hope now; and
when I heard about Felix--Stella, dear child, where are you going?'
'Mayn't I help Sibby?' The voice was so plaintively imploring, the eyes
looked so mournfully earnest out of the loose damp mass of dark brown
hair, that it seemed cruel to answer, 'Stella, dear dear little one,
indeed you must not, you can't go there.'
Instinctive obedience recalled her; but still she pleaded, 'He must get
better! He was such a little moment under water! I think he is afraid
to open his eyes because I am not there, nor Brother. Do let me try!
I'm sure he would know me.'
'Stella, sweet, indeed I would let you if I could; but you can't go to
the laundry, there are strange men about, and they are making up a bed
for young Light; he can't be moved. The hope is quite gone, my dear, it
was such a feeble little tender life.'
'And there could have been no pain or fright,' said Cherry.
But she broke off, as poor little Stella collapsed with her face
between her hands, sitting on the floor, lost in her hair, not
speaking, only a great stifling smothering sob heaving up, as if the
oppression of her first grief were crushing, nay strangling her.
Wilmet knelt down to gather her into her motherly arms, and whisper
comfort, but this was not what she wanted; she somehow slid away, stood
up, and said, 'Please, may I go into my own room? I want to be by
myself.'
'To your room and your bed, my dear,' said Wilmet. 'I am going to send
you both some tea.'
Cherry only had visits from the maids, with tea that refreshed her, but
from which Stella in the inner room turned away. The summer twilight
had passed into night before a long black figure looked in. 'Asleep,
Cherry?'
'Oh no, Clem! I knew you would come.'
'I am sorry not to have come before, but there has been so much to do.'
'And he?'
'Tom May thinks his pulse stronger, and was struck by the look of rally
about his face when we came back after supper.'
'Who is there now?'
'Wilmet and the Professor. May will let no one sit up who has been in
the water. I care the less because with my door open it is almost like
being in the same room.'
'But he is better?'
'Not in pain,' said Clement; 'and May thinks that there are no ribs
broken, though there is a great bruise. Much may be only violent
sprain, and it may be only some unimportant vessel that has given
way; but he is too weak and tender yet for anything like examination.
However, as long as the bleeding does not return, he is gaining every
hour.'
'It was that dreadful scramble up the bank!'
'That quite accounts for it; and he must have twisted himself as he
threw himself over the rail. No one could have done it in cold blood,
even without dear Baby's weight.'
'And after that he pulled me up! Clem, it was you that saved me,
and yet I could not thank you if--O Clem!' She laid her head on his
shoulder, struggling with horror at the bare notion of life without
Felix.
He was very sorry for her. He had always loved her the best of his
sisters, yet he felt himself so inadequate to fill to her the place of
their eldest, or even of the lost Edgar.
'My poor Cherry!' he said, stroking her damp hair; 'but thus far God
has been very gracious to us, and we will take hope, and trust Him.
Think how much worse it might have been. So many in danger, and the
only one taken so surely gone home!'
'Ah! I can only think how happy we were so short a moment before. He
said halcyon weather came to bear us through storms; but oh! it makes
it worse.'
'You will not think so when you see our little one's countenance,
sealed with his Alleluia! The vacancy is gone, and there is a wonderful
depth in his face, as if his Ephphatha had come to the guileless lips.
Sibby and I have been dressing him in his surplice, and laying him
under the Cross in the Oratory with his broom blossoms in his hand.
Sibby says he was still clutching them when Felix gave him to her. Poor
Sibby, she says her heart stood still then; but she would not cease
from trying to restore him till long after we all knew it was vain;
and when I made her desist, for the sake of young Light, who must be
kept quiet, I thought she would have broken her heart; but at last she
seemed to feel the soothing awe of the dear little face; and she has
got her beads, and means to keep her vigil over him all night.'
'Does he know?'
'Wilmet fancies not, and is on the watch for his asking; but I am sure
he understood, when I thought he was fast going, and told him Theodore
was "safe home." I am sure it made it easier;' and as Cherry winced and
shuddered, he added, 'This calmness after the suspense was over was
really what did him most good. He is better every hour, and no one else
of ourselves at all the worse except Lance. When the alarm was over, we
found him shivering violently, and hardly able to hold up his head. I
believe that his danger was the greatest of all, and that he could not
have been saved but for John; the stream was carrying him down against
the bridge.'
'O Clem! help me to be thankful! But is not one poor fellow really
taken?'
'Yes, a fine young lad about Bernard's age. He had been under water so
long, that we never had much hope; but the whole frame seemed so made
for vigour, that Page thought there might be a return, and went on with
Krishnu's help for four hours--nor did Sibby leave off till after that.
They were a party of clerks and shopmen from Spiers and Hart's. The
four who are gone home are very subdued and grateful. The father of one
came out in a fly and took them all back, though I thought it rather a
risk for the lad who had been so long insensible.'
'Then there is one in the red-room.'
'He had had some blow, and was too much done up to move; but Page says
he will be all right to-morrow. I am more afraid for the one in the
laundry, and have got Kerenhappuch to sit up with him. The poor boy who
is lying by our dear child was a clerk of Hart's; Audley was going to
see about sending to his people. He went off in his skiff a couple of
hours ago.'
'There's eleven o'clock! O Clem, I ought not to keep you from resting.'
'This is rest, Cherry.'
'Only leave me something to rest on.'
'What shall I say to you?'
'What you like. There are matches.'
'I need not read.'
And he murmured over her Psalm, Collect, thanksgiving, and prayer,
half quoted, half from his own heart, and then stood to give her his
blessing of peace, and his kiss, which left her hushed, softened,
comforted, attuned to meet whatever might be coming.
Again he was at her door in early morning, with tidings of reassurance.
Felix had spent a quiet night, without recurrence of bleeding, and
though too feeble almost for speech, and unable to make the least
movement without pain, he had so far surmounted the first danger, that
Professor May meant to go away on the return of the carriage he had
sent home at night, and, unless telegraphed for, would not come again
till Thursday, only enforcing absolute quiescence though not forbidding
speech. Clement had seen a great improvement in looks, and Wilmet had
consented to lie down on her husband's coming to take charge of the
patient.
'And Lance?'
'He is getting up to come to Church, though he has had a bad night, and
he looks anything but fit for it. He says he must come even if he has
to go back to his bed.'
'Surely it is too great a risk.'
'So I told him, but he declares he has caught no cold, and that it is
all headache and feverishness, which fresh air will relieve. I don't
know, but I can't withhold him.'
'Whit-Tuesday! I had forgotten. Sunday seems to have been ages ago!'
'And how are you, Cherry? Did you sleep?'
'In a sort of way; I am quite well, if only any one would come and help
me to get up! I can't bear lying here any longer. Do try to send me one
of the maids. I can't disturb that poor little dear; she is asleep at
last. Take my heart with you, Clement! After all, it is a sacrifice of
thanksgiving this morning.'
Clement was wont to gather his small daily congregation in the Lady
Chapel, where never since the family migration had the early Holy-day
Celebration been so scantily attended. It was in unison with the many
beyond that he made his Commemoration, his oblation, his intense
intercession, in the dewy light of the early summer morning, his
apparently low yet really powerful deep-pitched voice sounding far down
the aisles and among the pillars in the nave.
The blessing echoed beyond the enclosing screen, and presently Lance
rose from his knees and moved slowly westwards. If for a space he had
felt some of the joy of holy comfort on the renewal of the sacrifice of
self, soul and body, love and hope, before the Lord of life and death,
yet he was more conscious of the oppression of the sickly odour of the
drooping greenery and faded flowers that hung trailing on column and
poppy-head, and which compelled him to leave the Church, though every
step down the nave seemed to increase the load of sorrow, anxiety, and
wounded affection, beneath which head and heart had burnt and throbbed
the long night through. If he had reinforced patience and resolution,
he could not yet feel the benefit.
A slight sound made him raise his eyes. Whom did he see catching at
a bench for support, with white cheek and dilated eye? Whose voice
exclaimed, 'You! you safe then!' Whose hand, so strangely cold, grasped
his with convulsive eagerness, as her lips formed but did not utter the
inquiry, 'Who?'
'Our poor little Theodore,' he said. 'My brother is better this
morning.'
'Theodore! I never thought of him!' she gasped. 'Two lives--one in
great danger--the note said--Tom's man could not tell which--I could
not bear it--I had behaved so ill to--'
And she was cut short by a violent though hushed fit of weeping, while
he exclaimed incoherently, 'No! no! don't think--I was a fool--oh!
don't cry--don't--it is all over now--and this is so good and precious!
Oh! please don't cry! Come in to Cherry! Take my arm.'
'Oh!' between her sobs, in a panting whisper. 'I never meant that. But
I should have died if I had not come with the carriage to find out. I
went in here to wait. I meant no one to know.'
'You must come in now. Cherry is well, and up.'
'I can't! I ought not! Don't let any one know.'
'Indeed you must come in! Think of the comfort to Cherry. Besides, you
will hear of them all. Come.'
The tone was most persuasive, and Gertrude felt that she must yield;
indeed, she trembled so much as to need the support of his arm as he
took her along the cloister into the darkened house, up the stairs to
the Prior's room, where he was glad to find preparations for breakfast;
and placing Gertrude on the sofa, he was knocking at Cherry's door,
when he heard the tap of her stick as she came along the gallery from a
visit to Felix.
She had only been allowed to give him ocular demonstration that she
was well and afoot, and exchange a kiss and five fond words; but the
welcoming smile of gladness had so enlightened his face, that she was
cheerful enough to be able to meet Lance's eager face and gesture as he
threw his arm round her, whispering, 'She's here, Cherry. She's come in
May's carriage. That most dearest--!'
And before she had fairly recollected who was most dearest to Lance,
she was borne away into the room, to see tearful eyes, and crimson
face, find them hidden against her, and be almost stifled in Gertrude
May's embrace.
The explanation was made in more detail than in the church. Tom May,
on finding that he must stay, had scribbled a pencil-line to his
wife--'Terrible boat accident; two lives gone, fears for two more. Send
the other horse for me to-morrow morning.'
The groom was only sure that it was the Squire of whom scarcely a hope
was given, and another brother drowned, which he could not say, except
that it was not the clergyman. Dr. May and Ethel were spending the
night at Abbotstoke; and Gertrude, after hours of tossing under remorse
for her discourtesy, and misery of suspense, found waiting unendurable,
and obeyed the impulse to rise and go with the carriage.
'Indeed,' she said, looking up to Lance, 'it was very wrong. I could
not believe anything so exquisite had been done for me.'
'As if anything--'
'But haven't I been punished!' she went on, not pausing. 'Oh! to think
I never--never could unsay it, nor ask your pardon!'
'Pardon!' he gasped, turning as red as before he had been pale, and
holding a chair for support; and before he could say another word, the
impulsive girl cried, 'And oh! it is all my selfishness, bothering him
when he looks so dreadfully ill.'
'No, no,' broke out Lance, afraid he was frightening her away, and
still almost beside himself. 'This is perfect healing.'
'Don't talk nonsense,' broke in Cherry, half comprehending, but
a good deal alarmed, and therefore assuming authority with some
peremptoriness; 'the truth is, you are both famished, and must have
some breakfast this instant.' She poured out coffee, and then moved to
provide eatables. Lance's instinct was of course to help her, but his
hand shook so much that he had to relinquish the bread-knife. 'Yes,'
said Cherry, as she took it from him; 'no wonder! When did you eat
last?'
'I--can't tell. Somebody made me swallow something hot and abominable
when I came in, and my head has never stopped going round ever since;
but I don't care now.'
'No doubt it saved you from something worse.--You know he was longer in
the water than any of us.'
'I don't know anything,' said Gertrude. 'I thought Mr. Underwood--'
Then it had to be explained--that is, as much as Cherry and Lance knew.
'Some tipsy fellows racing us--the shock--the helpless plunge;' then
Cherry had felt the instant security of Clement's arm, and was drawn up
the bank.
'How beautiful it was!' said Gertrude softly, 'that care for poor
little Theodore first, and then you!'--and softer tears came into her
eyes. 'It is just like all his life.'
'Just,' they both said, gratefully.
'And how does he look?'
'Perfectly white, dear fellow--lips and all,' said Cherry; 'and he
speaks so slowly, and only just above his breath; but his eyes watch
one about with all their grave brightness.'
'Grave brightness,' whispered Gertrude to herself, while a sweet
satisfied look passed over her face. 'Did he know how it was with the
poor little one before he--was ill?'
'No,' said Lance; but he could now add that when Felix had seen
Clement about to go to church, he had said, 'Remember me, and give
thanks--above all for dear Baby.'
Never perhaps had Gertrude shown such soft shy tenderness; and Lance
confirmed the trust that Theodore could scarcely have felt a pang, for
he said that in his own case the drowning had been far preferable to
the coming back to life, when Wilmet had seemed a cruel tormentor.
'Who was it that brought you out?'
'Who, Cherry? I never asked!'
'Oh!' emphatically exclaimed Gertrude; then in a murmur under her
breath, 'or what would it not have been to me?'
'It was John Harewood,' said Cherry.
There was a knock. Professor May, at his principal patient's entreaty,
had come to inspect Miss Underwood. His amazement at the spectacle of
her companions was unbounded, and did not make him merciful to Lance,
whom he meant to have next visited in bed, and whose throbbing pulses,
varying complexion, heavy eyes, aching limbs, palpitating breath,
and untasted meal, all indicated that he ought to have been there.
The reproof was not like the rough uncompromising scolding Rugg was
wont to bestow; but with quiet irony Dr. Tom impressed on Lance that
getting up had been a recklessly foolish pastime, in which he might
have been permitted to indulge so far as his own insignificant welfare
was concerned, but that he could not be permitted to inflict another
serious illness on his family. The only thing that was proper by them
was immediately to repair to his bed, and there await the upshot of his
imprudence, so as to mitigate the effect as much as possible.
And then summarily carrying off his sister, Tom began as soon as
they were outside the gate, 'This is simply the most extraordinary
proceeding I ever heard of.'
Gertrude held her tongue.
'May I ask whether my father is in the habit of permitting these freaks
when he is visiting his patients?'
'I beg your pardon,' she answered. 'I forget the unapproachableness of
your patients when they are my dearest friends.'
'Oh, indeed!' Then presently, and as if for fear the groom should
hear--'Les demoiselles font beaucoup de choses mal  propos  l'heure
qu'il est, mais je vous conseille de ne pas avouer votre prfrence 
si haute voix.'
'I don't care,' she said, scorning the veil, 'who knows that I glory in
appreciating heroism.'
'The heroism of getting upset in a boat!'
She deigned no reply; and he waited, trusting to her feminine nature to
make her begin again, but silence was her only refuge from angry tears
or words, and she kept it till the Church Ewe station was in sight.
'Thank you,' she said. 'I'll go home by train.'
He had visits to make, and was glad to be quit of her, but with
elaborate cold care came to the station, found that a train was nearly
due, and waited with her. He must have done so for the purpose of
saying, 'Mind! these are estimable persons, but that is no reason for
dropping self-restraint.' Then, as her pout nettled him, 'Nothing is
more disgusting or unmaidenly than pursuit of one in a lower walk of
life.'
'Walks of life are what men make them.' And they treated each other
with dignified silence till the train came.
'Well,' said Dr. May, on hearing his son's story, 'the Press is king
now-a-days, and one daughter is his tribute.' The Doctor still liked to
tease Tom.
Meantime, Lance, in no condition to resist, had betaken himself to
his own chamber, but only to find the housemaid had left the bed in
the most approved sanitary state--so long as it was not to be lain
on. Not sorry for a dispensation from captivity, he extracted his
private horse-hair pillow from the pile of bed-clothes, and came
back to the painting-room, where Cherry cleared her large sofa, and
covered him up with her Indian silk quilt, he smiling blissfully, and
observing, 'Isn't she the dearest girl in the world?' Cherry might
have heard a great deal, had it been possible to her to sit and talk
when innumerable messages were coming for her. When she had answered
the first, he began again with 'So sweet and generous.' Then came the
second which involved a note. When she looked at him again, he only
smiled. She next had to go down to the kitchen; and on her cautious
return she found him asleep, breathing like a child, and a colour--not
fever--coming into his cheek.
'Poor fellow!' she sighed to herself. 'I wonder if there is any hope
for him; but if the notion only bears him through to-day, it is a
blessing!'
Poor Cherry! Such as this was all the nursing she was good for. Her
nerves made her not to be trusted alone in a sick-room, not to do equal
damage to herself and the patient; and she could only sit with the door
ajar, writing notes, and acting as referee to countless questions, all
in an undertone out of respect to Lance's slumbers.
And there meanwhile sat Angela, trusted to fan Felix, refresh him
with a strawberry or spoonful of iced lemonade, bathe his face with
eau-de-cologne, or catch his slightest wish, cares so congenial,
that she liked them for a stranger, how much more delightful for 'my
brother;' and though she knew more clearly than anyone save John
and Clement how precarious his state was, youthful buoyancy viewed
the danger as the cause of future triumph. To be a lady-doctor was
surely her vocation! What a pity Charlie was heir to a baronetcy! And
he had finally saved her--though she had kept herself afloat--he
might be allowed the honour of her rescue; and if it made him her
fate, Lady Audley, M.D., should obtain a magnificent triumph over
conventionality, far beyond all her former conceptions.
When Clement came into the room at noon, she would not give up her
place. Felix looked up to him, and said, 'You are seeing to things!'
'Yes--' interrogatively.
'Try how near that willow it can be.'
'I will.'
'How about the inquest?'
'At the Rood this afternoon. Never mind about that.'
'Only see there is no injustice to those poor lads! It was our own
doing;' and as Clement looked amazed, 'if our boat had not swung
round;' but the earnestness with which the words were spoken brought
a thrill of pain that cut him short; and they wiped his brow, and
sprinkled him with scent, and watched anxiously till the lines about
the eyes and mouth began to relax, and he smiled thanks back, then
closed his eyes.
Clement left the room unheard, for the heat of the day compelled the
opening of window and doors. He had only just became conscious that
from the moment of the accident he had never had leisure to consider
the cause; and he went across to the painting-room, where he did not
find Cherry; but Lance awoke at his entrance, sat up, and in answer to
his apology and inquiry pronounced, 'There's wonderful virtue in sleep.
I don't think any of the ills Tom May threatened me with are coming to
pass.'
'Your head?'
'No worse than I'm well used to, thank you. How is it in there?'
Clement told him what had just passed, adding, 'What do you remember?'
'My notion,' said Lance, 'was simply that we were overtaken by a lot of
scamps too excited to perceive what they were about, and egged on by
Angel's unlucky song.'
'I doubt the "excitement" being of the technical kind, unless the water
had a very sudden sobering effect.'
'Indeed! Well, considering that you were in your shirt-sleeves, their
not perceiving that we weren't in their style was not so wonderful.
So Felix says we ought to have cleared them. Ay, I do remember the
swinging round now.'
'An oar must have missed the stroke, and brought her stern foul of the
other.'
'He must have seen who it was,' said Lance.
'Yes, but as the point is to exonerate these fellows, there seems no
need to drive it close home among ourselves.'
'No, she need never know exactly what she has done,' said Lance.
'I did not say she never should,' returned Clement; 'but the public
need not. In fact, we have nothing to say. Felix, in the stern, may
have seen, but I did not.'
'And Charlie Audley?'
'If he knows no more positively than we do, you may be sure he will
not draw inferences. I wonder he has not been here yet, by-the-by.'
'You don't mean to forewarn him?'
'Certainly not.'
'No, it would not be right. All we determine is that it shall not be
known through us, if we can keep truth and justice without,' said
Lance; 'and if appearances are to be trusted, he is likely to be as
ready--or more so--to shield her as any one of us.'
'I believe that is as great an absurdity as any of the rest,' said
Clement, gloomily.
CHAPTER XLIII.
PRINCESS FAIR-STAR.
'But the little Stars we found (out)
Down amongst the Underwood.'
Jean Ingelow.
Even while Lance and Clement were in discussion, Charles Audley
had paddled up the river, and mooring his little craft at the
landing-place, had taken the path to the garden.
There, beyond the cedar, so as to be hidden from any one upon the
river, sat Stella, decking a cross with lilies-of-the-valley and white
lilacs. Scamp was lying by her, and her doves parading and cooing
on the grass and cedar boughs beside her; but the utter droop and
dejection of her young figure were altogether out of keeping with the
summer surroundings; the shining head was bowed, and the heavy eyelids
with broad red rings around them showed that she had wept and wept on
for hours. She did not hear the step on the soft grass, for her low sad
voice was murmuring, 'My Tedo, my darling, my baby, is this the last
thing I shall ever do for him?'
Then Scamp wagged his tail and crested his ears in greeting, and the
doves circled about, and perched higher upon the cedar tree, while
Charles, holding one of the flat sweeping boughs back, stood looking
down at her, as hardly knowing how to greet her, and with a tear
gathering in his eyes. She stood up, and looked up to him meekly and
sweetly, with a touching sort of welcome, as she held out her hand,
saying simply, 'You saved me, and I never thanked you yesterday.'
Instead of speaking, Charles lifted the little hand in both his to his
lips and cheek for a moment, as if nothing else could express how he
prized that chance; but if Stella thought at all, it was that it was a
kind action of comforting.
'Your brother is better,' he said, having inquired at Page's door.
'Yes, he is better. I saw him, and he just spoke; but he does look so
bad!'
'He will soon mend now,' said Charles, with the confidence of one who
knew nothing about it. 'And you are all alone?'
'They are all busy or resting or something, and I want to do it all for
Theodore myself--my own own darling!' The last words were a moan to
herself, as she sat down in her low chair and resumed the little cross.
'May not I help a little?' softly entreated Charles, sitting down
on the grass and quietly handing her the flowers, ready arranged in
bunches, with a leaf. She did not speak, but seemed to like it. There
was a loneliness about her that again struck him, so that he could not
help half blaming those who had left her to herself; and to account for
their absence asked after Lance.
'He is up, but he seems very poorly still,' she said; 'he is lying down
in the Prior's room.'
'And they have left you all to yourself?'
'I like to be alone. Nobody did care for him like me. They were all
very kind to him. I don't think he knew the sound of a rough word, my
dear little gentle Tedo! but nobody understood him like me, nobody
could make him understand--' and she rocked herself backwards and
forwards under the load of her first real grief. It was very sad to the
young man to watch, and he hardly knew what to say, as again he took
her hand. 'Well, now he can't have any troubles, you know, Stella, he's
a great deal happier than ever you could make him.'
'Oh yes, I know that. Only it is foolish. I can't think how he gets on
all alone! I know it is very wrong, but if Felix or I had gone with
him it would not seem so strange for him. Yes, it is very silly,' she
added, half laughing, but crying again, 'but it will seem hard to
fancy he does not want me.'
'He is not the only one to want you,' muttered Charles.
'Oh no! There are plenty of them. I want to be thankful, indeed I
do, but no one ever can be so dear! Never mind,' she added in her
unselfishness, perceiving that her exceeding sorrow was causing grief
and perplexity, 'it can't be helped; I do know he is happy, and I'll
learn to bear the being left alone.'
'Never! if dearest love can make up to you--dearest, sweetest little
one!' cried Charles. 'There!' as he took both her hands, and her
wistful wondering eyes were raised, 'don't you see some one who wants
you every moment, and that all your brothers put together can't love
you a quarter as much as I do? There! there! Only do just promise,
Stella, never to talk again of being left all alone while you have
Charlie.'
'I don't think I can,' said Stella, in a dreamy wondering voice, 'for
you are so kind.'
'And you'll let me try to comfort you?'--a dangerous proposal, for he
did not in the least know how he should have set about it if she had
not answered, 'I think you do,' as if it rather surprised her, bringing
such an approach to caressing as would have startled her at any moment
when her heart was not so yearning for tenderness and sympathy. And
there was a reaction the next moment, as finding herself guilty of
forgetting Theodore and his cross, she gave a moan of pain--'Oh, my
Tedo!' and went on with her work; but she let him wait on her with the
flowers, and now and then a little squeeze of the hand, and he knew he
must be content with that much. Presently she said that she ought to
make something for 'that other poor one, or it would look so unkind
when his mother came.' In this task she could brook more help, and she
spoke more over it, with a sweet soft languor that had an infinite
pathos, as if somehow the acute anguish of her loss had been softened,
and she were resting in the strange new peace which she did not yet
know for joy, but which had filled her heart. She was so very young,
so very pure, so very unconscious, that Charlie, almost as young and
not much less simple and innocent, was as tender and reverent of her
and her grief, and the state of her guardian brother, as though she had
been one of her own white flowers--those last sprays she let him take
from her hand when all was done, and they went together to carry the
wreaths and crosses to the Oratory.
The large heavy curtains that separated the hall from the long room
were let down, and the screen, a tall wooden one, as usual cut off the
Oratory. Here the chairs had been removed to make room; and close under
the Cross, to the eastward, were the two tables that had been covered
with white to receive the two who had so lately gone forth full of life.
On one of the chairs sat Cherry, endeavouring to obtain some record of
that unearthly loveliness of expression, chiefly for Felix's sake. She
had just done all she durst, and produced a drawing that would not look
like such an utter failure away from the original, when these two came
in, Stella leading the way in gentle awe, very sad indeed, but still
not with that utterly drooping downcast look of leaden grief which had
in the morning shrunk from all comforters who could only believe, not
enter into, the intensity of her mourning for her twin.
Cherry, in the corner, almost hidden by the chairs, could not tell
whether her presence were perceived; but in truth the child was so
simple, that she would probably have done exactly the same whether
her sister was present or not, and Charles had no eyes for aught save
her. She knelt down for a moment, with her face in her hands; then she
kissed the white brow set in fair hair, and seemed to expect Charles to
do the same, as a great favour to him, after which she let him help her
to lay her cross with the wreath round it on the breast, and change the
now closed Star of Bethlehem that lay under the waxen fingers, as well
as that withered spray of broom. Once more she knelt, and whispered
the Lord's Prayer: and he did the same, imitating her in everything, a
grave kind of light on his young brow. It was very solemn and beautiful
to see them, and Cherry watched them almost with awe.
When they rose, Stella placed her decorations on the longer broader
form on the other table, but whispered that Clement had bidden her not
to look at that face.
They went away hand in hand, and parted upon the lawn, for precious as
each other's presence was, they, in their reverence and inexperience,
felt as if his coming in to the family meal might be an intrusion,
which neither could propose. So he bade her tell her brothers that he
should meet them at the Rood.
'I shall hardly see you just yet,' he said, 'though I shall come to
the door every day, but never--never think yourself alone, dearest,
dearest, dearest one!' And after holding both the little hands for some
moments in his, he drew her up to him for one second, then was gone.
No one saw Angela standing at the garden door, with contracted brows
and bitten lip. As she crossed the hall, there was an entrance at the
front door; but she darted up-stairs, and it was Stella who first
greeted Bernard, who had been telegraphed for by Charlie, and came
home awed, subdued, and terribly alarmed by the report he had heard at
Church Ewe. 'But I see it was all clack, after all, and no harm done,'
he said, as he looked at his little sister's face. 'Only why do you
frighten a fellow by having all the blinds down?'
And Stella, horrified at her own disloyalty, could hardly find
utterance to explain that it was but too true; and when she led Bernard
to the Oratory, somehow it was all the happy and glorious side of her
twin's removal that dwelt with her, while he, who had been in a rough
way very fond of the little helpless one, and had never faced death
before, broke entirely down with 'Poor little chap! I wish I'd been
better to him! I meant to have got him a new thingumijig last half--but
I spent--I wish I hadn't now. It seems so odd not to hear him humming.'
And he yielded at last to a fit of crying; and when Stella spoke softly
of the present joyful songs, he said, 'Ay! ay! that's all very well for
you that were always good to him, and never kicked him about; but if
I'd only known--'
And yet it had always been the most hopeful part of Bernard's character
that he had never been really unkind to Theodore, and very rarely even
impatient, even when teased by a fit of imitation.
The mid-day meal was the first family assembly since the same hour the
previous day, and it did not collect all the members at the same time.
Angela was only sent down after every one else had done, constrained
by Wilmet's command, enforced by a word from Felix. Cherry had lain in
wait for her, to ask necessary questions about her mourning, for no
circumstances were likely to make Angela brook the having orders for
her dress given without consulting her.
'There's a box of hats and bonnets in Sibby's room, if you would look
at them. The bonnets are all one worse than another; but if you would
see if you would like one like mine or like Stella's--'
Angela jumped as if she had been stung. 'Stella's! certainly not.'
'I have not chosen a very childish one for her. This will make her more
of a woman.'
'Don't go chattering on!' broke out Angela. 'Don't you think I've not
got enough upon me without your worrying me out of my life with that
little humbug!'
'I don't think you know what you are saying.'
'You don't, Cherry. That's the way people are always taken in by a
little sham softness and simplicity. I hate such snakes.'
It struck Cherry that Angela must have drawn the same conclusion as had
occurred to her for one moment as she saw the hands clasped. The bitter
word applied to their darling Fair-Star offended her not a little, but
she made a great effort to ask kindly, 'Has anything vexed you, Angel?'
'Vexed!' as if the word were utterly inadequate. 'No, not one thing
more than another! Have done, Cherry! You mean it well, but I can't
stand it!--No more! I've had enough to keep me going;' and she threw
down her knife and fork, and gulped down a tumbler of beer.
'You need not hurry. Wilmet is with Felix.'
'As if I didn't know that!'
There was a look and tone about her as if she were brimming over with
inconceivable misery, to which every word added; and Cherry felt quite
powerless to deal with her as she darted up-stairs.
And just then came the feet of many men, treading as gently as they
could. John Harewood regretted for a moment that Stella and Clement had
not delayed their arrangements till after this inspection, yet it might
be well that these rougher spirits should see how little gloomy they
had made the sleep of the innocent. The young men too were evidently
struck by seeing that their comrade had not been neglected any more
than the child of the house, and Stella's cares were thus not thrown
away.
Clement, Bernard, and John Harewood had just crossed the churchyard,
and were turning up the road to the village inn, when Clement
perceived that Angela had joined them, and turning back to her, he
said, 'My dear, you are not thinking of coming?'
'I am.'
'There is no need. Here are quite witnesses enough.'
'No. No one knows what I do,' she said, with face as hard set as marble.
'Has Felix spoken to you?' he said, understanding better.
'Only what you heard. That was enough.'
'It is a right purpose, Angela,' he said, kindly: 'but really you need
not expose yourself to this. We can quite exonerate the others by
showing that our boat swung round at the last moment, and that is all
that signifies. We neither saw nor knew why.'
'And I did,' said Angela.
To check her was plainly impossible. There was the sort of seared look
of misery about her face which had before struck Cherry, as if she were
perfectly indifferent what might happen to her, and hardly heard what
was said; and Clement could only make a gesture indicating that he had
no choice, when he met the astonished glances of the others.
The Rood was almost as old as the Priory itself, and the inquest was
held in a curious old pannelled room. The other boat's crew had brought
an attorney to watch the proceedings, evidently anticipating that undue
blame would be imputed to them, to the damage of their character even
if nothing more came of it.
The first to tell his story was the Reverend Edward Clement Underwood,
who merely explained the manner in which they were seated, the sudden
challenge from the six-oar, and how just as he had thought the boat
clear, he had felt whirled round in the eddy, the boat was struck in
the stern, and went down. His brother Theodore was instantly taken out;
Francis Yates, the other sufferer, not till the last, he could not say
how long.
Charles Audley then spoke of the shouts and violence of the
pursuit--admitting, however, that it would have been harmless had not
the boat turned so as to expose her stern in the midst of the two
streams. An oar must have missed the stroke, but whose it was he could
not say; and he finally mentioned having brought out poor Yates, who
had been sucked down by the eddy, and carried to the opposite bank. The
Coroner asked in a complimentary voice whether he had not been more
successful in other cases; and Charlie, colouring, allowed that he had
brought two more out of the river.
There Angela started up. Clement had tried to keep her till she
was called for, but the Coroner, seeing her agitation, courteously
expressed himself willing to take her evidence. Her cheeks were
crimson, and she spoke breathlessly. 'I only want to say it was
nobody's fault but mine. They would not have raced with us if I had
not begun singing. And then they would have cleared us, but I got
frightened when we came to the meeting of the currents, and my stroke
failed. That made the stern swing round. And I am ready to take the
consequences.'
'No consequences need be apprehended, Miss Underwood,' said the
Coroner, a kind old man. 'No one can impute blame to a young lady for a
very natural alarm; and every one must feel this voluntary explanation
extremely honourable to you.'
He was making a cruel cut if he had only known it, but he was full
of consideration for her; and the young men themselves gave their
evidence in a very different style from the defensive and offensive one
intended; nor was the question of their sobriety, on which they had
brought up the landlord of the Hook and Line, even alluded to, before
the verdict of accidental death was returned.
Clement had the feeling that this was the most generous action of
Angela's life, and yet she had carried it out in so defiant a manner
that it was not easy to give her full credit; and before he could
address her, she had sped away, between skimming and striding, and was
across the churchyard before he had reached the door.
Bernard relieved himself by a low whistle.
'Well,' said Charlie, 'I thought her pluck indomitable. I never
supposed that she capsized us.'
'Why, whom did you think it could be?'
'Well, if you must know, I thought Lance just the spoon to do it--a
musician, and he'd been looking moon-struck all day.'
'Much you know about Lance! Why, I'd have taken my oath beforehand it
was nobody's doing but Angel's. It's just the way with that sort of
girl that runs into what she's no call to--'
Lance meantime was having a brief transaction with the reporter of the
Ewmouth paper, and then was detained by warm expressions from the other
boat's crew, who had been quite disarmed, and were eager to tell of
their sorrow and their sense of the kindness and 'handsomeness' of the
treatment they had received--speaking to him, indeed, a great deal more
freely than they could have done to his brother the Vicar, as a being
far less removed from their own sphere, and giving him valuable data
for dealing with their comrade, young Light, who still lay very ill.
Clement had visited him in the morning, and had found him gruff and
reserved, and showing decided objections to clerical visits as such.
These lads seemed more careless than free-thinking, as they allowed
that Light certainly was; and they were now much impressed, and eager
to speak of poor Yates's steadiness and goodness. Indeed, he had
not even meant to go to the Maying, and they had been in the act of
chaffing him for the abstinence which they now longed to have shared.
It was the greater comfort, because his poor mother had just been
brought over by her son's master, who would take charge of her till the
funeral. She was in the strange mixture of fuss and grief that never
shows to advantage, and when taken to see her boy was divided between
gratitude at the honours paid to him and dread of their novelty, and
the ground where it was easiest to meet her was his real dutifulness
and affection.
Attention to the poor woman and other calls hindered Clement from any
interview with Angela, whom indeed he hardly saw till the night vigil
which he was to share with her. The day had not been unfavourable,
except from the exhaustion produced by the afternoon heat; and
Bernard's brief visit had exceedingly dismayed him. He declared that
he had never seen any one look like that but a fellow who had
been really killed by a disastrous blow at foot-ball, and put all
his auditors in the lowest spirits by a series of tragic anecdotes;
until Mr. Page, at his evening visit, declared that he saw more real
improvement than he had dared to expect.
Felix could not bear to see two watchers losing their whole night's
rest; and as Angela was unpersuadable, Clement, to content him, lay
down dressed on the bed in the next room, and being thoroughly tired,
was fast asleep, when in the middle of the night an access of pain
returned, probably from some inadvertent movement in slumber. Felix
forbade Angela to summon his brother; but ere long the agony increased
so much, that, with a lip stiff and straightened by the struggle to
suppress a cry, he said, 'Help me!' and as thinking he wanted to change
his posture, she offered her arm and neck, he released another sob of
anguish, and answered, 'No! no! Say--prayers--what I can't recollect.'
Her lips quivered, but no sound came. However, Clement, with true
nursing instinct, had been roused, and stood over him, uttering at
intervals the supplications after which he had been feeling in the
distraction of acute pain, and the look of having lost something passed
away. The fomentations were renewed; and at last, just as Lance was
dressing to go for Mr. Page, a faint but free voice said, 'Don't go, it
is getting better;' and in ten minutes more, the paroxysm had passed
into a sweet sleep, which lasted till long after morning had risen.
Clement would not leave him again, but Angela refused every sign of
dismissal, and sat cold, hard, stiff as a statue, with open fixed
eyes, and cheeks so wan as to be almost green in the light of dawn. He
watched her with almost as much anxiety as the sleeper; and when at
four o'clock their watch was relieved by John and Wilmet, he followed
her to her own door, and said, 'Angel, my dear child, I am afraid you
are very unhappy.'
'Well, why not? Good-night, or morning.'
'Should we not both be better able to rest if you would let me do what
I can for you?'
She laughed--a horrid painful scornful laugh it was. 'Much good that
would do. Such a trouble as this!'
'Yet, Angel, would you but try! There is no grief or penitence too
vast--'
The laugh again. 'So one says till one tries, and then one finds
that one hates it all! all! all! No, I tell you, Clement, I won't be
bothered now! I can't stand it.'
And she locked her door.
Even Felix, who in spite of that one attack was evidently stronger,
must have remarked her manner, for he asked Wilmet whether there were
anything amiss with Angel. 'She is grieving over her share in the
accident,' said Wilmet. 'I hope it may be a turning-point with her.'
No doubt he thought over this; for later in the day, when Angela was
sponging his face and hands with warm water, and exclaimed at sight
of a red mark on his arm, 'Did you hurt yourself there, Felix?' he
answered, 'No, it is the old scald. Do you remember our talk then?'
'You can't go on as you did then,' she hurriedly said.
'Then don't look as you did then,' he said. 'Remember, visible results
are often merciful aids to correction.'
She perpetrated a hard stiff smile; and from that time shunned being
left alone with him, and sometimes when the exterior family thought her
in the sick-room was really shut up in her own, for she avoided the
presence of the others as much as possible, and when among them showed
an irritability and unkindness to Stella that Cherry could hardly bear
to see. She could hardly answer an inquiry after Felix from her with
common courtesy, and roughly took things out of her hands to prevent
her bringing them into the room, when a moment's sight of her sweet
face would have been no harm but rather good to her patient.
By Thursday much of the pain, tenderness, and disability to move were
gone; and Tom May was well satisfied, not only thinking the first
danger over, and ascribing the chief remaining damage to a sprain,
but wishing that Felix should be lifted to a couch, where he could
be a good deal cooler than in his bed. It was lucky that Wilmet and
Cherry had resisted Clement's desire to present all the old Squire's
invalid machinery to the hospital, for there was great comfort in the
easy-going wheeled couch with angles of every inclination on which he
was brought to the window. Bernard longed to draw up the blind, instead
of his 'seeing nothing but that black cross and the old trumpeting
angel under it,' as he said.
'My trumpeting angel is a dear friend,' said Felix. 'He says a great
deal.'
Felix was obedient to the order to be moved, and showed that he
was less prostrate in strength than had been anticipated; but his
passiveness struck those who knew him best as not so much the langour
of weakness as of sorrow. What Clement had rightly deemed no ill news
in what seemed his own last struggle, was a sore grief in his recovery.
Little Theodore's loving dependence was greatly missed, and saddened
the thought of returning to the family.
Nor was he the only mourner. The first practice of the choir-boys
without him ended in a positive howl; one of them was reported to have
said Master Theodore was a little angel among them; and the intimation
of Stella's desire for broom blossom brought in such an accumulation of
golden flowers as might have covered the whole family.
Sibby added to Clement's perplexities by announcing her intention of
not going to mass any more barring at Church. She would cast in her lot
with her own children, the darlin' above all that was the Lord's own
lamb; and she hadn't need go further, when here was Master Clem, as
good a praste as any of her own clergy that was.
Though this was precisely Master Clem's own view, he could not tell
whether he were encouraging an act of schism or an act of Catholicity;
and he had not much choice, for praste as she owned him, he knew that
the least opposition would make him in his old nurse's eyes no more
than the long white boy she had victimized and allowed to be victimized
by all his brothers. He wondered whether to write to the Priest at
Ewmouth, who had certainly never attended to Sibby like his brother
at Bexley, nor exerted himself to encourage her weekly tramp to mass.
Altogether, though touched and warmed, he was by no means so elated
about his convert as Clan Hepburn would have thought proper.
Those good ladies, in spite of their belief that there was a regular
chapelle ardente round poor Theodore, and that the Vicar and the
Papist woman spent their time there in telling beads and sprinkling
holy-water, were too kind-hearted not to come daily to inquire, and
some one always went down to them. On Friday, when they were shown into
the drawing-room, they found Angela kneeling by the hearth, burning
some papers in the fire-place.
'Felix was better,' she said; 'he was being dressed, and was to be
taken into the painting-room, it was so much cooler;' but even as she
spoke, the hard silent misery of her face went to their hearts.
'You look sadly worn, my dear,' said Miss Bridget kindly. 'I hear you
are the best of nurses, but you must not be overtired.'
'Oh! nothing hurts me!' with her horrid little laugh.
'Fatigue of body is a rest to pain of mind,' said Miss Isabella; 'but
there is even a better rest, if you only knew your way to it, my poor
child.'
'And I fear it is studiously overlaid and concealed,' sighed Miss
Bridget.
Angela looked from one to the other; then exclaimed, 'There's not
a bit of help or comfort in anything! It is of no use talking.
Nothing--nothing will ever touch it.'
The vast grief she meant, and Miss Isabella understood her. 'Yes, truly
there are times when all we have trusted in falls--falls away and
leaves us alone.'
'And hating the humbug!' cried Angela, though even as she spoke she was
startled at her words; but the hard wretchedness of the past days, when
all she had been wont to hear of as comfort seemed but child's play
to the intensity of her grief, had exacerbated her against the whole
system in which she had been bred, so that the very sight of Clement
brought an angry sense of mockery.
Miss Bridget was shocked at the language; but her sister understood
better. 'Yes, Bridget, the dear child is feeling the desolation that
sooner or later comes to all who have been content with unrealities!
Most cruel, but better than the delusion.'
Bridget quoted, 'He feedeth on ashes; a deceived heart hath turned him
aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in
my right hand?'
'Ashes! ashes indeed!' cried Angela passionately, as she looked at
the black paper with grey crumbling edges that had once been a song,
where she thought she met Charlie's heart. 'The more one cares the more
hateful it all grows!' and she crushed the fragments into tinder with
the paper as she spoke.
'Dear, dear girl!' cried Isabella Hepburn; 'even as you crush that
paper, throw aside all these vain shows that cannot profit, and simply
cast yourself where Help is to be found!'
The real tender kindness, the promise of help, attracted the heart
weary of its misery, and yet spurning all the love and help that had
longed to aid all these days. She could in some strange way open to a
fresh person when the heart was closed to her own kindred; besides,
it was better to have the circumstances blamed than herself, and the
effect of the good lady's appeal was to make her groan, with tightly
compressed hands, 'Oh! no one can tell--no one can reach near the depth
of this unhappiness. Think what I have done! and what it has cost me!
And then it all seems--words--words--words--'
'Words--yes, till you find Him only in whom is Power to comfort. Is he
not rousing your heart by this utter destitution and powerlessness to
comfort, so as to bring you at once to lay the load on Him?'
The fervour of her voice carried force; and Angela said, 'If I
could--Not to find it all words again--'
'Poor child! Did He ever turn from such as come to Him? Take your Bible
in your hand, and at the foot of the Cross--not the material cross,
of which you have been taught to make a plaything, but the spiritual
Cross--cast your sorrows and your sins; believe, and be healed.'
'Believe! believe!' broke forth the girl. 'I suppose I do believe! I
very nearly didn't when I found it all sounded so inadequate and empty!'
'He only can be her Teacher,' whispered Miss Bridget; but her sister,
with true warmth of love and hope, said, 'He is teaching her;--but,
dear Angela, we will do our best by praying for or with you, or
pointing the way to the best of our power.'
At that moment Stella came in, and after quietly giving her hand to the
visitors, she said, 'Please, Angel, Clement wants to know if you have
the key of the walnut-press.'
'No! I don't know,' she crossly said, after feeling in her pocket in
vain.
'Most likely it is in the pocket of your blue skirt,' said Stella. 'May
I go and look?'
'No! I won't have my things pulled about! I don't believe it's there.
What does he want?'
Stella reluctantly answered, 'We are getting the Church ready; he wants
the pulpit-banner with the triangles.'
To the visitors this sounded like profane play at such a time. 'Poor
child!' they said; 'are these the devices that fritter away the deep
lessons of grief?'
'Stella has devices enough,' muttered Angela under her breath; but the
little maiden answered, 'We don't want to be sad;' but, spite of the
pensive gentle tone, it seemed to the Hepburn sisters mere levity and
desire to escape sorrow.
However, they rose to take leave, telling Angela they would always be
at her service; and as she accompanied them through the hall, came
Clement on the wake of his messenger, in distress for the key. She
dashed impetuously up-stairs--found it where Stella had suggested, and
flew down again with it.
'There! I've done with it! I'm sick of it all!'
'What?' asked the astonished Clement.
'I loathe it all,' she repeated. 'It is all of a piece--all ashes
instead of bread.'
'You are not mimicking the Hepburns,' said her brother. 'I beg your
pardon,' he instantly added.
'Mimicking! No, but like them I have learnt to rate all this frippery
at its worth! If you had any depth of feeling, you would loathe it as I
do. But that's the way you palter with truth and reality--deceiving and
deceived.'
The voice and flash in her eyes directed these last words on Stella;
but cutting short the reply that Clement was beginning, she again flew
up-stairs, leaving the other two aghast.
'This is a new phase!' said Clement.
'I wonder if grief drives people into a sort of distraction,' said
Stella, in a tone of excuse.
'Had the Hepburns been talking to her?'
'Yes; I thought she looked, when I came in, as if they had been some
comfort to her.'
'Ah!'
She had never heard such a sigh from him. In amaze she said, 'They
are so good. I thought great troubles made little differences be
forgotten.'
'True! It is their genuine goodness that makes me fear.'
'If that made her quite--in earnest?' asked Stella.
'I wish Mr. Fulmort could have come before Monday!' ejaculated Clement.
'She's past me!'
Then it struck him that he was talking to little Stella as to a woman,
and looking to see whether she had become one, he saw new depths in
her eyes. 'Well, Stella, if she deserts I must trust to you,' he said.
'Have you seen much of her state of mind?'
'Not much,' said Stella. 'I think,' and her eyes filled with tears,
'that it is so much worse for her than for any of us--that she is like
one bruised all over, who can't bear the least touch, and it comes
on her all the more to-day, because she has been occupied by Felix
hitherto, and now he wants her less.'
'But is not she specially unkind to you, Stella?'
'Oh! don't call it that. I believe she can't bear to see me, because I
put her so in mind of dear Baby.' And the bright tears dropped.
The simple-hearted child had no idea of any deeper and more personal
cause of irritation; nor was it possible to pursue the subject, for
whereas the innocent's entrance to Paradise was not to cost the central
feast of the Christian year one wreath, Angela's defection threw much
toil upon her. The funeral was to be late on the Saturday afternoon,
for the convenience of poor Yates's friends; and all must be finished
before, with the help of Bernard, Lance, and Will Harewood, who had
come down, like the brother he was, and was a welcome assistant to
Clement, just as Angela's secession seemed like the last straw that
would break the camel's back!
The best exhilaration was perhaps an occasional visit to the
painting-room, where Felix and Geraldine were so peacefully thankful
to be together again, that they hardly breathed a word to one another.
And there was comfort too in finding how much the tone of young Light
was softening from its hard defiance. Lance, who had a good deal of
experience, and was to the young tradesmen at Bexley much what he had
been to the choristers at Minsterham, had devoted himself to the sick
lad, and had certainly produced an effect upon him.
Felix was recovering strength quickly. As there was an awkward step
into the painting-room, he begged the next day to perform the journey
on his own feet; and though he needed both the balustrade and Clement's
arm, and was still sharply pained by any sidelong movement, this was
wonderful progress in so few days. Here he meant to be during the
funeral, and to hear the service through the window opening into the
transept. There were many dissuasions, but he was for the first time
resolute on his own will, both to listen and to be alone. 'It is not
nearly so likely to overcome me,' he said, 'as if any one were with me.
I shall lie quietly back, and listen as to a most soothing strain!'
'Yes,' argued Cherry; 'but why risk it?'
'I cannot do the last thing for my boy, but it is the nearest I can
come to it! The son of my right hand, as Father said! So he has been;
I only know now what an incentive his dependence was, and how this
loosens me from the world.'
'Please don't say that! We have been too much frightened, and you are
getting well so fast.'
'I think so!' he acquiesced, but without much elasticity. 'Yet it was a
great element of thankfulness that night, and is so still, though the
air seems empty without his constant music.'
Many a note of praise was to come to his ears that day, as the choir
preceded their little member across the lawn to the Church gate. Their
voices predominated in the Psalms; and the Lesson, read by Mr. Colman,
the vicar of poor Yates's parish at Ewmouth, was almost inaudible
through the window; but the Lord's Prayer at the graves came to his ear
like 'the voice of many waters;' and the final hymn, the same which had
been last on Theodore's lips, was sung by the tones of a multitude, and
thrilled mightily through the summer air.
Felix was not the worse, though afterwards three doctors came up
and tormented him, ending by allowing him to do whatever suited his
own feelings and discretion, only bidding him not persevere in what
pained him, and to rest thoroughly between every exertion. He asked no
questions, and seemed quite satisfied; but Clement was more explicit in
his inquiries in private, and was told that where there was so little
power of examination, it was impossible to certify whether any harm was
done beyond the undoubted sprain, and that this might make itself felt
for months, even years, without anything but muscles being in fault;
nor could either of the May physicians detect any cause for alarm,
except a vague impression that the countenance was more changed than
was accounted for by the pain or loss of blood. There had been from
the first an indescribable stricken look, less evident now as the face
varied with animation, but recurring in repose, and taking away that
youthfulness that had endured so long.
Nothing of all this was said beyond Clement's study; the others
remained happy in the verdict of remarkable improvement. Dr. May had
brought a note from his daughter.
DEAREST CHERRY,
I long to come, and dare to think I should be welcome, but Tom
will not let Papa bring me. At least I know it is all right.
I knew it would be. Lives with so many bound up in them are
not so lightly wrenched away. The world cannot grow dark by
losing the selfless. All my soul is with you. Your dear little
Theodore has not lived in vain. Your ways--all of you--to him
have been bitter reproof to me. Write to me all I cannot pick
out of Papa. I hope Lancelot is looking better. Tell him I
shall try his 'Lightning Messages,' as soon as I can play them
without my eyes swimming or my voice getting upon the howl.
With my dear love,
Your affectionate
G.M. MAY.
Cherry gave the note to Lance to read, expecting to hear no more of
it; but he brought it out in the late evening as she was settling some
Pursuivant business with him, in preparation for his departure by the
early train on the Monday. 'Do you want this?' he asked.
'You may keep it if you like.'
He sighed, holding it close. 'I say--does he know--the Squire?'
'Of her coming over? No; I don't think any one saw her.'
'He ought. I had begun to think so before, but this note convinces me
on whose account she came.'
'I don't imagine she knew she came on any one's account in particular.'
'All the nicer of her, but so much the worse for me. Look here, Cherry.
Did you know I had been at Stoneborough on Monday? Well, she showed
plain enough how it was. Every hope seemed gone--crushed--done for. I
was so dazed, that if you said it was I who upset the boat, I shouldn't
wonder. I had lived upon the thought ever since Christmas. O Cherry, I
do love her so!' cried the poor lad, quite beyond his usual reserved
self-control.
'Yes; she is very bright and sweet,' said Cherry, by way of sympathy.
'The Daisy! the light of every place she goes to!' he went on. 'How
different she made it all last winter! and I was fool enough to
think--Well, it is no good to talk of Monday morning, but it was
just falling from Paradise to the abyss; and all the night after I
was savage with them all for having dragged me back--nearly mad more
than once, I believe. Then in the morning, when I had just stumbled
out into church, not able to put two thoughts together, but with only
sense enough to know that if I laid my love and my life on the Altar
as best I could, God would take them and make the right thing of them
somehow--I looked up, and saw her in the morning sunshine clinging to
me--the dear thing--then I did believe God had given her to me.'
'Dear Lance! still--'
'No; I understand now. The fancy bore me up from I don't know what,
till I had got myself in hand again; but when I look at it reasonably,
I see she was glad to find me alive, out of common humanity, and
because she thought she had vexed me; but as to the real feeling, this
note shows plainly enough where that goes.'
'If it were so, there would hardly be such openness of expression.'
'Do you think so?' (eagerly, then catching himself up). 'No; it is only
that the consciousness has never been brought out.'
'I don't believe he will ever voluntarily bring out anybody's
consciousness.'
'Then he ought! Why is he to debar himself from happiness, and
disregard other people's feelings? I tell you, it is positively wrong
to keep hanging about him and hampering him. You would do much better
to leave him to be happy, and come and let us get on together as we can
at home. You might make it just tolerable!'
'My poor Lancey,' said Cherry, smiling, 'things are hardly so far
advanced; but if they were, you would be my best dependence.'
'But you'll tell him? And let no fancy stand in the way of his--of
their happiness.'
'Tell? You mean of her coming over? Very well, if you think it right.
Nay, indeed, it is not the wish to keep him to myself, but the
assurance of his resolution--and, dear old Lancey, I don't like your
going back to the old mill without the bird in your bosom.'
He hid his face in both his arms as he sat over the table, but
recovering himself, said, 'Never mind! Hoping for him is some hope,
and there's too much on hand for being down in the mouth. It will all
come right somehow,' he repeated, secure in that faith, even under his
sense of disappointment; but after all, is not a generous consent the
best balm in disappointment?
After this conversation, Cherry and Lance were struck, amid a somewhat
astonished congregation, when the next day, the Vicar in his pulpit
gave out in his clear ringing voice, like a trumpet proclamation, his
text, 'And His Banner over me is Love.'
The church was quite full. The beauty of its musical services had
of late rendered it a resort from Ewmouth, and the present occasion
had attracted every one connected with the persons concerned in the
accident, as well as many of the curious. Mr. Colman, whose despair
was the young clerkhood of Ewmouth, had protested against having to
preach; and indeed Clement felt that he had a word to say, for had not
the week been one of intensified feeling, and deepened experience?
Yet even his brothers and sisters were not only sorry when they found
this task unexpectedly lapsing on him, but feared that he was hardly
adequate to the occasion. In general he was a careful preacher, very
exact, and rather tediously accurate in citing arguments, much given to
similitude and mystical interpretation, and instructive and interesting
in a certain degree; but without much fire or individuality, and, as
the Hepburn clique asserted, deficient in the root of the matter.
But his voice made Cherry look at him, and his countenance not only
glowed with unusual colour, but had a dignity and impressiveness that
assured her that she should hear something different from usual, after
a text so unlikely for a funeral discourse.
After twice proclaiming that Banner under which he served, he slowly
and distinctly spoke those other words, '"One shall be taken and
another left. They say unto Him, Where, Lord?" Yes! Strange, startling,
arbitrary, as seem often the calls to the soldiers in Christ's army,
each is at its true time, for the choice is made in Love.' Then came
the description of the mighty host, of their Leader and their conflict,
steadfast in the Name that the day's Feast glorified, going forth
conquering and to conquer, but, strange contradiction! under the Banner
of Love. Love, by which their Captain had won, the work to which all
were enlisted, the weapon wherewith each was to fight. Love had been
their Captain's weapon, but they needed another, namely, Faith--for
who could fight for a vision--who, without reliance on his general?
Cause and Captain, and His power to save to the uttermost, were dwelt
on in a few ardent words; and then came the picture of the serried
ranks, standing fast in one army, warring as one band against darkness,
foulness, cruelty, and all other evils, each fighting his individual
battle in private, yet even thus striking as much for the cause as for
himself. So they stood, soldiers in a campaign, aware that any moment
might snatch them out of the ranks, yet also aware that not one would
be taken save at the right moment when his warfare had come to the
crisis. Our forefathers of old believed in glorious maidens who floated
over the battle-field as choosers of the slain, and bore hero-spirits
away to the Home of Triumph in chariots of light, to dwell among the
brave. Like them we believe in the Triumphant Home, where dwell the
brave who have stood steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, rooted
in charity, bright in purity, dashing down the arrows of temptation
that glint against their armour. Like them, we believe in a Chooser of
the slain, bearing us, one by one, from our several posts, with longer
or shorter warning, exactly when our warfare is accomplished, our
individual battle is, or ought to be, won.
'Is or ought to be! That is the point. That is it on which depends
the awful question, "Where, Lord?" which He who has seen beyond the
grave, left unanswered. Where? Less than a week ago, on one of the
days especially given to us for joy and gladness, in the very height
of our mirth, came the moment of danger to fifteen of us. For thirteen
of us, thanks have been today returned. "Where, Lord?" has not been
said of us, but has not its echo been with us? Where? When I look back
on duties neglected, on self-complacencies, on purposes fulfilled
on the surface but not in the spirit, on cold-hearted devotions, on
a thousand treasons against the Banner of Love, I can only cry out,
"Where Lord?" and bless Him that it is the Lord my Redeemer, Who looks
mercifully on His unprofitable servants, of whom the question is asked,
and Who has spared me for a little space. He calls in due season. But
whether the summons be welcome or the reverse, does not depend on its
finding us in sunshine summer pleasure, or upon a bed of pain. No--it
depends on whether we are really in our camp, our face to the foe,
our ensign above us, no treason or desertion at heart. Then, spite of
short-comings and failures, with the Banner over us that is Love, we
shall know that death is victory; and "Where, Lord?" will be answered
for ever by "Him Who liveth and was dead, and is alive for evermore."'
Felix, from his window, caught the texts, and noted the breathless
hush. The Vicar of Ewmouth said, as he took leave, 'Thank you. You have
touched hearts I could not reach.'
And Lance followed Clement to the library, and begged for the sermon
for the Pursuivant. 'I know they would read it at Bexley, and if they
care for it as I do, it ought to tell. I never heard you go on like
that!'
'Here are my notes, but they will do you little good; I could not write
last night.'
'You came up late enough, though!'
'I had to make it up in thought and prayer.'
'A better thing, it seems,' said Lance. 'It is a sermon to set one
going, however things look!'
He was nearly at Bexley the next morning by the time Felix had
fulfilled his intention of coming down-stairs, and had taken his seat
in the Squire's chair before the writing-table, but with his back
to the door whence the musical hum would never more issue. Cherry
wanted to have put it off; and Clement had proposed an exchange of
sitting-rooms; but he had said such things were best faced at once,
while no association made much difference.
Cherry was with him, looking over the letters of inquiry and
condolence, and sorting out those which she would answer at once, or he
undertake by degrees--looking too at the first Pursuivant in which for
at least twelve years he had had no share, and which, he said, told him
more about the accident than he had yet known.
'Lance has fared better than could have been hoped,' he said. 'I feared
for both chest and head.'
'I believe he was very ill the first night,' said Cherry.
'Then--was it my fancy, or did not I hear Gertrude May's voice?'
'How could you hear it?'
'Through the open window, at the hall-door, as Tom May was going. Did
she come over with the carriage, good girl?'
'Yes; but we never guessed that you knew it.'
'Many things were borne in on me in a passive sort of way,' said Felix,
'and among them the trust that she was as good an elixir to the boy as
in the winter.'
'Quite true! I believe the glow she excited saved him from an illness;
but he has come to another conclusion since.'
'Well--what?'
'I should not tell you, but for his entreaty. He thinks she cares less
for him than for you.'
'Nonsense! He may put that out of his head, poor boy.'
The colour mounted in his bloodless cheek, but the decision of the tone
satisfied Geraldine.
At that moment, however, the door was gently opened, and Stella, her
cheeks more deeply tinted than their wont, quietly said, 'Brother,
Captain Audley is here. He wants to know whether you are well enough to
see him.'
Cherry divined what was coming; but Felix exclaimed, 'Captain Audley!
How kind! Tell him I am quite ready.--But you had better make yourself
scarce, Cherry; the poor man has met one lady already, and I can't
answer for the consequences of his falling in with another.'
There he was interrupted by her contention with his instinctive impulse
to rise and give her his arm--a token of improvement; for whereas
yesterday he had apologised whenever she crossed the room without him,
to-day he began getting up, but was checked by the twinge betrayed by
lips and brow, and as Lord Gerald had been fortunately left ashore,
Cherry professed to have her most constant supporter.
Another moment, and Captain Audley crossed her, and bowed to her, as
she repaired to the drawing-room, from the window of which she saw
the two young things, not idling--Stella never dawdled--but cutting
flowers, and filling the whole stock of vases which she had brought
out, to renew the cheerfulness of the house for its convalescent master.
The sight was pretty, but Cherry wondered whether she ought to go out
and protect her little sister's peace, deciding however, that whatever
harm there was must have been done already, and that accessibility was
her best condition for the present; and so she sat down to begin some
of the numerous letters, though their subject was most incongruous with
that of her anticipations, and she wrote with divided attention, till
Felix came into the room.
'Cherry,' said he, deliberately placing himself on the settee, 'Had you
any notion of this?'
'Only the last day or two, very dimly. Has it come to anything?'
'That I want to ascertain. Which did you think it was?'
'The poor little star, I'm afraid.'
'Why afraid?'
'Because there must be breakers ahead, and that poor little dear need
not have been molested for years to come.'
'Is she molested?'
'Look! Ah, no! you can't turn; but if you could see them on the lawn!'
'She is such a child. She might be with him as simply as with Will.'
'I'm afraid that is over. Is not the Captain dead against it?'
'No; that's the odd thing. She seems to have vanquished him on the spot
by one glint of her bonnie blue een, and he has not the heart to say
No; but the worst of it is, he has no power.'
'He should not have let his son loose here.'
'So he allows, and that I saw clearer than he--which I did not, for my
suspicions were in another direction, and I fear not without cause, on
one side at least.'
'That's the horrid part of it!'
'So persuaded was I, that I went on at cross-purposes at first, and had
to ask point-blank which of my sisters he meant, but I don't think I
betrayed Angela. What is to be done about her?'
'Oh! tiresome love! Why could they not let you alone a little while? I
think Angela has some notion, and that it must be what has made her so
very queer.'
'Perhaps! I thought it was her share in the disaster, poor girl!'
'That would not have made her almost spiteful to poor little Stella.'
'Where is she now?'
'Gone to the penny-club business as usual.'
'I hope this will be over before she comes back. I must speak to my
little one, only first let me hear what you think about it. The Captain
has been most straightforward with me. He explained that he never was a
favourite at home, and his marriage was a case of extorted consent. His
wife was never cordially treated, and he could not forget the slights
she received. Neither party wanted the other, and he had got into his
lonely yachting existence, when, unluckily for him, his elder brother's
death has rendered him and his boy important. The widow lives with the
old people, and he thinks they want Charlie to marry the daughter. They
want him to spend his vacations with them, and he is always shirking.'
'I have heard him bemoan himself.'
'The worst of it is, that if the old people take offence, they are
likely to leave the bulk of the property to the grand-daughter. The
Captain says he hates it all, and would freely let it go; but at
Charlie's age, it would not be right to let him incur such a forfeit
blindly.'
'They are both too young for anything.'
'Precisely so; but the thing must be either suffered or not, and it
is a mere subterfuge to call it nothing, and let him be always about
here. If the child knows nothing, the boy's mouth could be stopped, at
least till he has taken his degree. I came to see whether that be still
possible. You think not? Well, I have some hope of her simplicity. If
not, what think you of this? We tell them they are a couple of babies,
and bind the fellow to keep away somewhere till he has taken his
degree, when it will either have blown over, or he can judge whether to
take to a profession and endanger his prospects, and there will be some
test whether he really cares for the poor little dear.'
'I'm afraid there is trial for her any way!'
'The difficulty I foresee, is in keeping the Captain up to anything.
If he were set against it, our part would be much easier; but he seems
to have surrendered at first sight of our Fair-Star, and he is weaker,
more impulsive, and undecided than I could have conceived.'
'He has been indulging his feelings all his life. I should not wonder
if Charlie were the more sensible.'
'Our other baby! So! I must see how far it has gone.'
'No! I'll call her. Don't move.'
'A shocking reversal,' resigning himself, 'but I believe you had
rather. I don't mind walking; it is getting up and sitting down that
beats me. Don't startle the child. There's still hope that he has not
stirred the waters.'
Cherry had no such hope, as she stood at the conservatory door, calling
Stella. Both came up to her; and as she sent the girl to her brother,
Charlie looked at her with an anxious 'Well?' as the colour deepened in
his honest face.
'I think your father is in the study,' she evasively said.
'Come, now, Miss Underwood, I am sure you know all about it. What sort
of a chance have I?'
'I don't think you ought to have any chance at your age. Indeed,
Charlie, I do wish you had let it alone for the present.'
'I assure you, I didn't know I wasn't going to let it alone; but what
could I do when I found the dear little darling crying enough to
overset a mill-stone? One couldn't but do one's best to comfort her;
and when I found I had really got over the line, and been making sheer
love, I could not but have it out and go on with it.'
'Then was it only that moment?'
'No! no! no! I'd known her for my Star, my light, my darling, ever
since I can't tell when; but of course I knew what a shindy there would
be, and as long as I could come here and look at her, I could have gone
on quietly till I was of age, and could fight it out. Only when it came
to her being lonely--'
'Do you think she knew it for what you say?'
Charlie shrugged his shoulders, laughed, and coloured.
'And your father?'
'That is comical,' he said confidentially. 'He was dead against it!
hummed and hawed, called me no end of fools, said I should be cut off
with a shilling, and told me how my grandmother bullied my poor mother.
I'd hard work to haul him here, and he said it was only to beg the
Squire's pardon, cram full of objections. Well, there was the darling
girl gathering forget-me-nots in the garden, with Scamp and the doves
round her. "That's she, bless her!" says I. "Is it she?" says he; and
with that, he whips out of the skiff, leaving me to moor it, you see,
looks her full in the face--I believe he hadn't seen a young lady to
look at since my mother died--"Are you Charlie's little Stella?" says
he; and behold, there he is, giving her a regular paternal kiss, before
I could get quit of the boat. And when one's own father is all right,
who is to make objections?'
Stella's examination had been short. Felix held out his hands, took
hers, and gazing into her blushing face, said, 'Look at me, my child,
and tell me if you know what Captain Audley is come for.'
She hung her flower-like head, and answered, 'I think I do.'
'And what do you think of it?'
'O Brother,' the eyes overflowed, 'I didn't know it was that, when
he came and was so good to me, or I would not have been so unkind in
all the trouble. I only thought how nice he was. Indeed it was not
forgetting Tedo.'
'No, indeed, my sweet; that was the last thing I meant. Only, since you
do know the meaning of it, tell me--whether you like it.'
'Like! O Brother! It did just seem to take away all the unhappiness. I
couldn't help it, you know!'
'Ah! No, no, my dear, you didn't hurt me. Now will you be patient, so
as not to get Charlie into trouble, and trust me?'
'Trust you, Brother?' in a tone of wonder, as if it would have been
impious to do otherwise; and then she faltered, 'I thought Captain
Audley didn't mind it much--for, Brother, he kissed me.'
'He is ready to like you with all his heart; but he has a father too,
and can't do all he pleases. So you may have to be kept waiting to grow
older.'
'Oh yes,' said Stella; 'I know I'm too young, and I could not go away
from everybody for a long long time.'
So the edict was given in form, with more assumption of authority on
Felix's part than had been his wont towards his sisters' lovers; but
he saw it was the best way to spare the little maid from what might
prove trifling and end in disappointment, and the young lover from
unfair usage of his grandparents, and its punishment. Someone must be
resolute, and the father would not; so the brother had to depict the
impossibility of fostering an attachment between an undergraduate and a
child, under the certainty of displeasing the head of the family.
Charlie argued that it was hard his father's consent should not
suffice--that he cared not for the property--he would go to his uncle
in Australia, become printer's-devil at Bexley--anything to be free
to win his Cynosure, while his father seemed far more disposed to
applaud him than to say, Nonsense; and it fell to Felix to explain that
whatever course Charlie might decide on, it must not be till his Oxford
career was ended, and that till then there must be neither engagement
nor correspondence, and the vacation must be spent elsewhere, since
daily meetings in present circumstances would be a wrong towards all
parties concerned.
Captain Audley could not gainsay that this was both reasonable and
honourable, and even reminded Charlie of an invitation from Lord
Liddesdale, to pay a visit at his foreign embassy in the long vacation.
Meantime there was to be nothing to bind either party; but as Charlie
had to return to Oxford that night, a parting interview was allowed in
the drawing-room, in which he raved a good deal, and she was very quiet
and rational.
Then Felix was left to repose, which he so sorely needed as to have to
give up both coming in to dinner, and driving to meet Mr. Fulmort.
'Sisters' lovers are tough customers,' he said. 'Thank you, Cherry,'
as she elevated the front and lowered the back of his chair, so as to
render it a couch; 'it is well for me that you would have nothing to
say to the sculptor.'
She kissed him silently; and as she looked at the pallid sunken
face, with the eyes closed, she recollected her declaration that he
must be more to her dead than any other man alive, and though far
from retracting the sentiment, she wished she had uttered nothing so
ill-omened.
The effect on Angela was the present anxiety; and it was impossible
not to feel it staved off by the announcement, through a school-child,
that she was staying to dine and spend the rest of the day at Miss
Hepburn's. Whatever this might portend, it was a present relief to
Cherry, though Clement looked very gloomy upon it; and the Vicar of St
Matthew's had not been many hours in the house before Cherry, rather
to her own surprise, found herself invited into Clement's library, to
assist at a council over the perplexing girl.
Neither brother nor sister could say more than that, up to the moment
of the accident, she had been in her usual state of ultra-observance
and ultra-gaiety, alike wilful and exaggerated, and that on finding
herself the real delinquent in the fatal catastrophe, she had petrified
into hard fierce reserve. On Sunday alone had she been at Church, and
then had been absent from the Feast where all the family had met; she
had thrown over all the little ecclesiastical offices that had been her
pride and pleasure, and repelled all sympathy, except perhaps that of
the ladies to whom she had been most opposed, and whom she had derided
and contemned for years. Indeed, she might be said to have hoisted
their flag, for the cross round her neck had been discarded, and her
hair had descended from the stupendous fabric which no asseveration
would avail to persuade the Miss Hepburns to be of native growth, and
was now coiled about her head--with an effect, certainly, preferable in
itself, save for the signification. Things were come to a droll pass,
that the absence of Angel's lofty coiffure should be complained of by
one vicar to the other; but Mr. Fulmort had been Angela's first guide,
who had prepared her for Confirmation and Communion, and Clement had
from the first looked to him to deal with her; but Mr. Fulmort was
scarcely encouraging. 'Nothing will be gained by forcing me on her,' he
said. 'If I cannot draw, driving will be of no avail.'
'If Miss Isabella has got hold of her,' said Cherry, 'she is likely to
imitate the people in books whose first act of virtue is shunning their
priest; and when Angel's conscience gets on the side of perverseness,
there is no saying what she will not do.'
'One is so in the dark!' said Clement.
'I think I can guess the process,' said the elder clergyman. 'Only
actual experience teaches that no system is infallible.'
'Of all plans of education, I should have chosen hers!' said Clement.
'So we trusted to the framework!'
'And how admirably it has answered with Robina, and many more.'
'As far as we see; but this is what I imagine this poor child's
history. She has more vehemence and energy than depth, and her
musical taste found ritual so congenial, that excitability passed for
devotion, in spite of the lack of trustworthy fruit of submission or
self-discipline.'
'I believe it did.'
'So she is in a manner justified in complaining that she was allowed to
trust to the shell alone. She has been content with the outward form
all this time; and when real sorrow makes her find its failure, she
is naturally distrustful of the whole teaching that was to her mere
surface work.'
'Nothing could be more ungrateful, or improper, than to charge it on
you, Sir,' cried the younger vicar.
'Less unjust than you think, though there may be some human nature in
it too. When my sister collected those girls, we thought, like most who
try experiments, that we had a set of puppets, on whom certain wires
must produce certain results--and if we saw untoward specimens, charged
it on the want of our system.'
'The system is not ours, but Divine.'
'There was a Divine system in the Wilderness, but with how many did it
succeed?'
'According to that,' said Clement, 'nothing would be anybody's fault.'
'And,' said Geraldine, 'did it not succeed with all the mighty men who
overlived Joshua?'
'True; but even of that generation, who had never seen Egypt, there
were many who lacked faith to drive out the Canaanites. It is the same
story over and over again. People who have been led out of something
like Egypt, are apt to think those secure who have never been from
under the shadow of the Cloud, and have known no bread but manna. We
forget how much depends on being "mixed with faith in the hearers."'
'Faith cannot be given from without,' said Clement.
'Certainly not; but looking back at our dealing with our earlier
pupils, I suspect that we worked away with the peculiarities we had
newly discovered, rather than with the great universal foundations.
I am sure we did so with you, Underwood: though happily there was
stuff enough beneath to prevent us from doing more than make you
unnecessarily priggish.'
'Geraldine can testify that that was done to your hand, Sir,' said
Clement, laughing. 'I believe I should have made any place I cared for
odious in the ears of my family.'
'We did not know how much party spirit we infused, fancying that
once in our groove all must go right. Now, I believe Angela ought
to have been held back. She would have done better in a commonplace
well-principled school.'
'I don't think her teachers were deceived in her,' said Cherry.
'No; but the observances which she genuinely enjoyed deceived herself.
Probably at a dull bare service she would have been naughty and
uninterested, but then she would have known her religion for what it
was worth. I don't say that I see what ought to have been done, if
we could begin over again; but I do see that she has found out her
unreality in the time of distress, and concludes that the fault is in
what we taught her. To use another metaphor, she thinks that because
the Cross has been decked with flowers, it has been no Cross at all;
but I trust she is learning the way thither.'
'By casting aside the means?' said Clement.
'Because to her they had not been means, but mirages. If I understand
rightly, this is her first true awakening.'
'But is it to be a regular case of conversion?'
'I hope so. I pray so.'
'Is she to be left to these women, to learn contempt for the Sacraments
and the Church?'
'Are they Churchwomen?'
'After a fashion! I don't believe they hold a single Catholic doctrine.'
'They never say the Creed--eh?'
Clement looked abashed.
'If she were likely to be led into an act of schism, it might be
needful to interfere; but if they seem to be bringing her to the sense
of repentance and individual spiritual contact, which is the essential
need, resistance would do more harm than good.'
'Why should she not come the right way?'
'Do you remember Ezekiel's pure springs, which the evil shepherds had
fouled with their feet, so that the flock could not drink thereof?
Without classing you among evil shepherds, whatever I may do with
myself, is it not natural to turn from what has been without benefit?'
'By her own fault. And is she to follow their ways, without check or
warning?'
'They are communicants?'
'Four times a year. Frequent Celebrations seem to them superstitious
and formal.'
'And irreverent,' added Cherry.
'Is it not doubtful whether our poor girl have been reverent? Should
not we perhaps be keeping her back for a time?'
'Not for their reasons.'
'No; but if she be in the way to what she needs and we have failed to
afford her, it seems to me that while it is within the Church, we had
better abstain from distracting her attention by trying to make her do
things in our own way.'
'Our way, Sir?' said Clement, whose mind was never rapid; 'it is the
right way. I cannot understand sitting still to see my sister carried
off into ultra Low Church.'
'Better that than incur the risk of taking party spirit for zeal and
diverting her attention from vital religion to the excitement of
persecution.'
'There's nothing that would gratify her more,' said Cherry.
'It is exceedingly mortifying,' added Mr. Fulmort, 'to see one's own
child going over to a rival battalion, which disesteems our ensigns and
war-cries; but by your own account it is no worse--the army is all one.
And for ourselves, nothing can be more wholesome. I wish it all fell on
me, since the mismanagement began with me; but unluckily it comes most
heavily on you, both as brother and parish-priest.'
Clement was of course disarmed and humbled. 'No doubt you are right,
Sir: I will try to accept the personal vexation as my due; I did not
know how much it biassed me. Shall you take no notice?'
'I shall express the interest I feel as old friend and guide, but I
shall not insist on confidence.'
He could afford to bide this time, for he contrived to give a parson's
week, on finding how heavily this sad Whitsuntide had told upon
Clement, coming at the end of a clergyman's hardest half-year. Change
could not be had, for Felix was not fit for a journey, and was still
so much disabled as to be unable to put on his clothes unaided; but
nothing could be better for both brothers than the presence of this
friend, bringing them fresh interests from the great arena of conflict
between good and evil, and giving warm sympathy and satisfaction to
their efforts in their own field. One of his scholars, at least, he
confessed to have far surpassed his expectations. He had never expected
to see his tall, docile, self-complacent chorister all the man that the
Vicar of Vale Leston Abbas had become; but on the other hand, Angela,
once almost his devotee, eluded him by every means in her power, and
never willingly opened her lips in his presence. When at last he
succeeded in catching her, and expressing surprise that she was rushing
away when the church-bell was ringing, her reply was, 'I've done with
those things!'
'With prayers?'
'With heartless forms.'
'So I should hope.'
'Let me go, Mr. Fulmort; I don't want to be ungrateful, but it is all
one great mistake.'
'I am afraid you have found it so.'
His tone was sad, and made her exclaim, 'You feel it too, then? Oh,
come and learn as I have learnt--see as I have seen!' Some men would
have laughed at this sudden reversal of the order of things; but Mr.
Fulmort felt the matter far too seriously, and the sound of inquiry
he emitted encouraged her to go on. 'Oh; the hollowness of my old
life--the utter lack of all aid or light when the hour of darkness
came--the misery, the agony, that racked me all day and all night, when
all you told me to trust to proved broken reeds. Would that I could
proclaim to all what it was to see at last in Whom--in what assurance
lies peace!'
'Yes, my child,' he said. 'There truly lies the only hope. May you be
able to grasp it firmly, and for ever, and render the fruits of faith
and repentance apparent in your life.'
'I shall never put my trust in my own works again. I hate them--I
loathe them.'
'You cannot do better than repent, and bring them for forgiveness.'
'To the foot of the Cross?'
'Certainly.'
'Then you really see the hollowness and emptiness of the system of
thinking them pardoned by a man's voice?'
'Did I ever tell you they were?'
She was a little conscience-stricken, but rallied enough to say, 'It
is the whole principle of auricular confession, to which nothing shall
ever bring me back. Not the utmost persecution!' and as he smiled a
little, she added, 'It was all form and human intervention.'
'If you can say so from personal experience, Angela,' he replied,
'it proves how lamentably I have failed to express my doctrine and
intention, and how vain it is for me to try to converse with you.
Indeed, I only attempted it because I knew you had had a great shock,
and were unhappy.'
'Unhappy till I turned my back on the world and its vanities, and
beheld the true and simple way of salvation! Would you but let me show
it to you!'
'My dear child, do you think I have feebly tried to follow my Master
all these years, and never seen it? If I have so totally failed in
guiding you to it, my words alone were in fault, and it is well that
the one Truth has been brought to bear upon you. I thank Him for it,
and pray that some day you may be led to full truth.'
There he quitted her; and she could report that Mr. Fulmort had tried
to get her under his direction again, and that she had almost brought
him to own the emptiness of the system that he inculcated. That he did
not was, Miss Martha decided, wholly owing to the Old Adam.
CHAPTER XLIV.
THE FIDDLER'S RANCH.
'The Vater Unser that I said
Before I went to school,
The prayers come ringing in my head
Like ripples in a pool.'
Veritas.
Angela's conversion, as her friends did not scruple to term it, had
this happy effect at least of extinguishing her passion (if so it might
be called) for Charles Audley. It was swallowed up in the general
excitement; and once or twice Cherry had reason to think she had
persuaded herself that she had voluntarily renounced him among other
earthly vanities, such as her chignon, her church decorations, and her
balls.
If she still felt any jealousy of Stella, it only showed itself in a
pitiful contempt of the poor little unawakened creature, so contentedly
deluded by ceremonies, and drifting into the jaws of this wicked world;
but it was memorable that though she always opposed Stella's opinion,
were it only on the weather, she never attacked her direct, nor
reproached her, probably out of a certain discomfort which the little
maid's simple answers always gave her.
Stella was Clement's mainstay this summer in the thousand and one
inconveniences caused him by Angela's conscience in the thousand and
one parish affairs in which she used to be his prime helper, but where
she now disentangled the material and the spiritual, after the example
of her advisers, though with a sauciness and vexatiousness of which
they were incapable. Luckily no idea of pining after Charlie seemed to
occur to Stella, and she devoted the time once spent on poor little
Theodore to the many tasks that Angela had left on her hands and
considered just fit for such a foolish little thing.
Any secrecy as to the possible relations with Charlie had proved
unachievable, at least within the family. Charlie might be banished,
but his father carried on the courtship with unblushing assiduity,
viewing Stella as his special property, and being never happy without
seeing her two or three times in a week. In truth, after so many years
of morbid seclusion, the society of a family home--such as he had never
known--was so delightful to him, that he could not stay away, and
almost exposed himself to suspicion of being in search more of a wife
for himself than his son.
The Kittiwake, where never woman had set foot, and where Charlie,
in spite of Angela's bantering solicitations, had never ventured to
invite her, was urgently pressed on the whole party for any excursion
imaginable; and when it became evident that both the Captain and Stella
greatly wished it, the seniors consented to a day's sail along the
coast, it being decided in council between Wilmet and Cherry that sea
air might bring freshness back to Felix's looks.
The morning was all that could be wished, but the post brought an
appointment from a man of business to see the Squire respecting some
land which was to be secured in East Ewmouth, for the foundation of
buildings that might serve to Christianize the straggling population
there, making a fresh district from both parishes. For it was to this
purpose they had decided to devote the tithes cut off from Vale Leston,
since the new tenements actually stood in that parish, and the work at
home was now forward enough to enable the extension to be made.
Great was the lamentation at this inopportune arrival; but Felix owned
himself glad of it, and did not look equal to a long day's fatigue.
Clement also remained to assist at the consultation, and after the
conference, walked to the spot with the agent.
Returning soon after the hour for the second post, Clement went
to the study, where, as he entered, Felix, who was seated at his
writing-table, lifted up his face from his supporting hand, very pale,
and with eyes swimming in tears, but with a look of rest and relief
that reminded the Vicar of that which had responded to the tidings
that their little Theodore was beyond the reach of harm. He held up
something, saying, 'Look!'
'The photograph of my father.'
'See there,' pointing to the corner.
'T.E.U. Edgar's copy! Is he found?'
'Thank God! There is hope that the lost is found!' He rested his
head against Clement, heaving a mighty irrepressible sob, physically
painful, but full of relief. Those two had become inexpressibly much
to one another during these four years, and far more during the last
six weeks.
'From Travis?' asked Clement presently, observing the handwriting of
the letter on the table.
'Yes, good faithful fellow! Would you read it to me, Clem? I cannot get
on;' and he cleared his eyes of the blinding tears. 'I could only see
that there was hope at the last.'
'Of finding him?'
'Not here. No. He begins by telling us the dear fellow is dead. I think
it was something violent, and that he tried in vain to save him. Let me
hear, that we may see whether there be anything we can spare Cherry.'
Clement thought Felix even less fit for any shock or agitation than his
sister, but he could only make him lie back on his couch, whence he
watched with earnest eyes for every word.
The narrative is, however, here given more fully than it could be
written, especially as one portion of the history was reserved for
Marilda alone.
Ferdinand Travis had inherited a considerable claim to mining property
in the south-eastern portion of California. He had gone to America,
intending to dispose of it, but had ended by settling down there,
naming it Underwood, and doing his best to exert an influence for good
on the lawless races he found around him. He had enough in common with
them to obtain a partial success where another would have failed; his
little township was thriving, and to some degree civilized, and he
had even been able to obtain the building of a church and residence
of a clergyman with a kind of mission to the Indians. All around him
was safe and peaceable; but between him and the nearest cities on the
Pacific lay a tract subject to the forays of a tribe in the tiger stage
that precedes the abject decline of the unhappy red-skins. The district
was gradually becoming settled, but neither village nor traveller
was secure from horrible raids and savage massacres, and save by
letter-carriers, who trusted to speed, the region was seldom traversed
except by parties numerous enough to protect themselves.
Such a surveying party Ferdinand had joined, intending to transact
some affairs at San Francisco; and on the third day of his journey,
when descending a steep hill-side, the war-shouts of the Indians were
heard, and presently about thirty beplumed and painted savages were
seen evidently triumphing after a victory.
The travellers scarcely uttered a word, but settled themselves in
their saddles, and drew their revolvers, then charged the foe with the
full impetus of a down-hill gallop. It was the affair of a moment;
the Indians threw themselves on their horses and scoured away like
the wind, while the new comers found that they had been exulting over
the slaughter of only two men and one little child, whom they had
been proceeding to mangle after the custom of their tribe. One victim
was quite dead, and already scalped and scored; the other, though
senseless, stripped, and gashed in many places, was still breathing, as
was the child--a boy of six or seven, though shot through the breast,
and the mark of the scalping-knife already begun on his head.
The keen wiry dauntless fellow, who acted as guide, driving two of
the party in a much enduring waggon, opined that they came from
Fiddler's Ranch, about two miles off, and recognized the living one
as the Fiddler himself--the best company, he guessed, between this
and the Atlantic. It was a service of danger to lift the bodies into
the vehicle, for the Indians might be hovering about in ambush to
fall on the rescuers in great numbers; but the transit was safely
performed; up to the stockade and ditch protecting the township called
Fiddler's Ranch, whence issued a population of the rudest description,
vituperating the Indians, and bewailing 'poor Tom the Fiddler and
little Jerry, the smartest, cutest little critter that side of the
mountains.' 'Pretty nigh gone, stranger; bring him in, lay him by the
side of his father; those brutes of Injuns fix their work off too
handsome--best if neither opens his eyes again.'
A low frame-house, the outer half-store, also post-office, newspaper
office, photographic studio--such was the place into which the father
was carried, Ferdinand following with the child into an inner room,
where were some appliances of comfort, a neatly ordered bed, a few
chairs, a table, and some drawings fastened to the wall--among them a
photograph that arrested Ferdinand's attention. Had he not gazed at
the likeness from his bed in Mr. Audley's room? did he not know it in
the family parlour, and in Clement's cell at St Matthew's? It was the
likeness of Edward Underwood!
He turned hastily to the bed. Yes, the face, weather-stained yet
ghastly, overgrown with neglected beard, stained with blood and dust,
still showed the delicate chiselling of eyebrow and nose, the Underwood
characteristic!
Such remedies as the Ranch afforded produced tokens of reviving power,
and Ferdinand could not believe the wounds necessarily mortal. The rest
of the party were about to pursue their journey, and through them he
sent the most urgent entreaties and liberal promises that could induce
a surgeon to take his life in his hand, and cross that dreadful waste.
The signature of F.A. Travis was well known in the West.
While Ferdinand was washing away the soil from the face once so
fair and brilliant, bringing out more of the familiar features,
consciousness returned in groans; and when at last the lids were
raised, and showed the well remembered deep blue eyes, the first word
that struggled articulately from the lips was, 'Jerry! Baby!'
'Here!' Ferdinand laid the nerveless hand on the little flaxen head,
still motionless.
That was enough at first, but as the tide of life began to flow more
freely, Edgar called the child again; and as no answer came, used his
hand to feel, writhed his head to look. 'Jerry!--what--asleep? They've
not hurt him!' The last words in a tone of full sense and anguish.
'He does not seem to suffer,' said Ferdinand. 'I have sent for a
doctor, and I trust to keep you both up till he comes.'
'A doctor! Here?' with a contemptuous groan. 'Help me, I must see him!'
with a vain effort for a fuller view of the child, who was on a sort
of crib by his side, lying with closed eyes, and a beautiful waxen
death-like face. 'Lift me!'
It cost sobs of agony, though that seemed lost in the intense gaze. 'Is
his wound there?' he asked, looking at the bandaged head.
'That was the scalp-knife, but it has done little harm. The wound is
here, but the ball passed out at the back.'
'And is here,' said Edgar, laying his hand on his body. 'I had him
before me on my horse, as we always went, my brave boy! One week more,
and we should have been beyond the miscreants' reach!' and he sank back
with a piteous wailing moan, too weak and shattered for demonstrative
grief, though utterly crushed. 'Put him by me,' he added presently; 'if
there be any life left in him, he will like it.'
'I am afraid of hurting you.'
'Nothing will make much odds now. We are both done for, and I am glad
it is both, if it was to be. My poor little chap, we couldn't do
without each other!'
Then, as Ferdinand placed the child where his restless hand could
stroke the cheek, tender parental pride revived. 'A jolly little face,
isn't it? if you saw it like itself. Oh, if I could see those eyes open
for once!'
There seemed a revival of strength; but with the knowledge of the
bullet-wound and the six frightful gashes of the Indian knives,
Ferdinand felt that a few questions must be risked, lest this should be
a delusive rally, and speech suddenly fail. 'You know me, Edgar?'
'Fernan Travis! Ay. You're not much altered! But how did you know me?
I'm not much like the swell I used to be! Ah! I see!' as Ferdinand
signed towards the photograph. 'How are they all?'
'All well, when last I heard. Longing only to hear of you.'
'Better not.'
'And this is your boy. His mother?' he added, with more hesitation; and
it brought a fierce look.
'Never had one in any real sense. She left him at ten months
old--always hated him. But he's all right. You'll find the certificate
in that old green case.'
'Of his baptism?'
'No. Such matters don't come handy here, and she wasn't one to concern
herself about them. I don't know that she was the better for that! No:
it's my marriage lines! I kept them for his sake, though I gnashed my
teeth at them often enough.'
'Pray let me baptize him!' entreated Ferdinand, with an imploring
accent, contrasting so curiously with his bronzed face and black beard,
that Edgar again smiled, saying, 'You've not turned parson?'
'No, but this is a case of necessity.'
'Oh! all's one to me,' interrupted Edgar, with a sort of instinctive
sneer to cut short a Clementine discourse; 'since this business must
come to their ears at home, they may as well be at peace about one of
us.'
'And his name?'
'His eyes--you'll never see them--but they have so much little Cherry's
wistful look, that I've called him Gerald; you may tack Felix to it.
No mockery! He's been the happiest little soul that ever was born,
happiest maybe if he goes on as he is, knowing nothing about it.'
As Fernan repeated the Lord's Prayer, first learnt from Lance, the
tears gathered and softened Edgar's eyes, and made a mist as he saw the
pale brow sprinkled, and heard the Holy Name.
'You said that once for him. Let me hear the old echo again. I wanted
to teach him, but it never came right.'
Ferdinand was so thankful that the doxology came from his heart, though
at the moment he saw that the poor child had been almost baptized in
blood, for Edgar's caresses had displaced the bandage and some bright
red drops had started, and mingled with the water, and he could not
help silently tracing the cross with his finger before kissing and
wiping it away, and re-adjusting the handkerchief. 'He is warmer,' he
said. 'See, his lips are less deathly.'
'The death flush,' said the father.
'It need not be. I will try the brandy again. I thought we got a little
down before.'
'I tell you he shall not be tortured! Why should he wake to an hour's
conscious misery? I could not bear it! I say I will not have it done!'
and he stretched out his hand as in protection.
'Nay, why should not he live? There can hardly be any vital part here,
and it has just missed the spine. Let me try!'
'To make him a wretched orphan. Another burthen to Felix.'
'That need not be a scruple now.'
'He has not married Marilda after all!'
'No; but he has come into the property.'
He was surprised at the effect of his words, 'What! what! Felix! Vale
Leston?'
'Yes, he has been living there these four years.'
'Not married?'
'No.'
'Then that child is heir to all! Bless me! Felix at Vale Leston! It
makes one believe in a Providence at last.'
He anxiously watched Ferdinand's endeavours to restore his little son,
as though divided between the wish for his life and the apprehension
of his visible suffering; but though the stimulant was certainly
swallowed, and produced a slight revival of pulse, the lethargy
continued.
Edgar's own wounds, except the rifle-shot in the body, were the
lacerations with which the Indians mark their victims, not mortal in
themselves; but he never admitted any hope for himself, and though for
one day and night his recovery seemed possible, after that the wounds
assumed an appearance which the experienced inhabitants, many of them
fugitive Secessionists, pronounced to be fatal.
He talked a good deal at times, and was eager to hear all Fernan could
tell him about home; and though he gave no connected history, it was
possible to piece together the sad story of his life from his rambling
talk.
The sight of Spooner, the manager, in a cab, had convinced him that his
forgery had been detected, and he could hardly credit the assurance
that it was known to no creature save Marilda and Ferdinand himself,
whom she had instantly despatched to assure him of pardon and secresy.
'No! did Polly do that? A golden girl I knew she was; but that's
sublime! Yet I might have known she had held her tongue, since Felix
and Cherry are alive and well! Good old girl. I say, Travis, you must
have her after all. She deserves it!'
His relief was intense, when he thought of his son, in finding no brand
affixed to the name he had never dared own again, except at the two
most unhappy events of his life, his duel and his wedding.
'Ourselves, our souls, and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively
sacrifice,' he said. 'Those were little Lance's words--the chief reason
he assigned for burying himself at Bexley. A fanatic craze of course,
but I never got the words out of my head, and I'm sure I've been
the sacrifice, soul and body, though not what you'd call a holy or a
reasonable one! Well, whatever hindered him, it was well for him!'
He explained that Allen had been a feeble speculator, but plausible, of
personal good faith, and perniciously sanguine. His schemes had chiefly
devoured Thomas Underwood's legacy, while as to the other debts, Edgar
treated them lightly, and though he was much moved at Geraldine's
exertions to pay them, he called it an infatuation in Felix to have
allowed it.
After his flight to Ostend, Edgar had joined Allen's company at
Strasburg. Failure had disgusted him with painting, and the free
wandering life had long fascinated him, while with the Zoraya he had
a standing game at coquetry. Though her name was Hungarian, she was
almost stage-born, and her nationality was harder to analyze than
Ferdinand's. She had sung ever since she could speak, and been bred
to the boards, but as, in spite of her splendid beauty, she lacked
dramatic talent, and her voice had been too early strained, she was
never more than a third-rate prima-donna, with airs and graces that
were Edgar's sport and titillation, while to her he was the handsomest
and most gentlemanly man in the company, with wit and breeding of which
she was half afraid.
When Edgar found that the unhappy occurrence at Pau was known, he
asked eagerly after Alice, blessing the kindness that had brought her
home; but he lived where life was held too cheap to make him greatly
heed blood-guiltiness; nor had he deemed the wound more than the just
penalty of forcing the duel on him, viewing the fatal result chiefly
as an accident. But Zoraya had seen Alice shriek and faint, and Edgar
falter and blush, and knew that this pretty English doll had been the
cause of his killing his man. Thenceforth passion and jealousy awoke in
her, and made her whole being centre in the determination to turn his
trifling into earnest. Her beauty became more striking, her songs more
effective in the absorption of her soul, and her eager pursuit became
as often oppressive as amusing. When he had remained in Egypt with the
apparently dying Major Harewood, nothing could persuade her that the
Englishman was not connected with Alice; and when he joined the troop
again, she hailed him like a truant slave returned to his bondage.
Why had he not broken from it? Had the telegram announced Felix, he
could not have helped lingering for a sight of his face in spite of
everything; but Wilmet, in her cold severity, and her grief too, he
could not encounter, especially as Zoraya had threatened to descend
upon him and 'imagine the meeting.'
So he drifted back to the 'company,' which had by force of custom
become a sort of home, and was his sole resource. 'Rattle-snake and
frog,' he said; 'of course the frog succumbs at last.'
But that had not been till the retirement of the Allens had left him
to the mercy of the Prebels, and when the absence of Mrs. Allen's
unimpeachable respectability left the company at the mercy of scandal;
and a little exaggeration of evil report, with a few tears and heroics,
brought him passively to surrender his hand to his pursuer, and they
were married in New Zealand before proceeding to America to 'star it'
in the Southern States.
Even then his affectionate nature would have opened to family love; but
with the attainment of her object, Zoraya's passion ceased, and she
viewed him as a master to be resisted. His ideal of a wife had been
formed on very different women, and incensed her imperious temper; and
when her violence was met by cool sarcasm, she was lashed to frenzy.
Her repugnance to motherhood completed his disgust. He deliberately
told Fernan that first and last he had never seen a spark of even
animal yearning towards the infant, only angry impatience of the
discomfort and inconvenience, and contempt of the pleasure it gave him.
She was enough among the advocates of advanced women's rights to learn
to admire her own scorn of maternity, and but for an old negress, whom
he had hired on the poor little thing's unwelcome entrance into the
world, its chances of life would have been few.
So they had rubbed on, till at Chicago Edgar had fallen ill with
inflammation on the chest and throat, and was left voiceless, hovering
on the verge of decline. He was still confined to his room when he
received a note from Zoraya to inform him that she could not be
burthened with the support of an invalid, and had therefore made other
arrangements, in pursuance of which she enclosed a deed of divorce.
To him it was liberty, and satisfaction that she had not heart enough
to rob him of his child, but it was also destitution. However, there
was compassion enough for the sick and deserted vocalist to render
landlord and doctor merciful, and he was allowed to liquidate his debt
by taking portraits as soon as he could reach the drawing-room of the
boarding-house and wield his crayons.
'I don't know whether the divorce would hold water at home,' he said;
'but keep it, to guard the boy. If he is heir to anything she will
scent it, like a vulture, carrion. Stay, while I can sign it, you draw
up a form, giving the custody of him to my brothers, and forbidding her
having anything to do with him.'
He was uneasy till this was done. His success at Chicago had given
him hopes of gaining a livelihood with his brush, but he soon found
photography too strong for him, and could meet with no employment as a
violinist. His health was too much shattered for settled exertion, and
though he said little of his struggles and sufferings, they must have
been frightful, as he dropped from one failure to another, striving as
he had never striven before, till he actually became a teamster to a
party prospecting far West. 'I can't think how they came to take such a
screw!' he said; 'but I believe they forgave me my child for the sake
of my fiddle. Such a child as it was too, not eighteen months old, but
never fretting for a moment. Most of the way I carried him strapped on
my back, and always felt his little hand in my beard, and heard his
voice in my ear as blithe as a katydid, and he was always ready to
play, till he was a regular pet-kitten among them. Ah, well, Jerry, you
and I have had good times together. How will he ever stand the high
polite at home? Pah! You must have him out now and then, and let him
breathe the prairies, and gallop after the buffaloes.'
It had ended in Edgar's settling down on this spot, having found the
Editor of the 'Soaring Eagle of the Far West' closing with a favourable
offer at the other end of the Continent. 'Tell Felix I took to his
trade,' he said. 'Take home a sheet or two to be preserved alongside
of the Pursuivant in the family archives. It is dated Violinia, a
free translation of Fiddler's Ranch. Before I came, it used to be
Broken-head Ranch; but it got the other name when I took to playing to
hinder my boy from hearing more foul tongues than I could help. Take
Lance my violin. He may some day make it over to Jerry, if he has a
turn that way, though maybe he had best not.'
Perhaps nothing he said was sadder than this, considering what music
could have been to him.
It appeared that though the wonderful spring of health in that
salubrious air had made his first years there enjoyable, he had begun
to feel the lack of all good influences as his child grew older.
What he heard with indifference from his comrades, was shocking when
echoed from the tender lips that brought back the thought of home; and
when Gerald began to ask those deep questions of why and wherefore,
life and death, that we only cease to wonder over as we grow used to
them, Edgar, who had never reflected before, only undergone a few
intellectual impressions and influences, answered as one bewildered;
and when the fair head nestled to him, longed to see it bent over the
clasped hands, like the heads so like it at home. He tried to teach;
but prayers, cast off half a life-time ago, came not at his beck, and
the very framework of the religion he had never attended to, and then
thrown aside, had almost passed from him. Fragments floated before
him, and his perplexity became longing to clear his mind; and when
the foul habits and language of the Ranch came prominently before the
child's growing perception, he had resolved to remove to where order
and decency prevailed. He had answered an advertisement offering
employment as an editor in a more advanced settlement, and was in the
act of riding to an isolated station to collect his debts before his
departure, when the attack had been made.
It was as if he had been just turning back from the husks which the
swine did eat, and making his first step from the far country; and
perhaps he thought so himself, for when Fernan's kindness as well as
his own suffering had demolished his proud irony, he said, 'A fellow
like you carries his Bible as a charm. Read me the old story of the
younger son. It is not an original idea to ask for it, but the cadences
have rung in my head ever since that "Pater noster" of yours.'
It was as if the old irreverence must still tinge whatever he said.
Very perplexing it was. Was it repentance, that self-condemnation for
wasted kindness? Was it faith, that increasing craving for Gospel
messages? Was it prayer, the entreaty for the forms whose words, all
broken, haunted the memory of the clergyman's son? He showed neither
fear nor regret; he knew he had his death-warrant, he had made a bad
business of life, and was weary of it--he, his thirty-second year not
yet complete--he, the most gifted of the brothers. He sent no direct
message, either to ask pardon for himself, or protection for his
child--perhaps he was too secure of both to feel the need, for he spoke
more and more of Felix and Cherry--nay, seemed to be talking to them
when fever obscured his mind. Over and over recurred Lance's answer, 'a
reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice,' as if it had been the riddle
of his life--or again the opening words of the Lord's Prayer, running
into 'I will arise and go to my Father.'
The loving hearts must trust to the Father, Who can meet the son even
while yet a great way off. And it was well for them that kind Ferdinand
dropped the veil over the day when the doctor came too late for
alleviation, though in time to save the child, as the lethargic trance
gave way, and the moan of 'Daddy, daddy!' began. The last conscious
light of the father's eyes met those of the boy; his last word replied
to the feeble call. So Edgar Underwood passed away, and Ferdinand
buried him beneath a pine-tree, amid many evidences that he had
endeared himself to the rude spirits around, who mourned him in their
rough sort, with many an anecdote of his ready wit and good-nature, and
many another of little Jerry's drollery, simplicity, or courage.
The doctor recommended transporting the child to Sacramento before
recovery of his senses should aggravate the danger of the journey. The
spine, though not actually touched, had received a shock, and would
require most careful treatment, beyond his own skill. So a bark cradle
like that of a papoose, had been constructed, and slung to Ferdinand's
shoulders so that he could raise it in his arms and break the jolting
of the waggon over the roadless waste. When clasped in a pair of kind
arms, with a beard to put his hand into, and a soothing voice to hush
his moan, he did not waken to miss his father, though more than once he
asked how soon they should arrive, and many times begged to go to bed.
The best surgeons of Sacramento and San Francisco had consulted over
the little fellow, and pronounced that the spine had escaped by so
little that the nerves would long feel the shock, though it might be
outgrown in time. They thought he might be removed as soon as the
external wounds were healed and the constitution had somewhat rallied.
A nurse had been obtained, but at present the boy would endure no
attendance but Ferdinand's, and seemed satisfied and lulled into a
half-conscious doze by his English voice and accent.
All that Edgar had said about his son being Felix's next heir was
omitted in the letter; but Ferdinand said he supposed that Felix would
wish the boy to be brought home as soon as he could safely travel, but
if not, he should be sure of a loving home at 'Underwood.' If he were
not to be received, a telegram should be sent to Sacramento, but there
would probably be time for a letter, since weeks might pass before a
move would be prudent. Of course, too, all respecting the forgery was
suppressed, and only written to Marilda, who was attending her mother
on her yearly visit to Spa.
Clement read the letter through without pause or remark, though his
voice shook and thickened when he read of Edgar feeling about for
the Lord's Prayer, and Fernan helping him. Truly, the last had been
first, and the first last. He was disappointed too, not to find more to
justify the hope that his brother had evidently gathered.
Felix lay back all the time, his eyes fixed with a kind of unseeing
steadiness on his own photograph of his father, hanging against the
wall. His hands were clasped over his breast, sometimes trembling
slightly, but never unlocking. 'Thank you,' he said; 'there seems
nothing to keep from Cherry.'
'She might imagine much worse things if she did not see the letter.'
'If we prepare her, and give it to her to read, it will be almost a
comfort. Call her in when they come home. No, I will, or she will take
alarm for me.'
Care for Cherry seemed his first thought; and Clement said, 'It is well
we never told her what we thought about the Australian report. How much
it has spared her!'
'Ay; mark the time, Clem! It was spring, five years ago, just when you
and I began those prayers, that he was left with a little child to lead
him. How often that is brought about!'
'I am glad he named the child after Cherry,' said Clement, willing to
blink the full reply, for never having been able to love Edgar as
did his elder brother, he could not as entirely 'believe all things
and hope all things.' He felt the terrible deficiency, knowing that
Ferdinand would have put foremost whatever truth would allow him to say.
The indirect reply made Felix shrink from that heart's core of the
subject, unwilling to hear the faint qualified hope that conscience
would suffer his brother to utter, dashing the comfort that he had
embraced.
With a heavy sigh he began to lament the great unhappiness that had
come upon one so formed for light and sunshine. Edgar and Lance had
always been of the same temperament and tastes, and yet they had been
the two arrows, shot by the same hand, but of such different course.
'A very sinister blast came on one!' said Clement.
'Yet, change their places,' said Felix. 'Lance would at fifteen have
stood the foreign college, and I doubt if the Minsterham choir would
have been good for Edgar!'
'The real key lies in those words that haunted poor Edgar. The
sacrifice must be to One or to the other--the Rood, or the heavier
weight,' said Clement.
'Heavy indeed!' sighed Felix, as if the severity cut him, giving way
to a sobbing groan. 'Such a life, and such a death! Our father's
pride--the flower of us all! O Edgar, our nursery king, that it should
have come to this! What would not I give to have been where Travis was,
if only to cry, Alas! my brother!'
And as the beautiful features, gallant bearing, and winning speech, so
affectionate when most blameworthy, came over him, his enfeebled state
broke down his ordinary reserve, and sorrow had its course.
Then came a long stillness while Clement wrote to Lance; but when the
bell rang, Felix rose to accompany his brother; and when Clement,
perceiving how painfully he moved, would have dissuaded him, he made
his usual answer, that 'After a time, there is no use in favouring a
strain.'
His management of himself was right, for after the quiet little
service, almost a duet between the brothers, in which both could afford
to falter or choke when the De Profundis came among the Psalms,
Clement found him standing under the willow-tree, quite himself again,
as he looked at Theodore's little green bed, with Stella's wreath
of white roses. No doubt his thoughts were on the lone unhallowed
grave parted from them by half the world; but he would not risk his
self-control again, and took Clement's arm without speaking.
The twilight of the July evening was falling when the waggonette came
to the door with rippling laughter and merry voices, calling to the two
brothers who stood in the porch.
Clement went forward and lifted Cherry out, then left her to Felix. It
was too dark to see faces; but silence was already taking effect, and
when she found herself beckoned into the study, she knew her brother
was strongly moved, and was too sure of the cause by intuition to utter
her former cry, 'Is it Edgar?' only she trembled as Felix made her sit
down on the sofa, and placing himself beside her, said, 'My Cherry, our
long waiting is over;' and then while her fingers closed on the hand
that held them, he calmly told her the facts.
She bore it better than he had expected, unknowing how he himself
absorbed her chief anxiety. Indeed, the hours which had intervened had
brought him to so resigned and thankful a tone, that it almost hid from
her the full force of his tidings. She asked for the letter, and then
rose in search of light.
'You would like to go to your room,' he said, and gave her his arm,
both too much absorbed to remember that he had not helped her upstairs
since the accident. When he had kissed her, and shut her into her room,
he leant for some seconds on the rail, and his face was contracted by
suffering, more physical than mental.
He was at the evening meal, and so was Cherry. She would not have her
supper sent up, she wanted to be in his presence, and be supported by
it. She was so far stunned, that the horrors that would yet haunt her
for many a night had not dawned on her imagination; but when he said,
'It is well,' she felt it so, but she needed to look at his face to be
soothed and comforted--yes, though it was terribly pale. The colour,
save in chance flushes, had never come back, and to-night the whiteness
was like marble, but the quiet strength and peace seemed to hush, bear
her up, and quell the wailings of her heart.
And when John Harewood came full of anxious inquiry, he really thought
the tidings had overcome them less than his own wife, who had never
quite recovered the effect of her exertions at the accident, and coming
home over-tired, had been quite crushed by the intelligence--the more
because, like those whose judgment was stronger than their yearning
over Edgar, she did not trust much to those few tokens of penitence.
And Angela was not withheld from loudly blaming Fernan for not having,
as she assumed, insisted on proclaiming the sinner's Hope, and when
assured, that no doubt he must have done so, though he did not set down
his own words, she shook her head, and said, 'How could he, when he did
not know it himself?' There she was silenced by Felix, and went to the
Hepburns for sympathy.
For the rest, the family spoke little of the new loss. Felix quietly
busied himself in the arrangements that the discovery of of his new
heir made him think desirable. Mrs. Fulbert's remarriage, and the
lapse of her annuity, made him better able to carry out his plans at
once; and if his heir were not Clement, it was necessary to make the
arrangements more definitively.
Of course the little Gerald was telegraphed and written for. He must be
welcomed and loved, but he was on the whole dreaded as much as hoped
for. The Mays spoke of the self-reliance of the best-trained colonial
children; and what could this poor boy be--the deserted son of the
singing-woman--but at best a sort of 'Luck of Roaring Camp.' Wilmet
infinitely pitied Geraldine, and rejoiced that the river lay between,
to keep Kester and Edward out of the way of corruption.
CHAPTER XLV.
THE MYRTLE SPRAY.
'He smiled, "Shall I complain if joy go by
With summer days and winter follow it?
If He who gave the gladness I have known,
Shall take it from me, shall I make my moan?
Nay, for it all is His, the joy, the pain,
The weeping and the mirth, the buoyant breath
Of happy toil; the mist on weary brain;
The turmoil of our life, the hush of death:
And neither life nor death--things near nor far,
Shall sever us from Him whose own we are."'
Autumn.
The Vale Leston waggonette was waiting at the Ewmouth Station to meet
the express on an August afternoon, and in it sat Geraldine, her heart
in her eager eyes.
Felix was coming out of the station with--oh! what a robust, brown,
bronzed Ferdinand, and between them, a little fragile, shrinking
figure, dragging his feet with a certain stiffness and effort. That
was all she saw till he was lifted in Fernan's arms to her kiss, and
passively endured it.
'Will you come by me, Travis?' asked Felix, ascending to the driving
seat.
'Will you stay with your aunt, Gerald?'
'Oh, come! don't leave me!' in a plaintive voice, were the first words
Cherry heard from her nephew.
'I believe I had better. He feels the jar less,' said Ferdinand,
seating himself within, and lifting the child on his knee. 'Geraldine,
I say,'--bending forward and indicating Felix--'is he all right?'
'O yes! quite! he only feels the strain a little now and then,' she
asseverated.
'I did not know him till he spoke,' said Ferdinand. 'He is grown so
much stouter and so pale.'
'We are all getting middle aged, you know,' faintly laughed Cherry.
'Not you, Geraldine, I never saw you looking so well.'
'That's the place. It has done us all good--only strains are endless
worries, and he can't take as much exercise as usual. He has thought so
much of your coming too--he will be much better now it is over. Little
Gerald! little Gerald, our dear little boy!' said she, trying to take
the small thin hand that lay on the little black knee, and to look
beneath the broad grass hat.
'Take off your hat, my man,' said Ferdinand; 'let your aunt see your
face.'
The child obeyed, and sat leaning against his friend, holding his hat
in both hands, and gazing full at Geraldine, out of a pair of eyes,
which, after what she had heard, rather disappointed her by not being
of the family blue, but soft liquid brown; but the skin was delicately
fair, and the features of the true Underwood cast, strangely startling
her by recalling Theodore, not the mindless Tedo of daily life, but
such as he had lain in the Oratory only with those great mournful
eyes and a soul intensely looking out of them. The hair too was very
light, of the same silkworm fineness as Theodore's, and falling in
the selfsame masses of glossy waves. Ferdinand parted these aside
caressingly, and showed a curved red scar that made her shudder and ask
'Is it well?'
'Quite. It did not go deep, and even the other is entirely healed now,'
said Ferdinand, 'though its effects are more lasting. However, he found
his legs on board ship.'
'Are you tired, my dear?' she asked, feeling as if another moment of
the gaze of the big sad eyes would make her cry.
'I'm used up,' he said, piteously, but though the phrase was Yankee,
the weary tone was English, and gentlemanlike.
'Poor dear little man! We shall be at home presently, and then you
shall rest, and have tea.'
A smile broke out on the little face--a smile approving him truly as
Edgar's son, as, glancing up through those long black eye-lashes, he
asked, 'Are you Chrie?'--(not Cherry, but Edgar's own exclusive title
for her).
'Chrie! To be sure I am, my own dear, dear little boy,' and the tears
started while she smiled.
'Then will you tell me the rest of the stories?'
'What stories?'
'The story about the poor man that had the burthen and went the long
journey, between the lions and up the hill Difficulty. When Daddy
couldn't remember, he says you know it all.'
She withstood the impulse to call out to Felix, knowing that a turn to
look back always hurt him, and only said, 'Yes, my dear, I'll tell you
all my stories. What a traveller you are! how did you like the sea?'
'All but the womanfolk,' said the boy gravely.
'Oh! Gerald!'
'You're not womanfolk,' he answered.
'Eh! what then?' she asked, endeavouring to look into the brown eyes,
but their black fringes were down now, and he nestled to his protector,
into whose ear he whispered what was repeated to her in a sort of aside:
'She's just Daddy's Chrie, the darling.'
How well she knew them for Edgar's words! She longed to have him in
her arms, but she saw by the manner in which Fernan held him that the
strong support was needed to break the vibration of the carriage. 'Did
you carry him so all across America?' she asked.
'Nearly. Even Pulleman's cars shook him, and he could bear it less then
than now. The voyage did him a world of good, and every one was kind to
him, but he's as bad a misogynist as ever Lance's Miles. There were but
five women at Fiddler's Ranch, and only one white, and they called them
all aunts. You'll have to drop that distinction! And may I keep him in
my room till he has had time to get used to the strange house?'
'And the strange beings,' said Cherry. 'It will be a great blow to
Sibby, who had begun to cheer up at thought of him; but as she never
had Theodore at night, she may bear it better.'
'Ah! that loss must have been much felt, though no one could wish it
otherwise.'
'No one has felt it so much as he,' said Cherry, glancing up to her
brother. 'He had really the mother's love for the weakest. I wonder if
he will see the likeness I do! I feel as if Tedo were come back, with
what was lacking.'
'And Stella?'
'Oh! Stella--' she suppressed with difficulty, 'has another interest,'
and changed to--'Stella has turned into a woman, and is the most
helpful person about the house.'
'Whom shall I find at home?'
'The regular domestic establishment, including Bernard, but Lance comes
on Saturday, and Robin--she has not been at home since September, but
the De la Poers have all settled down at the baths at Tplitz, and his
Lordship is coming back on business, and escorts her to London, where
Lance meets her. You'll find Will Harewood too--good fellow, I know he
thought Clement overtasked, so he has taken no pupils this year, except
that he is coaching Bernard for Keble College, and says he is come
to learn parish work, and you would never believe what an excellent
clergyman old Bill makes.'
Here they reached that spot where ten years previously the charms of
Vale Leston had first broken on Felix, and this time he could not help
looking back to call out 'Look, Fernan! Hold Gerald up to see the
place.'
Ferdinand lifted the boy to look over the empty side of the driving
seat, exclaiming himself 'How lovely! There's nothing like an English
village!'
'It's a ranch and not a city,' said the boy.
'It is home, Gerald, your home,' said Felix, trying to get a view of
his face, which expressed more wonder than admiration.
He looked puzzled as they drove over the bridge, and when they came
among the grass and trees of the park where John Harewood's fine
short-horns were grazing, he asked 'Where's the store?'
'He has only heard of Bexley!' cried Cherry. 'Not here, my dear; uncle
Lance takes care of that.'
'And the paper?' asked Gerald, much to her amusement, but just then
they drew up at the door, where all the rest were assembled to meet
them, including Wilmet and her boys, who were both dancing about,
shouting at the top of their voices for a drive round to the stables.
It was too much for the new-comer, he clung to Fernan with a scream,
burying his face in his breast, and trembling all over, and Fernan,
saying he was always frightened at any sudden outcry, asked leave to
lay him at once on his bed, and let him sleep before there were any
more introductions.
Felix showed the spare room, and after an interval Ferdinand rejoined
them, saying the little fellow was asleep. Cherry asked if she should
sit by him.
'No, thank you, he does not mind being alone, and as long as he sees my
portmanteau he will know it is all right. It is numbers and noise that
frighten him, I sometimes think he has never got the Indian war-whoop
out of his ears. They talked of his bravery at the ranch, but that is
all gone now.'
'From helplessness, very possibly,' said Felix.
'That is fast improving, but his nerves have had a shock that does not
pass off. Besides, I find the poor little fellow somehow fancied he
should meet his father here. I had no notion till now that he supposed
he was going back to Fiddler's Ranch and the old life when he heard of
home.'
'It must have been all like a long horrible dream,' said Cherry.
'I don't understand it,' said Ferdinand; 'he was scarcely sensible when
I took him away, and he called me Daddy till his mind grew clearer. He
seems always watching for some one. I did explain it all, and then I
thought he understood, and he knows what death means, but somehow he
does not realize it with regard to his father.'
'Very likely,' said Wilmet, 'his impression varies according to whether
he is well, or tired and feverish.'
'I never thought of that!' said Fernan, 'I believe it is so--for when
he is pretty well, he is the smartest little thing I ever saw, always
asking questions, and reading! I believe he read every book on board!
And he was very funny there, ready to talk to any one, provided it was
not woman.'
'Has he any religious feeling?' asked Clement.
'Yes. He said his little prayers--poor Edgar had taught him that--and,
and I thought you would like me to tell him what I could.'
'No one has so much right,' said Felix. 'Fernan, I have been
remembering the time when I was angry with Mr. Audley for taking you
into our house--as I thought to corrupt Lance.'
'Well, I did my best, or worst, to corrupt Fulbert,' he said smiling;
'and if you and Lance had not been what you were, you would have seen
me in much truer colours. I had no training like what Edgar gave his
boy. You will find him a wonderfully good little fellow, marvellously
shielded from evil.'
'You think he may safely play with our boys?' asked Wilmet.
Fernan smiled sadly. 'Play, poor little fellow, he is a long way from
their play as yet! But he is a far safer companion for them than I was
for your brothers. He has hardly ever spoken to a child of his own age;
I believe there was one black baby and one half-caste papoose in the
Ranch, but childhood was not otherwise represented, and he was afraid
of the few we had in the steamer.'
'He must have been a most incessant charge,' said Felix.
'But I don't think I ever enjoyed anything so much,' said Fernan. 'I
wish you didn't want him!'
'You see how little Cherry could spare him,' said Felix. 'But you will
make us a long visit, till he is quite at home.'
'I thank you; I couldn't go till he has grown happy with
you--happier, I hope, than he has been with me, poor little man; but as
soon as I can, I shall run up to London, and there's a matter I must go
to Spain about before I return far West.'
'At any rate this is your home in England, Fernan. You know we can't
thank you, but you are more than ever one of ourselves.' And Felix held
out his hand for a tremulous grasp of Ferdinand's.
Gerald did seem in great need of his friend when he awoke. He recoiled
in dismay at the stairs. 'Oh! those dreadful things are here too!'
For he had never seen a staircase till he was carried down that of
the hotel at Sacramento, and his limbs had so far been affected by
the spinal damage that he could only as yet move with difficulty on a
level surface, and needed to be carried down with his eyes shut, that
he might not see the giddy height. He consented to sit by Chrie at
the evening meal, and was not ungracious to the other members of the
family, comporting himself discreetly, gazing out of those enormous
eyes at the novel scene, and fraternising with Scamp, who adopted him
at once as an Underwood.
He had made up his mind as to his eldest uncle, and when they rose,
crept up to him and, putting his frail little lizard's hand into his,
said tentatively, 'Blunderbore!' and as Felix started, hardly knowing
whether to laugh or cry, he added, 'I want to see the Pursuivant,'
uttering all the syllables with great clearness and deliberation.
Much delighted, Felix took him into his study, when he examined the
last roll of proof with profound sagacity, and said eagerly, 'I can fix
off a sheet for you,' accepting his uncle much more as editor than as
squire.
The introduction to Sibby was tolerably successful, he detected that
she talked like 'Kerry Micksey,' his chief playmate at the Ranch, and
she was the only person he accepted as an aunt. Felix was too glad to
be dubbed Blunderbore again to object to the familiarity; they taught
him to term Clement the Vicar, and the others went by their unadorned
names. It was remarkable that Bernard, though growing up into a fine
manly beauty much resembling Edgar's, did not seem to recall any
association; but on the Saturday afternoon, when Cherry was sitting
with him under the cedar-tree, a low sweet whistle made him start,
scramble to his feet, and as Lance came forward, he threw himself upon
him with an ecstatic shout of 'Daddy, daddy.' And as Lance stooped down
and gathered him into his arms tenderly, saying 'Poor little chap,'
no doubt the tone and gesture kept up the delusion, for he clung in a
rapture that it seemed cruel to disturb. 'What shall I do, Cherry?'
said Lance, much distressed. 'Oh! my poor little fellow, if I could but
change myself!'
By that time doubt had wakened, the arms were unwound from his neck,
and Gerald, after a moment's contemplation, gave a sad low cry,
struggled down, and hid his face on Cherry's lap, then lay passively
against her while she fondled him with her hand, taking no notice in
word, except by distinctly letting him hear his uncle's name. 'Lance!
how came you so early, and where's Robina? Felix is gone to Ewmouth,
thinking to meet you by the express.'
'We got off from town earlier than we expected; and walked from Church
Ewe, and meeting Bill in the village, of course I stepped out and left
them to their bliss.'
Lance looked well, and spoke as if he had attained to steady if
not high spirits. In fact, though asking anxiously after Felix, he
was plainly gratified by the entire trust and satisfaction shown
in himself as a substitute; some of his articles in the Pursuivant
had been a success in the circle that cared for them, and one on an
important subject had actually been copied into a London paper, a
distinction that had not so often befallen even Felix as not to make
it exhilarating. What made far more difference to him, Mr. Bevan had
finally resigned, and the new rector had a bright young wife, who had
been a school friend of Robina's, and both had accepted Lance on terms
of equality, so that he had more access to society than had ever been
his lot before, and found himself treated as an important ally in all
matters for the benefit of the parish. His life was evidently far
more cheerful than in the previous year, and he had done what he had
declared he should do--'got over' his fit of depression, i.e. resigned
himself, and therefore recovered a certain power of enjoyment as well
as interest in his work. Cherry reproached him with never having come
home since Whitsuntide.
'No possibility of getting away,' he said.
'Not with Mutton as a pice de resistance.'
'Mutton's Madame requires recruiting at Dearport and the frequent
solace of her cosset.'
'O Lance! what a boy you are for being put upon.'
'Don't row me, Cherry, I get enough of that from Mrs. Frog. By-the-by,
she's going to let Marshlands for a year to the squire while he is
enlarging his house, and we are to have Prothero's rooms. The dear
old Croak says she'll not have me catching my death on that nasty
velocipede another winter.'
'Ah! if you had but brought her back to our old quarters! You should
never have allowed the Giant to let Madame in! But tell me, Lance,' she
added in a different tone, 'has she shown any feeling?'
'Lamb was in a state of mind about telling her, and wanted me to do it,
which I declined, so he fetched Miss Pearson, and came down quite proud
to tell me she had had hysterics. What a sheep it is, to be sure! He
adores whatever she does! And then her spirits and health required the
parade at Dearport.'
'You don't believe in it?'
'I only know that whenever I had to go to Dearport I always saw her
best bonnets bobbing about among the ladies, or met her on the parade
with Gussy and Killy looking like princes. I called to see Sister
Constance one day, I thought she would like to hear about you all.
And, Cherry, did you know that Angel had sent back her medal as an
associate, and without a word?'
'Just what I should have expected.'
'They did not like to write about it till they knew more. Now I believe
the chaplain has.'
'She has said nothing about it. In fact, she is much more with the
Hepburns than at home, and they have really done her some good. She was
quite meek when we fell in with all the Walshes' guests the other day.
I wonder whether she will thaw to Robina! Ah! here they come!'
William and Robina were walking arm-in-arm, deeply content to be
together, but grave and subdued.
'How still it all sounds!' was Robina's exclamation, and though the
others smiled, it was with a sigh at the thought of the low humming
that they all missed.
The hush over the house struck her more than anything. When last
she had been at home the whole place seemed vocal with unrestrained
life and mirth, all the brothers and some of the sisters went about
whistling or singing, every one was always shouting to every one,
Stella's doves cooing, the clock chiming, Theodore a continual
musical-box, but now, though chimes and doves had not ceased, the soft
undercurrent was gone, and so was the gay ring of mirth.
'It is as if there were something quelled,' she said, pausing for the
word, when she went out for a turn with Will in the light of the broad
harvest moon, rising red over the woods.
'So we are,' said he. 'There is something about the place that reminds
me of going into the garden when everything is lying broken and weighed
down by a storm, the sunshine making diamonds of the drops, but
rain-drops still.'
'Angel is so different,' said Robin, 'and Felix's looks appal me: and
yet Cherry seems easy about him.'
'So would you be if you had seen him two months ago,' said Will. 'I
don't think any one is really anxious about him but Clement.'
'Oh! if it is only Clement, I don't care.'
'Working under Clement gives a very different notion of him,' said
Will; 'you can't think how much I find I have to learn now I come to
the real practical thing, among simple folk. It humbles me as much as
it refreshes me, after the forcing-house at Oxford. I say, Robin, how
long is this to go on?
'How long?' echoed Robina sadly.
'Nay, listen: Clement is going to set up a curate in the new house, as
is to be, and 200 a year. I am sure of pupils.'
'Please don't ask me, Will. It is so very hard, and my better sense
won't let me.'
'Then put away that better sense, as you call it, I don't.'
'I can't put away the recollection of my father dying of toil and
privation. I should feel it killing you to consent.'
He felt rather than saw she was crying as she leant against him, but he
tried to laugh and say, 'I am a tougher subject, Bobbie; we've neither
of us been tenderly reared. Besides, here it would be different.'
'Yes, because we should prey on our families. No, Willie, I made a
solemn resolution never to drag you down, and I will keep it.'
'You're far too wise for me,' he began, displeased.
'Don't be foolish, and break my heart over it! Oh! Willie, if you get
angry, I can't bear it now, it is all so sad.'
The mute caress answered, but each was a little relieved to say 'Hark,'
as the silence was broken by the sharp wail of Edgar's violin, which
Lance was handling to ascertain in what condition it had arrived.
'Is your voice all right, Lancey?' asked Felix, as he spoke of the
choral meetings.
'Just what I want to know. I've not sung to any one I could trust to
tell me the sound of it. Miss Grey likes it well enough, but then she
never heard it before, and I don't know whether the best high notes
have not thickened.'
'What will you try? said Clement 'I'm not sure that "Chloe's disdain"
did not show you off as well as any.'
'Then Angel--where is she?'
'Angel anathematises light and profane songs on the eve of the
honourable sabbath,' said Bernard; 'I wish she was here to have her
ears pulled.'
'No, it is not so much that,' said Cherry, 'as that she cannot bear
secular music since that unlucky song. But here's Stella, the universal
stop-gap, to be Chloe.'
It was a fine old seventeenth-century dialogue song, a sort of
heir-loom in the family--the lady's part full of the pert coy disdain
that passed for maidenliness, the swain's of a pathetic steadfast
constancy, and there was a variety in the expression that had always
given scope for the peculiar beauties of Lance's voice. But as he sang
it now, it was not only as a musical exercise or 'crack song,' the
manly melancholy stirred the depths of a sad but resolute heart that
could hardly have otherwise poured itself out. So two of the hearers
understood it, and Cherry, clasping Felix's hand, found the pressure
returned.
It was only Clement who, as the last sweet quiver died away, was
disengaged enough to say, 'You seem to me to have gained instead of
lost.'
He muttered something about a German air left upstairs, and ran away.
'I'm afraid it is Philomel against the thorn,' murmured Felix in his
sister's ear.
And Clement, in an undertone, uttered the two words 'whosoever hath,'
and Stella, of course mentally supplying the continuation, perceived
that he was thinking how the voice treated as a means of praising
divine glory had survived in its purity and freshness under the same
danger that had been fatal to the gift that had been the temptation
and ruin of its owner--a thought better suited to Clement's stern sad
nature than to his little sister; and instead of answering, she began
to play Mozart's requiem.
It was long before Lance returned. 'It was that poor little Gerald,' he
said. 'I wish I had thought of it--when he heard the violin, he thought
his Daddy was really come at last. I nearly tumbled over the little
white bundle in the gallery. Poor morsel, I suppose he was almost
asleep, for when I picked him up, feeling like just nothing at all
without his clothes, he firmly believed I was Edgar masquerading; and
the more I coaxed him in the dark, the more he implored me, "Oh! Daddy,
don't go on, be Daddy, I know you, I do! 'Tisn't play," till he almost
broke one's heart--I thought I should have to call Fernan.'
'And how did you manage him, poor darling?'
'It was curious. One of those shouts that they give in the harvest when
they clear the last sheaf in a field came in, and made him shudder in
horror. "The Indians," he said, and then, after I had told him what
it was, I said, "Yes, you heard the Indians once, didn't you?" and he
answered, "Oh! yes, Daddy told me, 'Never mind, my brave boy, it can't
last long. Shut your eyes, and say your prayers!' and he held me
tight, tight."'
'Then that is the last recollection he has of his father! A noble one!'
said Felix, with a sound of thankfulness.
'So I told him,' pursued Lance, 'that Daddy was right, and it hadn't
lasted long. I just told him the real story, and how his father gave
him to Mr. Travis to bring to us. I told him how poor Edgar used to
teach me to play on his fiddle, and I think he really was relieved to
lose the confusion about identity, and he knew me at last for the Lance
who used to sing "Jim Crow." I told him all I could, and looked at the
marks on his poor little back and breast. How did he live, Fernan?'
'I can hardly tell; I suppose life is very strong in a healthy child,
and that torpor of benumbed nerves saved him much pain.'
'I fancy poor Edgar had told him a good many stories about us, for
he asked me all manner of odd questions about home, and I am to take
him there when he is well. Meantime I had to sing him to sleep--"like
that," he said, poor little fellow; and he started Sibby's old croon
that used to be Baby's name for her.'
'The child has adopted you, Lance,' said Felix, when he saw Gerald
riding down to breakfast in the new uncle's arms, with an arm round his
neck and his head on his shoulder. 'Should you not like him to be your
godfather, Gerald?'
'No, Gerald, that can only belong to Mr. Travis, and your uncle Felix.'
'Travis, of course,' said Felix; 'but for me, it would be too like a
parent, and--' he paused, but went on: 'You ought to have that tie--you
who brought out that final saying from his father. Never let him forget
it. It is so perfectly the spirit in which to meet the unavoidable.'
He certainly had a power of transmuting into comfort all he heard
of this beloved brother. It had been decided that the boy should be
admitted into the church on this, his first Sunday. Ferdinand was
anxious that it should be, like his own baptism, his first sight of the
interior of a church, and had been preparing him for it all the way
home, so that he knew a good deal more than had yet been made to adhere
to his cousin Kester, and his replies had a flavour of St. Matthew's
that delighted Clement. It did not seem right that the thing should
be done in a corner, and in the first strangeness numbers would make
less difference than after he had learnt to know the faces round him;
so they resolved to face the full congregation at once, large as it
was apt to be in the afternoon; for there had of late arisen among the
young men of Ewmouth a fashion of walking out to church at Vale Leston,
attracted partly by the choir and partly by the preaching.
It was too long for Gerald's feeble limbs to be kept standing, and
though he was tall for his age, Ferdinand Travis took him in his arms
where the questions and replies startled the unprepared. 'Who baptized
this child?' when the answer, 'I did,' came from the jet-black beard
of the great American merchant, more like a Spanish grandee than ever;
and 'With what matter was this child baptized?' was responded to
'With water'--there was a thought of the blood that had oozed forth
and mingled with the 'lucid flood,' and Clement's voice trembled with
emotion as he certified that all was well done, and as he signed the
cross, it was where, in anticipation, Ferdinand had marked the rood,
and as Geraldine's eye traced the little coronal that the cruel knife
had scored, her whole heart went into the thought.
'Thus outwardly and visibly
We seal thee for His own;
And may the brow that bears the cross
Hereafter bear the crown.'
Strange was the entry in the parish register regarding the child whom
his uncle treated as heir of his house and name, but at whom every one
looked with compassionate misgiving, so weird were his great pensive
dark eyes, so thin his cheeks, so feeble his movements, so complete the
contrast to his sturdy cousin Christopher, the one all mind and the
other all body.
Felix wished for London advice for him, and, as there was to be a
clerical meeting on Tuesday at Richard May's, proposed to drive with
Clement as far as Stoneborough to ask the two physicians what they
would recommend. Lancelot only discovered this intention just as he
was stepping into the boat in which Bernard was going to take him
to Ewmouth to meet the train--probably he fancied his face quite
impassive, but it was far too transparent for him, and there was a
curious gust of expression passing over it when Felix asked whether he
had any commands for Stoneborough. 'N-not--at least, my--my--remember
me to them. That's all! good-bye.'
Then he expended his energies on the oars, and snubbed Bernard into
silent smoking, meanwhile he was calculating the increase of means that
had accrued to Felix, and would surely render marriage possible.
Felix found his call happily timed, for Dr. May received him with,
'That's right. Just as the last patient has made his exit. Nay--not the
last. I fear your side does not seem to have mended.'
'Not much, thank you.'
'So I see, but wait a bit. You are Tom's concern, and I shall get into
disgrace if I go into it without him. You can stay?'
'Yes, I ventured to think you would house me while Clement is sitting
in council.'
'That is well. I need not go out till after dinner. Gertrude is at
home, but Ethel is gone to Cocksmoor to see after feeding the divines.
Don't you find that an uncommon excitement to the clergywomen? Well,
have you got the poor little boy?'
'Yes, a sweet little fellow, but in an anxious state. The spine seems
affected still, and I want to know to whom you would advise me to show
him--I must get some one while Travis is with us to tell what the
American surgeons said.'
'That's another matter for Tom. He knows the present leading men better
than I do. I'll send up word to him to look in when he gets back from
the hospital.'
'There is a third matter,' said Felix, with a blushing smile, when the
message had been despatched, 'not so professional.'
'Eh?' said the doctor with arrested attention.
'It is this,' said Felix in the deliberate manner of one who had long
conned his part. 'Should you regard it as intolerable presumption in my
brother Lancelot to raise his eyes to your daughter Gertrude?'
'Your brother!!!'
'Yes, sir. Lancelot. I could release him from the retail business and
make over the Pursuivant to him. He would have rather more than 500 a
year, and if--'
'Lance!' again exclaimed the doctor. 'So it is Lance! I beg your
pardon, I had been hoping it was yourself.'
'You will hardly hope that long, sir.'
'What do you mean? That hurt? What has been----'
'That will wait. Do not let me lose this opportunity,' said Felix,
rather breathlessly. 'It is not only my health. For all essentials,
whatever you are kind enough to think of me, Lance is that and a
great deal more, and he is deeply smitten, poor fellow, and needs
affection and happiness so much,' he continued, a little hurt at the
smile that played on the doctor's features, and broadened into a laugh.
'Well, I've no right to complain after setting the lad on.'
'You, sir?'
'Ay. When he was brooding and moping in the winter, fancying no girl
would look at him, I told him, by way of shaking him up, that I should
be ashamed of one who stuck at his occupation. It is like giving a
boy a gun, and wondering when he brings down your tame jackdaw. One
ought to have experience by the time it comes to one's youngest, but
I suppose I should never get it if I were the father of the fifty
Danaides.'
'May I gather that you would not think the disadvantages
insurmountable? I know it does not sound well, but Lance is in a better
position than mine was. He is a good deal thought of in the town; is
intimate at the Rectory; and if he lived in the country, and dropped
the retail, I can answer for it that there would be plenty of society
such as your daughter would care to have. If I foresaw mortification,
it would not be right to expose her to it.'
'Somehow my girls care rather too little than too much about society,'
said the doctor. 'I shall be the sufferer. How I shall catch it from
Tom and the rest!'
'Thank you, sir.'
'Not so fast. Stay a bit. How far has it gone? The boy has not spoken
to her?'
'Not in so many words. He does not dare, and I could not venture to
encourage him till I knew what you thought. Indeed he has been chained
to Bexley ever since I have been laid up.'
'He is a thoroughly nice fellow,' allowed the doctor; 'he let out a
good deal of his inner self to me last winter. If worth were to have
it----'
'He would stand first,' said Felix eagerly. 'To tell you what he has
been to all of us these----'
'Hush, here comes our professor. He was fuming like quicklime at
Daisy's escapade the morning after your accident. A wholesome
preparation.'
About an hour later the dinner bell brought down Gertrude and her
nephew Dickie. She started, and a thrill of colour passed over her
face as she met Mr. Underwood at the table, and, laughing rather
nervously, begged him to excuse deficiencies, as Ethel, the cook, the
parlour-maid, and all the best knives and forks were gone to Cocksmoor.
It struck her that her father was grave and silent, but her heart
was, as usual, full of Vale Leston and Cherry, and she catechised
him next on all the ins and outs with which her visit had made her
familiar, he replying in detail with his natural quiet humour, though
whenever Lance's name came up, he could not help colouring a little.
He delighted and excited Dickie with Bernard's cricketing feats, and
the doctor waked into interest from his abstraction. He had to go
out directly after, taking with him Dickie, who now held the holiday
privilege of being his charioteer.
'You had better take a rest after your drive,' said the doctor to
Felix. 'Nobody will disturb you in the drawing-room.'
Felix willingly reclined in the great easy chair, only begging Gertrude
not to think it necessary to leave him, and as she wished nothing
better than to stay, she took her work and sat down. At first all was
still; he had put his head back, with closed eyes, in the relaxation
of complete lassitude, but his countenance did not give the impression
of sleep. It was weary and exhausted, though placid, and gradually
an expression of reflection came over it, deepening into anxiety and
perplexity, until after about twenty minutes he opened his eyes, and
looked at her with a pleasant smile.
'I hope you are rested,' she said.
'A good deal, thank you;' then, after a pause, 'Did I tell you that
Lance has quite recovered his voice?'
'I am glad; I have never heard him.'
'You must, then. Cherry shall manage it next time he comes home. He
has been kept much too close this summer, but we must make a different
arrangement.'
'Not your changing places!' cried Gertrude, 'you don't look fit!'
'I am afraid not,' he answered with weary acquiescence. 'Your father
and brother have been overhauling me, and I believe my effective days
are over for some time.'
'Oh!' she started, and said in an imploring tone, 'Cherry said the
sprain was almost gone.'
'The sprain is,' said Felix, 'but there's something beyond. It may go
on for some time, but the result is very doubtful.'
She rested her chin on her hand, her eyes dilated by the shock.
'So, you see,' he proceeded, 'I am anxious to lose no time in getting
matters into order, both as regards Vale Leston and Bexley.'
'Oh!' she burst out with a cry; 'don't, don't, don't go on like
that--just as if it were somebody else.'
The sound of misery convinced him that he was acting for the best in
killing at once any embryo aspiration directed towards himself; more
especially as he felt her more capable than any one he had met since
Alice Knevett of stirring what he was resolved never to allow to be
stirred. Never would he have risked this tte--tte but for his
recent interview with the two physicians; and her sorrow touched and
warmed the inmost recesses of his heart. He leant forward, saying,
'There is so little actual suffering that perhaps I feel as if it were
somebody else. I have been expecting this, and there have been a weight
and weariness about me which make the thought of rest not unwelcome.'
'Oh, no, no! You are quite young. Papa and Tom couldn't have said it
was so bad. There can't be no hope.'
'No, there is just a chance of things taking a different turn.'
'Oh! they will! I know they will! Please don't give yourself up. That's
the worst thing for any one.'
'I don't do that;' and as she came and stood by him he looked up in her
face, saying, 'there is so much kindness in the world that one would
gladly not leave it, if only not to grieve one's friends.'
'I wish,' with a half-angry sob, 'you wouldn't talk in that horrid
resigned way.'
'This will not do, indeed, my dear.' Her weeping made the word slip out
as in reasoning with one of his sisters, but it brought her colour,
and the tint was reflected in his own as he said, 'I beg your pardon.'
'Oh! please, I do like it so.'
He found himself on perilous ground, for he was exceedingly drawn
towards the girl, whose warmth gave him a greater sense of sweetness
than ever had Alice's most gracious moments; and it was with strong
effort that he preserved a sort of fatherly tone.
'Sit down again; there is a great deal I should like to tell you, if
you have patience to listen.'
Patience! She would fain have listened for ever. He told her the more
slowly, in order to give time to rally, the history of the family
struggles, dwelling at each turn on Lance's manful part in them, and
resolute sacrifice of taste and ambition, and coming down to his own
inheritance at Vale Leston, with all that it had involved. The fact
was that it was needful to let her perceive that he had never had it
in his power to marry, and never intended it; that the only mode in
which he could both do his duty by his brothers and sisters, and make
restitution of the church property, was by continuing his business,
being economical, and raising up no fresh claims on the estate.
Probably she did not at the moment take in the idea of this affecting
any relations with her, for she exclaimed, with that hot petulance
which in her was never unbecoming, 'I see, it's too late; you've spent
everything on everybody else, and lived for everyone but yourself.'
'I wish I had.'
'I don't think it fair!' she passionately exclaimed. 'Why should
everything come on you?'
'Perhaps, when one's forefathers have done a great wrong--ignorantly,
may be--it must come on some one. I have been struck by seeing how
seldom the lay rectory has gone in the direct line, and I am glad to
prevent it from being bound about that poor child's unconscious neck.'
'I was wrong,' she whispered under her breath, in a sudden change of
mood, as the simple-heartedness of his manner impressed her. 'You are
as devoted as any of those old people.'
'Not I,' he answered. 'I have had a particularly prosaic, prosperous,
comfortable life of it;' and then, thinking the scene had lasted long
enough, he said, 'I should like to call on Mrs. Thomas May. Is it
permissible to go through the garden?'
'How can you?' she exclaimed.
'Thank you, I am quite rested' (he might have said, as much as he ever
was).
'I meant, how can you go and make trumpery trivial calls.'
'It did not answer in the year one thousand to sow no corn, in
expectation of the end of the world,' he answered. 'Spiritually, as
little as materially.'
He tried for his dry gentle manner, but was too much moved by her grief
to make it natural.
'I'll come with you,' said Gertrude, leaping up.
He took his hat, and she a parasol, and they crossed the garden in
silence till, almost at Tom's door, she exclaimed, with a choking gasp:
'Oh dear! oh dear! if there were anything I could do for you!'
'Thank you,' he answered affectionately, with a smiling trembling lip.
'One wish is very strong with me. Things may not be prepared for its
fulfilment while I am here--but when it comes before you--you will
remember what you say, and I think it will be granted.'
She turned, half petulantly, and plucked off the myrtle leaves.
'Are you going to give me a piece of that?' he said, smiling.
She broke off a spray in full flower.
'Thank you,' as he put it in his buttonhole. 'Perhaps some day you will
see this again. Then remember.'
CHAPTER XLVI.
SOUR GRAPES.
'Hast thou forgot the day
When my father found thee first in places far away?
Many flocks were on the hills, but thou wast owned by none.'
Wordsworth's 'Pet Lamb.'
The London surgeon met Tom May and Page, and gave every hope of little
Gerald's ultimate recovery, though for the present there was not much
to be done except watching him, and encouraging such exertion as did
not excite or fatigue. Cherry was so anxious about the examination, its
result and the directions she received, that she never perceived that
the doctor spent a much longer time in the study with her brothers than
was needed on the little boy's account.
This, her preoccupation and bliss of ignorance, was a relief to both
Felix and Clement. They believed there would be ample preparation, and
not only were willing to defer paining her, but would have missed her
cheerfulness, and wished to spare her the protracted suspense that
might undermine her health and power of meeting a crisis that might be
deferred for weeks, months, nay years, or possibly might never come at
all; for there was a chance that treatment might disperse the evil. The
suffering did not increase, and was not constant, but only brought on
by sudden movements or in certain attitudes, and any token of it was
always laid to the credit of the strain. No one could fail to perceive
that Felix was more inert, more grave, and, if possible, more gentle,
but the acknowledged injury, as well as the loss of his two brothers,
might account both for this and his disinclination to the ordinary
summer gaieties. No one indeed, wished for them, now that Angela
professed to have broken with the world, and Geraldine's whole mind was
absorbed in the anxious tendance of the little nephew, who preferred
her to all others, and was continually needing to be soothed or amused,
with a precocious intellect stimulated by all he had undergone, and
at the same time with spirits and nerves too much shattered to bear
the least strain on mind or body. Edgar's child she must have loved,
but this little tender, fitful, dependent creature, used to be the
half-comprehending recipient of his sad memories and confidences, was
inexpressibly dear to her.
There was hardly any visiting that summer, except the calls of a few
friends, and in September Felix decided on asking the two Lambs to
the Priory. He had business affairs to arrange with his partner, and
thought it would be unforgiving to mortify the wife by excluding her
from the invitation, so he braved Cherry's absolute indignation. Poor
Cherry! had she known all, she would not have exploded as she had
hardly done since her girlish contentions with Alda. 'It is really weak
to give that woman her wish, and at such a time.'
'I am sorry for the infliction on you, Cherry.'
'You know very well that is not what I care for. It is the insult to
dear Edgar's memory to have her here pranking herself off.'
'I cannot quite see it in that light.'
'No, you always had some infatuation about her: you sacrificed Lance to
her when you let her into the house at Bexley, and now you are letting
her fulfil her aim of coming gossiping here.'
'One can only try to do what one feels to be right, Cherry. I am very
sorry, but I cannot be guilty of a marked slight.'
'The more marked the better, I should say.'
'Hush, Geraldine,' sternly interposed Clement; 'you forget yourself.'
She was greatly startled, for she had thought him entirely on her side.
'I understand her,' said Felix, as usual unable to bear reproof to his
sister. 'No one can be more fully aware than myself of poor Mrs. Lamb's
undeserts, but Cherry will one day perceive that this is the very
reason I do not choose to treat her with mortifying neglect. If it be a
foolish fancy of mine, my dear, please bear with it.'
She was entirely disarmed, burst into tears, undertook to do whatever
he wished, and apologised for her crossness, but in private with
Clement, she could not help expressing her wonder and annoyance.
'You had better say no more about it,' he answered, 'or you will be
sorry.'
'I shall say no more, but it is impossible that you should not think
this a great pity and mistake.'
'No, I don't.'
'I know I was wrong in flying out in my old way,' said Cherry, humbly.
'Perhaps there was more female spite in it than I know, and I am
thankful to you for catching me up. Of course this is Felix's house;
he invites whom he pleases, and I shall make them welcome; but still I
think this is a very unnecessary attention, and if you had seen as much
of her as we have, I think you would have enforced my opinion.'
He smiled a little sadly, and let it pass, and Cherry inferred that
even a cassock could not guard the male sex from weak toleration of
a pretty woman. Yet her loyalty was so strong that, when Wilmet's
surprise and aversion were expressed with equal plainness, she
maintained her brother's right to practise romantic generosity in his
own house, especially since his prudence had abstained as long as any
speculations could be thereby encouraged.
The visit was to last from Saturday to Monday, and in due time Mrs.
Lamb made her appearance, pretty, youthful, and charmingly dressed,
with her husband looking so proud of her as almost to overpower his
bashfulness.
They were a great contrast, he so honestly simple and affectionate,
adoring every word she uttered, however alien to his nature, and she
with the claws full grown that poor Edgar had detected in the kitten.
Indeed she was not unlike a handsome sleek cat or managing wife, an
excellent and tender mother, dainty and demure, but not by any means
indisposed to give a sharp scratch with her velvet paw.
When she exclaimed with playful surprise, 'Oh! what a queer old place.
So different from what I expected!' or, 'Looking into the churchyard!
It would give me the horrors in a week! Such a melancholy noise from
the river!' Cherry might conclude that the grapes were sour, but the
admirable Lamb was solaced by his wife's sweet preference for her
humble home. Such scratches as would have been patent to that good
man were reserved for his absence, as when she bewailed the low tastes
of such a promising young man as Lance--Cherry made some effort to
discover what she could possibly mean, and found that the low tastes
signified his preference for Mrs. Froggatt's company, and his assiduity
at the Shakespeare Club and Penny Readings.
Of course she commiserated Wilmet for her children's red
hair--predicted that Gerald would be a cripple for life, and lamented
Angela's being 'sadly gone off.' Angela did in fact avoid the lady as
much as possible, and on the Sunday afternoon went off to what she had
in her unconverted days been wont to term the Hepburn Methody Meeting,
i.e., a Bible class with exposition and prayer held by the good ladies
in their own dining-room, an institution dating from the darkest ages
of the parish.
Their green-shuttered house looked out upon a space shaped like a
triangle, grassy, and formed by the divergence of the Blackstone lane,
the nearest approach to a village-green possessed by Vale Leston.
Angela was lingering after the dismissal of the class, discussing Will
Harewood's sermon, which by-the-by, the clever Miss Isabella much
preferred to the Vicar's, probably because Will, a far larger-minded
and more intellectual man, was a great deal the most metaphysical, and
had more points of contact with her, when the sound of a bawling voice,
interspersed with the singing of a hymn, became audible through the
open window, and a procession consisting of a pale-faced young man,
one old one, three able-bodied women, and four little girls came from
the Ewmouth road, and having arrived at the triangle, the young man
mounted a log of timber and began to preach. Sounds ensued which made
the invalid Miss Hepburn exclaim: 'Oh! there are those people again!
There will be an uproar! Oh! my dear, shut the window, and come into
the other room!'
'What for?' demanded Angela, who was trying to hear.
'My dear, you can't think how dreadful it was. Such a noise, and that
terrible Timins set his big dog at the preacher, and the poor old
Squire said it served him right, and would not commit him.'
'Such a thing might be stopped in a moment,' cried Angela. 'Couldn't
you, Miss Isabel?'
'My dear, I did not feel free when it was the message of the Gospel.'
'I didn't mean the preacher, but the persecutors. You could stop them
directly.'
'Go out there! A lady, my dear Angela!' cried Miss Bridget
'One does not stick at trifles in such cases!' cried Angela.
'Trifles!' was echoed round her.
At that moment a coarse derisive laugh made Miss Hepburn scream and
Miss Martha fly to shut the window, while Angela caught up her bonnet
saying, 'I'll soon put an end to it.'
'My dearest Angela, you are not going out; your brother would not like
it.'
'Lydia never asked what her brother liked by the river-side,' said
Angela, hastily fastening her head gear.
'Oh! don't let her go. Isa--Bridget--they'll hurt her. My dear! Stop
her,' entreated the sick sister.
'Miss Underwood going out to a Ranter!' cried Miss Bridget.
'Your brothers will never forgive us,' sobbed Miss Martha. And Miss
Isabella laid hands on her. 'It is not proper, Angela, I cannot suffer
it.'
'I cannot suffer violence to be done to one who is preaching that Name
for petty scruples of worldly propriety.'
'They'll throw stones--She'll be hurt,' sobbed Miss Hepburn.
'You know better, dear Miss Hepburn,' said Angela, turning with a smile.
In another moment she was gone, out into the road.
There was a hush at once. The boys all turned round, and the nearest,
a lively mischievous fellow, accosted her with a touch of his hat, and
evident sense of high desert. 'Us aint a bin listening to that there
chap, ma'am. Us be going to send he off faster than he came. Us don't
want none of his sort.'
'How do you know that, George?' responded Angela, to his great
amazement. 'How do you know he has not the very message you have been
wanting so long.'
The boy opened the roundest eyes. If any opinion was strongly
established, it was the ill savour of ranters in the nostrils of the
gentry.
'Squire'd be against it, ma'am,' said an older man, 'and Mr. Eddard!
Us knows our dooty better than to hearken to such like trash.'
'For shame, Brand,' returned the young lady. 'How dare you speak so of
a man who comes in that Name. Now! Here I mean you to stand and listen.
Who can tell what good he may do us?'
'Miss Angela' was the universal favorite with the village youth, having
fascinated them from the first; and if they had of late remarked any
change in her, it was set down to 'taking on' about her brothers,
and her defence was undisputed quite as much from attachment as from
sheer amazement. The preacher had, on the apparition of the tall lady
in black with the lightly waving crape streamers and mantle, expected
a rescue from insult and violence, but a warning to depart; and his
amazement was great when she took a position in advance of the rabble
rout, and signed to him to go on.
He was a man above the average of his class, and his discourse was
considerably affecting Angela, when down the lane from Blackstone
Gulley came Robina, Stella, Bernard, and Will Harewood, showing Mr. and
Mrs. Lamb the beauties of the country.
'Holloa, what's the row? A fellow jawing away somewhere!' quoth Bernard.
'I thought you had no dissenters here, Robina,' said Mrs. Lamb.
'No more we have,' stoutly affirmed Robina, in spite of the strange
voices on the blast.
'What's that?'
'An obliging mission from our neighbour.'
'Soon to be refuted by our boys,' added Bernard, 'most likely a cricket
ball is flying at his bumptious head by this time! Hollo there!'
For he turned the corner and stood in blank amaze.
Alice tittered.
Robina and Stella were prepared for anything from Angela.
Even Will only perpetrated a long whistle, and the observation 'This is
coming it strong.'
Bernard's measures were more decisive. After the first shock he marched
forward with the peremptory admonition, 'Come, my man, be off with you,
we allow none of this here.'
The young man stood his ground. 'By what authority Sir?'
'I'll soon show you--I say--You here, little Pryde, run down and tell
the policeman to step up.'
'Stay Bernard,' exclaimed Will, 'this is nothing the police can
interfere with.'
'Don't tell me that, canting and ranting here on our ground,' cried
Bernard, with a fine development of the insolence of the lord of the
soil. 'Pity you're a parson, Bill (and Lamb a sheep),' he added under
his breath, 'or we'd have a jolly good shindy. All you're good for is
to walk off the ladies. Here, Angel, you mad party, go with him, I say,
the joke has lasted long enough.'
'I shall not move, Bernard, I am here to protect this good man from
insult.'
'I tell you 'tis the very way to make me insult the impudent scoundrel
to see you standing there among the rabble, making a spectacle of
yourself.'
'Neither you nor any one else will touch him while I am here,' said
Angela, heroically moving nearer the preacher, and further from her
brother. 'He is giving us the message that is too much obscured, and I
will not have him silenced. I only wish you would listen! Go on, if you
please.'
But the unwonted style of this interruption had disconcerted the ardent
missionary more than unlimited rotten eggs could have done. The young
lady's presence, though embarrassing, had been stimulating; but when
three gentlemen, including a clergyman, were added to the audience, all
his confidence in his mission could not bring back his eloquence, and,
addressing himself to Angela, his only attentive hearer, he said, 'The
tenor of our discourse has been interrupted; thank you, Miss, we will
resume on a more favourable occasion.'
'When I'll bring down the garden engine,' muttered Bernard, clutching
in vain at his sister as she stepped forward to shake hands with the
preacher and say, 'We are greatly obliged to you, and I am sorry you
should have been so interfered with.'
William, premising that he was not the parish priest, turned to
walk with the amateur in his own profession, as much because he was
curious about this phase of life as to see him courteously off the
ground--while Bernard was scolding and deriding Angela on what he
deemed her most monstrous aberration of all, and Angela marching on,
impervious alike to displeasure and ridicule. Mrs. Lamb was trying to
condole with Robina, and Robina was coolly stating that Angela was
quite justified in using her influence to prevent the man from being
assaulted.
The fame of Mr. Froggatt's state-dinner party and of another on behalf
of Mr. Bruce had reached Mrs. Lamb, and, on the strength of it, she
had freshly trimmed her wedding dress, and was greatly aggrieved to
find her labour lost; disregarding her husband's representations of the
recent bereavements and Mr. Underwood's state of health, and insisting
on attributing the slight by turns to Geraldine's spite, and to the
meanness that hindered the family from enjoying their fortune when they
had got it.
Though Geraldine had withheld this indulgence, aware that a long late
dinner would be a great fatigue to Felix, she believed in dilution, and
had arranged to gratify her guest so far as to take this opportunity of
inviting one or two Ewmouth families who hardly ever had a day in the
country except what they spent at Vale Leston, and whom it would have
been almost unkind to deprive of their summer treat.
So on Monday afternoon there was a gathering on the lawn large
enough to be a formidable spectacle to at least one pair of eyes in
the Kittiwake's gig as she came up the river, and to evoke a strong
expletive from a mouth whose fringes were grizzled enough for it to
have learnt to be less impulsive.
'Can't be helped, skipper. Come on,' laughed the joyous youth at the
prow in the ease of summer attire. 'What, hasn't your domestication
proceeded further? One would think you were the one newly caught from
the bush.'
'I shall set you ashore and come back at dark when the bear fight is
over.'
'Not a bit of it! See here she comes, the little darling Star, bless
her,' as over the wire netting, that guarded the croquet balls from the
river, sprang the little figure attracted by the well-known boat.
'Oh! I'm so sorry,' was her apologetic cry to the captain, then
stopping short, the bright colour flew to her cheeks.
'Well you may, to have such a mob to receive what I've brought you,
my pretty. Yes, yes, no mistake about him,' as Charlie bounded to her
side; 'but what's this? who's this big fellow in the yellow beard? Did
you ever see anybody like him? He looks as much astounded as you.'
'You didn't say it was Stella!' ejaculated the tall, powerful personage
designated. 'She was just toddling when I went out.'
'You're Fulbert then!' she said, looking up as she was folded in a big
brotherly embrace.
'Yes, to be sure, you pretty little thing. I declare you are a beauty
after all! And who's this?'
'I can't expect to be remembered,' said the white-whiskered sunburnt
clergyman in a broad shady hat and green shade over his eyes.
'But I think I remember your voice,' said Stella, 'Oh how glad my
brother will be!'
'And Lance, is he here?' cried Fulbert, eagerly.
'No, but every one else is at home.'
'At home! I believe so,' grumbled Captain Audley. 'I thought myself
secure from launchings out this year.'
'It is only the Colmans and Strachans and Parkers, just to amuse Mrs.
Lamb. I did not warn you, for I thought you were yachting to-day.'
'I was on board, going to sail this morning, when I got a telegram from
Charlie, and just as I expected him to turn up, who should drop in but
these two, fresh from Liverpool. Charles, this one, I mean, not ours,
thought it best not to startle my mother, and came here first, so I
brought them over as soon as they had eaten a mouthful, and now I'll
take a cruise up the river till it is all quiet.'
'O no, please don't be so unkind,' pleaded Stella. 'I'll take you to my
brother in his study without coming across anybody. He went in as soon
as we began to play at croquet. Here, through the laburnum path.'
She led him by the hand in a passive condition, highly amusing to his
son and brother, and Fulbert followed in a state of bewilderment.
'What an exquisite place!' exclaimed the elder Charles, catching sight
of the cloister through the trees. 'What a treat to see old walls! It
is like Oxford.'
'Pretty?' said Fulbert, 'I can't think how any one can stand being
cramped up by all these walks and enclosures!' and indeed his great
robust swinging step seemed to spurn them. 'All well?' he asked.
'Doesn't he know?' said Stella, pausing and touching her crape.
'Yes, yes, my dear,' said Captain Audley, 'they understand all that.'
'But Fulbert is more than half lost,' said the uncle, 'and for my own
part I can't realise this as your home.'
'I shall be glad to get to Bexley,' sighed Fulbert. 'However the elder
ones can't be so altered! I should know old Fee anywhere!'
They had reached the house, and Stella left them in the hall, saying
she would find Felix. Fulbert would have followed her, but was detained
by the captain, with the words, 'She knows best. I told you he had
never been quite the thing since.'
Fulbert stood still gazing in amaze at the lofty dark oak hall and
broad staircase so utterly unlike the narrow entry that had been
home to him, but the study door opened and forth came a figure with
outstretched hands, bright face, and glad welcome. 'Ful! Dear old boy,
come at last!' and the boyish handclasp of departure was an eager kiss
of greeting between the men. 'Mr. Audley! My great wish! Do the others
know? Have you seen Cherry?'
'I'll send her in,' quoth the captain, and rushing off in his
excitement and hatred of scenes, he marched into the thick of the fray,
where Cherry, amid mammas and Hepburns under the cedar, was astonished
by a voice in her ear, 'Your brother and mine are in the study, go to
them. I'll take the teapot.'
'Your brother?'
'Charles. Eyes brought him home--Fulbert with him. Good morning; you'll
excuse Miss Underwood: her brother from Australia.'
Cherry could only gasp something about pardon, relinquish her teapot
to the valiant skipper, snatch up Lord Gerald and hurry off at her
swiftest pace, finding, under the appropriate shade of the orange-tree
at the conservatory door, Charlie and Stella. 'Oh! it was not you he
meant,' was her inhospitable greeting.
'No, no. The Charles worth having is here, and Fulbert. We are gone
to look up the rest.'
This did not look much like it, but Cherry stumped on, and came in
sight of the three in the hall, still silent in the first wonder, Felix
with one hand on the table, gazing at the new comers in silent extasy,
while they looked as if scarcely able to speak under the shock of his
appearance--those wasted enlarged features, that transparent pallor
with the grey shades round mouth, eyes and temples, the figure that
lost elastic slenderness without gaining strength, and the hair thinned
though still shining. Cherry was used to it, but she saw how it had
startled them, and that all three were like men in a dream, which she
broke by her cry of--'Fulbert, Fulbert! Mr. Audley! Oh! Felix, is not
this joy?'
Fulbert started round, relieved at his first real recognition, and his
big arms were round her, his great beard sweeping her cheeks. 'Cherry!
you at last! Little Cherry! But you've not got a proper crutch.'
'So much the better,' said Mr. Audley, amused at the complaint, 'she is
a stronger little body than when you left her.'
'And where did you drop from?' Felix was the first to ask.
All was quickly explained, Fulbert keeping hold of his sister all the
time. Mr. Audley's eyes had suddenly failed him, and the doctor had
urged his going home at once if he hoped to save them. Fulbert, who
had long been meditating a run home, resolved to see him safe through
the voyage, and thus they had set forth suddenly, preceding their own
letters. The inflammation of the eyes had subsided, and they were
somewhat better. 'Though,' said the owner, 'I hope it is their fault
that you look so altered, Felix.'
'He will soon get back his looks,' said Cherry. 'He is ever so much
better. You heard.'
'Yes,' said Fulbert, 'Captain Audley told us. Poor little Theodore. The
only wonder is that he lived so long--Who comes there?'
'You know me, Fulbert.'
'Wilmet? Yes, only grown grander than ever. But bless me! I thought
they told me. No--Lance isn't here, and couldn't have got like that.
Who is it, I say?'
'Have you forgotten little Bear?'
'Great Bear, rather,' said Mr. Audley. 'You've made good use of your
time, Bernard!'
'Oh! here's the long lad,' said Felix. 'You'll not mistake him.'
'Aye! I should know Tina,' said Fulbert. 'He always did look the
parson. Who's missing now--Robina?'
'Robin is here! Oh Ful, Ful, you're very big, but your face is just
like the old times when you used to clamber up the timbers in the yard!'
'That's right, Bob! Now I begin to believe I'm come home. You're as
jolly as ever.'
Just then a shout of 'Mother!' and a vigorous patter of boots ended
in the bouncing in of two red curly mops of hair, whose owners were
pursuing a squabble of 'I will' and 'I won't,' and pulling at the
opposite ends of a string as they charged against Wilmet, in loud
appeal and protest. 'Softly, softly, Kester, Eddy, look at your uncle!'
was the motherly unperturbed rebuke, a hand on each shoulder, 'There's
your uncle Fulbert. Oh Kester, right hands.'
'Never mind,' said Fulbert, not more eager for the greeting than the
two nephews, who began again, 'Mother, make Eddy'--'Mother, Kester
won't'--and reeled out of the room still twisted up in the string,
Wilmet after them. 'Like a pair of puppies in leash,' said Felix.
'How many are there?'
'These two, and a little girl.'
Then came a sound, not without sweetness, though still a
whine--'Chrie! I want Chrie, O Chrie, they've got my lasso,' and
tottering and shuffling in came the little black figure with the white
face and clung to her. Both travellers started. 'I thought they said
Theodore--No, he'd be bigger,' exclaimed Fulbert.
'It is Gerald, poor Edgar's boy,' said Felix. 'Here, Gerald, here is
another brother of your father--and here's a dear old friend.'
The delicate hand held out by Gerald was as unlike as possible to the
brown puggy paws of his cousins, but he entreated still 'Don't let them
have my lasso, Chrie. It's grass, and Fernan gave it me!'
'I'll come, Gerald dear, I'll get them some whipcord--I must go back to
the people; I hope they'll soon be merciful and go--Oh! the heart's
joy of having seen those two!--Yes, dear boy, I'm coming, I'll take
care they don't take it away.'
'Cherry and her master!' said Bernard.
'Blissful bondage,' said Felix. 'Have you seen them all yet, Fulbert?
No--where's Angel?'
'Little Pryde has chopped his finger with a reap-hook, and she's gone
off with Miss Bridget to see about it,' returned Clement. 'Suppose we
walk and meet them, Ful--Felix will have his talk with Mr. Audley.'
And Robina and Bernard departed to the game, while Felix led his friend
into the study, saying in exultation, 'Our Cherry looks a heartier
woman than ever we expected, does she not?'
'Wonderfully improved. I only wish I could say the same of you! Is this
the effect of the accident?' as Felix, having placed an arm-chair for
Mr. Audley, subsided into his manifestly invalid resting place.
'I believe so. But how about your eyes?'
'That is what I cannot tell. They have mended since I have given up
reading or writing, but I durst not accept the Bishopric till I knew
whether they would be serviceable.'
'Albertstown?'
'Yes, I've been offered it. Any way, I should have had to come home;
and it was very good in Fulbert to come and take care of me.'
'An unspeakable delight and gift to have you both!' said Felix, 'Most
thankworthy!' he added almost to himself, 'how good in you to have come
to us!'
'More pleasure than goodness. My mother hates surprises and shocks,
so I had the day to spare, and I longed to see your domains. What a
delicious place! Not even Cherry's sketches made me understand the
charm.'
'We have so much to show you! You will think me absurd about it, but I
own I never see anything comparable to it.'
'I shan't think you absurd! Imagine what this room, with its air of age
and quaintness of carving, is to a man who has seen nothing venerable
these thirteen years.'
'And our church. But that you must not see without our Vicar.'
'I hope to give thanks for our return there. Robert said he would give
us all the evening here. How much good you have done him. I think his
adoration of little Stella is quite equal to Charlie's.'
Felix smiled faintly. 'Ah! you seem to have come to help us anent that
affair! I am very glad to be able to put it into your hands.'
'I'm afraid they are not very influential.'
'At least they belong to a head that can be trusted,' said Felix,
smiling. 'I'm not sure the poor lad ought to be here to-day.'
'I fancy he gathered hopes from Lady Liddesdale which he thinks justify
him,' said the uncle. 'Should you consent if he got a secretaryship at
the Embassy?'
'I should feel as if one of my greatest cares was relieved! I have
tried to do right in the matter, but it is a hard one. I should be
thankful indeed to see my little one cleared from this perplexity,
and I begin to trust I shall. Everything seems to be so remarkably
smoothing itself, as it were winding itself up.'
'Felix, I don't understand your tone. I can't see you distinctly, but I
am sure more is amiss with you than Robert told me.'
'I was on the verge of bleeding to death after the accident,' said
Felix, 'and I fancy the treatment I am going through keeps me low.'
'Treatment, what for?'
In a few technical words he repeated what he had told Gertrude.
'You speak with certainty!' exclaimed his friend.
'No, it is too much out of reach. They are trying to disperse it,
and if that cannot be done, there would be a fight of strength of
constitution. It seems to me hardly to get better or worse since the
mere muscular strain passed off, only paining me on provocation, and
telling chiefly in weakness and lassitude. It is curious how everything
in my life seems drawing to a point, so that somehow I feel as if I
were permitted to bind up my sheaves. Here is poor Edgar's fate certain
so as to enable me to make arrangements about the property, and his
child to be Cherry's object, making me far happier about her. And here
you are; I have longed to pray for your being here to help us both when
the crisis comes. You will?'
'I will! I will. So far as I dare to promise!'
'Remember. She knows nothing of this, only Clement. I could not get
along without him. Poor Clem! Do you remember how we used to laugh at
him? You will marvel at the strength and wisdom that have grown up
in him. I rejoice to have come to such dependence on the brother I
understood and perhaps liked least, and it is the same with Cherry. She
has learnt to lean on him.'
'More than on Lance?'
'Lance, our lark and our sunshine! Dear Lance, I think he may have
a home of his own, but his affairs are not yet susceptible of
discussion,' said Felix, smiling. 'Altogether, I have been strangely
blessed in these brothers and sisters of mine. The love and affection
I have had from them, the willing loyalty that has been the spirit of
them all, strike me as wonderful.'
'Wonderful, because those who do most are generally the worst requited.'
'And now, the dear little fellow is taken whom I could least have borne
to leave,' added Felix. 'The missing him was very sore to me at first,
but I am glad now. All were good to him, but it was effort to all but
Stella and myself, and even with Stella it could not have gone on.
There are only two for whom I have real anxieties, and there is good
stuff in both.'
'Alda?'
'I was not thinking of her. She never seemed my charge like the rest.
No, Angela and Bernard, but so much has righted itself that I have
the more faith. I believe Bear may be all the better for losing his
dependence on me. He wants to be forced into manhood.'
'Felix, I wonder whether you are right in thus giving yourself up. It
makes me doubt if I ought to have left you alone to the charge. It must
have gone very hard with you.'
'Not at all. I have had my full share of happiness. A most happy,
peaceful family, and latterly in this delightful place! my first,
dearest home, the spot I must always have loved best! and Cherry!
Truly, too, both here and at Bexley, I have had that blessing of
Joseph, whatever I have done, the Lord hath made it to prosper. You
left me Mr. Froggatt's assistant, I think, and each step since has been
no small enjoyment in itself.'
'Yet you are content that all this should end! Your father was, but
his had been a sadder, more laborious, unsuccessful life, and I own
I marvel at you, so fresh in this position, with life before you--You
are--?'
'Thirty-four this last July.'
'That is early youth to most men.'
'No doubt something is due to the perpetual weariness and "do
nothingness" that belong to the complaint, and make me feel getting
done with it all. Soon I shall free myself of being rector here,
the endowment of East Ewmouth is settled, the building begins in
the spring. A long minority will right the estate, and work off its
burthens, and I have had unexpected opportunities of putting things in
train; but if I go on, the task of making both ends meet must continue
hard. I suppose recovery would bring back zest and vigour, but as I
am now, it is like a lame horse at grass, shrinking from a return to
the load, the mire and the ruts, and the assurances of rest acquire a
sweetness they never had before. If I had only done my part fully, and
could say to my father, 'Behold me and the children thou hast given
me!' but when I count my hundred thousand errors, and remember what
makes up for them, it seems little if the last passage should be a hard
one, as I suppose it will. Oh!' breaking off short, 'I should not have
run on like this. It must be the worst thing for your eyes.'
'This is an odd way of helping you,' said Mr Audley, struggling for
composure. 'I ought to be thankful to see you like this, but I am
selfishly disappointed. I had reckoned on seeing you in the prime of
your usefulness and honors, and happiness.'
'Here's plenty of happiness,' returned Felix, with his brightest smile;
'and I've not yet given up the uses nor the honors of Squire Underwood.
In fact, I hear the carriages coming, and must go and see the people
off. Will that serve for honors? it would have seemed like them twelve
years ago.'
Uneasy about the eyes that had been swimming in perilous tears, he
continued, changing his tone from the thoughtful to the lively: 'It is
our only entertainment this year, of course, but I was forced to have
Lamb here on business, and we thought it would please his wife.'
'Is she?'
'Yes, Alice Knevett. Prettier than ever,' he answered. 'Will you come
out, or shall I leave you for these few minutes?'
The longing to watch him prompted Mr. Audley to follow him, though with
little mind to face any one, and in a few moments it hardly seemed
credible that the man who had been speaking of carrying the sentence
of death within himself was the same who was so cheerfully and easily
going through the friendly courtesies of a host--pausing with a face
full of quiet humour to point out Captain Audley acting beneficent
rover, though it was his first time of touching a mallet since he had
been a guardsman, and croquet a novelty of high life.
Here too came the introduction to Major Harewood, never seen before,
and the Reverend William, last seen as Lance's shock-headed friend,
a terror to Wilmet and Cherry, and frightening the babies with his
mesmerism.
It was still light enough for the grand tour, and Felix, though leaning
and resting at every pause, would not be denied the going through the
whole, showing it off with a kind of affectionate exultation rather
increased than diminished since the day of taking possession. The
character of the place had altered a good deal since that day when he
had first seen it. It must be owned that some of the perfect trimness
of turf and shrubbery had gone, and that some stable windows were
broken, and their yard grass-grown, and the Vicarage Sunday school
had an aspect which thirteen colonial years could not prevent the
baronet's son from feeling at first sight a little disreputable. The
half-finished Rectory of the future, where the Curate for whom Clement
was advertising was to live, was on the glebe land on the other side of
the church. Altogether, the house and grounds might be in less dainty
order; but there was a look of life about every window, and the lawn
was glowing with the bright tints of geraniums and verbenas, while
dog, cat, kittens, and doves, to say nothing of the human creatures,
imparted an air of gladness and animation, and the Virginian creeper on
the cloister hung like a magnificent purple curtain over the scene. The
dreary deserted aspect of church and churchyard which had at first so
disheartened Clement was entirely gone, and the last September lights
and shades showed themselves on tower and pinnacle, and gleamed on
stained glass as somehow sunshine does seem to fall on what is loved
and prized, as if inanimate things responded to affection.
In the part of the cloister wall that lay within the churchyard
precincts were two or three memorials of Underwoods who did not lie
buried there, and to these Felix had added a brass cross with an
inscription bearing the names of Edward Underwood and Mary Wilmet his
wife. Mr. Audley looked at these earnestly, marvelling all the more at
his friend's resolute content in his exclusion from this lovely spot,
and from thence he was led to the little grave, now marked with a white
marble cross, bearing on the foot the word 'Ephphatha.' What better
could have been wished for that little helpless being? Fulbert was of
course more interested in the willow tree. He swung himself over the
bank and calculated the height with wonder, demanding of Felix how
the feat had been possible to him. 'I can't tell,' answered he, 'I
have wondered since. It was very foolish of me not to have done like
Charlie. He was the hero.'
'Ah! Charlie is a regular fish, at home in the water or out,' said his
father, well pleased.
And they looked at the 'fish,' who was standing a little way off,
with Stella beside him, with down-cast eyes. He had made two attempts
already to pour out his plans on Felix, who had cruelly answered that
he could listen to nothing till the examination was over, and consent
gained, and ruthlessly cut him off from all private interviews, not
choosing to give anything that could be construed into the most tacit
encouragement--but not able to find it in his heart to interfere with
the present enjoyment, though it was not in the bond.
As to the church, now brought to all the glory that reverent hands,
careful taste, and well-judged expenditure could give it, the contrast
was not small from the dreary bepewed building, and all its native
beauties were unobscured or renovated. Very happy were Clement and
Cherry in pointing them out one by one, and telling the story of the
fragments whose forms had guided the restoration, and Felix sat by on
a bench, enjoying the evening mystery of soft darkness as it fell on
the archings and vaultings, and putting in his word now and then in the
pleasant history of the four years' work.
'Yes, Felix, I do congratulate you! Nay, more! I shall give thanks for
what I have seen to-day,' said Mr. Audley in a low voice, as they went
to robe for even-song.
And Felix added, 'Thank you. But pray for me, too.'
It was well he had an appreciative admirer for his dear Vale Leston in
Mr. Audley, for Fulbert, untrained in antiquities, and with colonial
'nil admirari' ways, did not enter into the charms of grey walls,
nor understand ecstasies over the proportions of arches, while even
in the house, he agreed with Mrs. Lamb that oak wainscot was dismally
dark, and that the furniture was worn and old-fashioned. He could not
feel at home. 'It was all very fine perhaps,' he said, 'but it didn't
seem natural,' and he eagerly accepted the Lambs' invitation to return
with them to Bexley. 'I can't help it,' he apologized, 'I'll soon come
back, but I shall not know I'm at home till I've seen Lance and the old
house. It's all different here, and you are all grown such swells, and
the little ones are so big, and Blunderbore looks as if he had been
lost for a month in the bush, and I sha'n't get my bearings till I've
been down to the old place, and seen Lance and the fellows there.'
So almost as suddenly as they had come, the Australian visitors
vanished, leaving behind them only the security that they were within
reach. Captain Audley went with his son and brother, and quiet was
left to prevail at Vale Leston. The first break was a message brought
in the forenoon to the study, where Felix saw to letters and attended
to business more slowly and with more pauses and effort, but not less
effectively than heretofore. 'Miss Hepburn would be glad to speak to
you, sir.'
'Which Miss Hepburn, Amelia?'
'Miss Isabella, sir.'
'She has found this out, and is going to exhort me as she tried to do
to Lance,' thought Felix, as he desired that she should be admitted,
and with some masculine perverseness, not only rose to greet her, but
placed himself in a common upright chair to listen to her. He found
himself mistaken, she had not come to speak to him on his own account.
'You are aware, Mr. Underwood, that from one cause and another, we have
had some influence with dear Angela, more I fear than has been quite
palatable.'
'In some ways you have done her a great deal of good,' said Felix,
wondering what was coming.
'Nay, not pot-sherds like ourselves, but the way we have been
privileged to point to her, dear child, but I am glad you think so. I
fancied that you were all in opposition.'
'I think,' said Felix, 'that the poor child had got into a state of
unreality and self-deceit, and that after the shock of last spring
your kindness helped her to the true foundations which she had somehow
missed.'
It must have been a temptation to Miss Isabella to enlarge on the
danger of concealing that true Foundation, but she had a point and
purpose, and besides, the Squire looked as little in need of being
taught where to find that Verity as any one she had ever met in a
biography, so she went on, 'It was, I am thankful to believe, true
conversion, and the dear child is indeed a sincere Christian, but young
people are so enthusiastic.'
'She is excitable, and sure to go to the utmost length in whatever she
does,' said Felix, beginning to expect to hear of the ranting.
He was right. Miss Isabella wished him to be aware that she and her
sisters had done their utmost to withhold Angela from rushing out. He
replied that he was not afraid it would occur again. William Harewood
had talked to the man, and thought him disconcerted, and likely to
carry his ministrations where there was more neglect. However, Miss
Hepburn explained that this was an offshoot of a great revival which
the Plymouth brethren were organizing at Ewmouth. One of their great
lights, a merchant captain who had given up everything for religion,
was about to preach, and Angela had set her heart on hearing him. His
tracts had been widely diffused among the Miss Hepburn's friends, and
the warfare about disseminating them in the village was still recent.
Angela, who had once made holocausts of as many as she could capture,
was now their ardent admirer, and had insisted on making part of the
audience of their author. Now the Miss Hepburns would as soon, no
sooner, have gone to the opera as to a dissenting chapel, and there
had been a vehement argument, resulting in their pupil declaring her
intention of going with a farmer's widow who liberally hovered between
Vale Leston Church one half of the day and Ewmouth chapel the other.
It was shocking to Clan Hepburn to think of forsaking the
Establishment, and even more so to imagine an Underwood, a lady, a
clergyman's daughter and sister, at a revivalist tea-meeting in a
dissenting chapel, and in full council they had decided that it would
be unjustifiable not to warn the head of the family, and absolutely
conniving at the monstrous proceeding.
'Thank you sincerely,' said Felix: 'it shall be put a stop to.'
'I sincerely hope that may be possible,' said the lady, 'but where the
dear child thinks her conscience is at stake, she is far too regardless
of remonstrance.'
Felix smiled, having found this the case whether her conscience were at
stake or not.
The encounter must be fought out, not on Miss Isabella's grounds but
on his own. He knew it must have come some day. He had not spoken a
serious word to her since she had rejected his consolation two days
after the accident, and knowing that she was under other guidance, he
had not interfered, feeling less equal than ever to a war of words with
the perverse and perplexing girl.
How near the conflict was he did not know till at dinner, when on
Bernard's asking her to pull up the river with him, Angela replied that
she was going to drink tea with Mrs. Lake.
This was one of the gracious acts performed from time to time, but
it sounded enough like a subterfuge to make Felix feel grieved and
indignant, but he held his peace, and so did Clement, while Robina
exclaimed, 'Almost my last evening, Angel!' And Cherry laughingly
accused her of devotion to Mrs. Lake's elderberry-wine. Colouring deep
crimson, Angela burst forth in a combative tone, 'Well, I suppose I may
go where I like.'
'O, yes, my dear,' said Bernard, 'to meet that nice young man, who was
holding forth on Sunday. Only, when it is a fixed affair let me know,
and I'll have a suit of tar and feathers in readiness.'
Angela's neck was burning by this time, and she crumbled her bread
savagely.
'Is the party in his house?' whispered Will to Robina.
But no one took up Bernard's remark, all feeling that the matter
could not be made game of, and when they rose, Felix said, 'Angela, I
want you in the study.' She could not choose but obey, and before she
was fairly in the room, or the door closed, made another outburst,
'Brother, I have no intention of deceiving you; I only did not choose
to have it out before Bernard and all in the middle of dinner.'
Felix, in his slow careful manner, deposited himself in the Squire's
chair, and said, 'Sit down, Angela.'
'No, thank you, I have not time. I only came that you may see I am not
deceiving you. I am going with Mrs. Lake to hear Captain Gudgeon,' she
replied, with a glow in her cheeks and a gesture as of noble defiance,
somewhat disturbed by his extreme gentleness.
'You had better sit down, my dear,' he said.
This actually put an end to her war-dance. She seated herself, but
tried to resume her challenge by saying, 'I shall be at home long
before ten.'
'Certainly,' said Felix, quietly, 'you will.'
'You understand that I really mean it?'
'No doubt you do at this moment, but I forbid you to do any such thing.'
'I acknowledge no commands superior to conscience,' she said. 'I have
made my appointment.'
'That I will arrange for you.'
'You can't.'
'The pony-carriage is coming round at three, and I shall go and explain
to Mrs. Lake that you remain at home by my desire.'
Mrs. Lake's farm was at the end of a lane all stones and ruts, and it
was well known in the family that nothing hurt Felix so much as a jolt.
'No! no! You can't think of it,' cried Angela.
'I shall walk over the worst places,' he said.
'And that's the whole! Felix, pray don't!'
'I must, unless you will submit otherwise.'
'That's taking an unfair advantage,' she said, with tears of anger in
her eyes. 'You know it is leaving me no choice.'
'Thank you. That is very kind. You had better take that pen and paper
and write to Mrs. Lake.'
'You know your power,' she said, petulantly. 'If you were well, I would
try it to the uttermost!'
With a fraction of a smile he said, 'We will talk it over when your
note is written, but it is hard to let poor Mrs. Lake butter her
muffins all the afternoon in vain.'
This view of preparations for a tea-party made Angela smile a little
also, and that did her good. She sat down at the table, and hastily
wrote--
DEAR MRS. LAKE,
I am sorry to say I am prevented from joining you to-night.
Yours, with great regret,
A.M. UNDERWOOD.
She showed the billet to Felix, who made no objection, but rang, and
gave orders for its despatch.
'Thank you, Angel,' he said. 'I do not scruple to avail myself of your
consideration for my side, because, as long as my authority over you
lasts, I am resolved to prevent you by any means in my power from doing
wrong.'
'You know I have ceased to think with you on that point,' said Angela,
not without hopes of extorting permission after all.
'I know you have, but you are young enough to be prevented from
committing an open act of schism before you have grown wiser.'
'You speak as if I wanted to become an out-and-out dissenter, when I
only wish to hear a man whose writings have done so much for my soul,
which was starving--yes, starving before.'
'Perhaps sleeping would be the fitter word.'
'Sleeping or starving, it comes to the same. Forms, routine, and
ordinances assumed to be everything, and did me no good--how could
they? And in the awakening! Oh, brother, would that I could make you
understand the joy--the ecstasy of looking straight up to my Saviour,
and the incomparableness of what brightens and quickens that gaze. Then
you could never try to keep me back for mere forms and distinctions!'
'Nay,' said Felix, gravely but fervently, 'it is because I do--I
hope--love and look up to my most blessed Lord and Master, that I can
permit nothing that rends and breaks the Unity of His Body, which He
gave us to guard and cherish here.'
'Unity is not external--it is only in the spiritual Church of the
faithful, in their hearts. It is I who want to keep it.'
'By going to those who have parted asunder from us?'
'I never said I was going over--only to hold out a hand of
fellowship--to hear and learn.'
'I'm afraid your hand of fellowship is hardly strong enough to unite
the two bodies, Angela. Don't you think it might end in your being led
captive, like certain silly women we have heard of--ever learning and
never coming to a knowledge of the truth. That is what I want to save
my sister from.'
'Then it is Wilmet's old "what it may lead to!"'
'Exactly, her old wisdom. See, Angela, I cannot tell how long I may
have any authority; at any rate you will be of age in a few weeks,
and then I do not know what you may do, for there is something very
dangerous in your passion for excitement. I have thought a great deal
about you, my poor Angel, for yours is the disposition that has always
made me the most anxious of all, especially since the shock that has
cast you loose from your old bearings; but all I can do, while I am
still responsible for you, is to restrain you as far as possible, both
because I think going among schismatics wrong in itself, and because I
hope the delay may give you time to be steadied, and to perceive that
the Divine appointments of the Church are not darkenings, but lamps of
faith.'
'I think you are in earnest, Felix,' said Angela. 'Miss Isa says you
and Lance are true Christians in spite of it all! Tell me honestly
now. Your objection is not because it is unladylike, not fit for Squire
Underwood's sister.'
He laughed, 'Really that never occurred to me.'
'Then I don't mind. I say, did Miss Isa put you up to this? Yes? I
can't understand. It was she who first opened my eyes to the light, and
taught me what true Christianity is, showing me the hollowness of all
I had lived in, and bringing me from darkness to light. It was she who
gave me Captain Gudgeon's books. They are beautiful. Will you look at
them?'
'Very well.'
'She does not think, like you, of what you call schism, only of its
not being proper for ladies. She says we can read at home, as if that
were like living words, and that we ought not to mix with "that kind of
people," as she calls them. I can't understand such worldly nonsense in
a person like her.'
'Many people let the world get a curious grip of their conscience,'
said Felix. 'Perhaps we who have lived so long beneath the line don't
estimate the strength of scruple, but in this case it may be well that
even inferior motives should prevent the breaking their Communion with
the Church.'
'You think that outward Communion preferable to an enlightened spirit.
There we differ.'
'No, Angela. The soul must have life and enlightenment, or else it is
like one asleep in the midst of a feast, under a lamp, but there is no
sure way of keeping up that life and light except by the means and in
the union our Blessed Lord appointed.'
'Then comes the question, how do you know that these means, precisely
in your own way, are what He meant?'
'By unbroken historical evidence of the Church universal--by the Saints
that have been formed through them. Nay, shall I say it, Angela, by
personal experience ever since I can remember. I can no more doubt of
the grace, comfort, and strength imparted through them than I do of the
refreshment of food or of air.'
'Tell me, if you don't mind, a little more precisely what you mean.'
'I mean so far this, that a perplexing question, when taken there,
is apt afterwards to clear itself. One sees the way to what seemed
impossible, and I am also sure that one's first impulses in unexpected
trials become much safer and more trustworthy under the influence one
then imbibes. How should they not?'
'That's not the heart, it's all outward,' said Angela, impatiently.
'Nay, is not the outward action connected with the abundance of the
heart? As to the rest, my dear Angel, I don't think anything that I can
say will express the blessing except "O taste and see how gracious
the Lord is!" What would life or death be worth without it?' And his
face spoke more than his words.
'Well,' said Angela. 'No good came to me till I banished those things
away, and knew my load of sin, and Who has taken it. I can't bear
anything between Him and me.'
'Nor I,' said Felix. 'Angela, my dear, are you sure your discovery is
not exactly what our old way was meant to teach you?'
She hung her head. He had enough experience of her to know that
pressing her was useless, so he leant back giving way to his fatigue,
and she sat on playing with a paper-knife, till at last she said,
'Brother, do you remember my scalding you?'
'Certainly.'
'When I would not let you pardon me, and you didn't want to.'
'Rather oddly put, but I remember.'
'Well!' coming and kneeling by him, 'I terribly crave for pardon now.'
'My poor Angel,' as he tenderly kissed her brow, and as she rested it
on the arm of his chair, stroked her fair hair. Presently there came up
a sort of choked whisper, 'for isn't it worse than we thought?'
'May be so, Angel, but you know that came of my own stupid choice of a
landing-place, so that is my private affair.'
Her instinct had gathered more than she had been told, and her eager
wilful chase of excitement and defiance of Clement had been the vain
resource of a sadly foreboding, half-broken heart, dwelling vehemently
on the whole mass of past sins, as if putting them in one vague heap
dulled the unbearably acute sense of the one act of vain flightiness
that had produced such consequences, and now, though she guessed enough
to be unwilling to agitate him, the comfort of the avowal and of his
caress was infinite.
He partly perceived how it was, and waited a little before saying, 'I
look to you as my great help if this comes to anything. You are the
family nurse.'
'Oh!' she came still closer, and presently said, 'please tell me just
what it is; it can't be worse than guessing.'
He told her.
'I thought so,' she said, and still knelt with her head against his
chair for a long, long time, till the door was opened and Clement came
in, not seeing her, as she sat on the ground on the further side.
'The pony-carriage is come round; but here's a pretty business. It is
all over the parish that Angela is going with Mrs. Lake to Gudgeon's
conventicle. Halloa!'
'How can you come and upset Felix?' was Angela's cry as she sprang to
her feet.
'Gently, Angel,' said Felix, laughing; 'don't be so like Tabby guarding
her kitten from Scamp: Clem is tolerably aware by this time of what
does me harm. She has been very good to me, Clem; she has given it up
to please me.'
'Because I should have been a brute if I had not,' said Angela. 'Mind,
Clement, I'm not convinced! I should like to have fought it out,
but----' her dignity quite gave way, 'I don't care. I can't vex him,
there--I nev-er, never will!' And she dashed away, struggling with sobs.
'A dangerous undertaking, if it were likely to last longer,' said
Felix; 'but even while it does, the restraint may be wholesome.'
'Then you have stopped this?'
'Miss Isabella warned me. One good thing is that the good ladies'
opposition was on motives that rather sap her faith in them.'
'Does she know about you?'
'She had nearly found out already. Nature designed her for a nursing
sister. I rather hope she may yet turn that way, but the load of a sore
heart is very heavy on her, poor child.'
'If she is getting into confidence with you, I have hope,' said
Clement, sighing as if his heart were sore enough as he looked at his
brother.
'If I can only be allowed to tide her through this searching time of
trouble and put her into better hands,' said Felix, 'I should be glad
indeed; otherwise I should fear her becoming one of the ladies who
drift through every variety of exciting religion.'
From that time he submitted to be watched and waited on by Angela, with
an exclusive vehemence that was almost fierce. She attended to his very
eye, and for the present so entirely centered her fervent nature upon
the 'not vexing him,' that he had to think twice before expressing the
most casual and careless wish, lest she should turn everything upside
down to gratify him.
To only one other person did Felix speak of his own state, namely,
Bernard, who, as Will Harewood foretold, egregiously failed in
obtaining admission to Keble College, and took his rejection with the
utmost coolness, seeming to think he had made a great concession to
family prejudice, and that now something must be found to enable him
to pass through the university with the same gentleman-like ease as
through Harrow.
Not in the least crestfallen, he stood warming his back at the study
fire, and mentioning one or two colleges whose requirements he thought
not unreasonable. That Felix should haggle about expense, and have
delusions that the university was meant for work, he could endure as
the innocuous thunder with which governors must be allowed to solace
themselves, while youth listened good humouredly to the growl.
The thunder, however, took an unwonted form in the quiet reply. 'Either
you must get a scholarship, or you cannot go to Oxford. You had better
study harder than you have ever done, or else turn your mind to some
other maintenance. Hitherto, you have depended on me, but Gerald's
guardians will not have the same power.'
'Gerald's guardians!' he exclaimed, as the import flashed on him.
'You're all right, except the old sprain!'
'I am afraid not, Bear. There is serious damage, and though I do not
wish to distress any one, especially Cherry, it is right you should be
prepared to get on without me, as you know I have absolutely nothing to
leave you.'
'I say, is this fancy, or have you had the doctor?'
'Four.'
'Four doctors! That's enough to account for anybody thinking anything
the matter with him. Cheer up, Squire,' and he assumed a superior air
of wisdom and encouragement that made Felix look amused enough to
persuade the boy of the effect of his words--'don't be croaked out of
spirits. Sprains are nasty things, and go on no one knows how long; but
I'll bet anything you like that nothing else is the matter with you but
the doctors, and poking over that desk. It's a splendid day, I thought
of going up the river. Will you come?'
To which Felix consented, and Bernard, when repairing to Geraldine to
propose her joining the party, said, 'It will be good for the Squire. I
say, what makes him so down in the mouth?'
'Of course, he is disappointed about you.'
'Pish! I didn't mean that, but about himself and the sprain.'
'I don't wonder, dear Felix!' said Cherry. 'It is very wearing to feel
it at every movement, and it is depressing to be so set aside from
active life. I only wonder at his patience.'
So Bernard continued to repose in his consoling fiction of low spirits,
but he was so far amenable as to think himself 'grinding frightfully
hard' with a tutor at Ewmouth, and dislike of the said grist impelled
him to propose going out to Carrigaboola; but after a day's shooting
with him, Fulbert declined the proposal in no measured terms, when
he had seen Master Bernard's daintiness of equipment, disgust at
difficulties, dependence on luncheon, and distaste at loading himself
with anything that could be carried by another.
And Cherry? How did the quickest witted of all avoid the shadow of the
cloud visible to so many?
Partly there was the resistance of a sensitive mind, after hosts of
imaginary panics, to a real fear--partly her brother was on his guard
against distressing her, and often commanded his countenance, when if
alone with Clement, it would have betrayed the pang, and besides, her
charm of manner often beguiled his weariness; but above all, her want
of perception was due to her absorption in little Gerald.
The child needed careful attention, varying from day to day under
a succession of petty ailments, only to be dealt with by assiduous
tenderness. To train his vivid intelligence, to amuse and occupy him,
to guard him from the aggressions of his cousins, and to soothe him
under pain or nervous restlessness was quite one person's work, and
engrossed Cherry, whom the little fellow preferred with exclusiveness
that increased to petulance whenever he was suffering. She was seldom
to be seen without him, and was always occupied with him, and her
unselfish brother was content that she should thus be weaned from him,
and wind her affections round another object. Yes, even though she
could no longer be entirely reckoned for Pursuivant work that must be
done, and now more than ever no one could do like her; though Gerald's
call would break off her writing for him, and either she came not, or
he enjoyed only her divided attention in his walks and drives.
'It was better so,' he said, when Clement was vexed and indignant. And
truly he was anxious enough about the frail little child to have none
of the jealousy of invalid number one towards invalid number two.
Marilda's eager, almost peremptory claim had little chance. Cherry was
almost furious at the tone in which the warm-hearted heiress wrote
demanding the boy, as if his father had been her brother and not
theirs, and nobody could care for him save herself. If Felix had not
had more coolness, there might almost have been a breach. As it was,
his grateful but decided reply that Edgar had entrusted his son to
his brothers and sisters in a manner that would not justify them in
resigning the charge, so offended her that a marked silence followed.
CHAPTER XLVII.
THE TASK OVER.
'If you might, would you now
Retrace your way,
Wander through stormy wilds,
Faint and astray?
Night's gloomy watches fled,
Morning all beaming red,
Hopes smiles around us shed,
Heavenward away!'
Lady Nairne.
Felix, Cherry, and Gerald were taking one of their slow drives with
Master Ratton, when a tall horse passed them, and with the shout 'As
right as a trivet,' Charles Audley the younger waved his hat and rode
on, leaving them to meditate on his announcement. 'A three legged
article,' as Cherry said, 'hardly suited the felicity he seemed to
intend.'
Charlie had not gone in for honors, but had obtained the flattering
assurance that he would have had them if he had tried. The
announcement, backed perhaps by some mediation of his uncle, had
brought an offer of a private secretaryship from Lord Liddesdale, and
therewith armed, he had made the awful plunge at the Hall--his father
and uncle both waiting to defend his independence.
Behold! Sir Robert and Lady Margaret had comported themselves like
lambs. Either the scheme for Charlie's union with his cousin had been
a figment, or they were glad to get the sole hope of their house
married at all, or they were gratified by Lord Liddesdale's estimate
of him, and had learnt wisdom by the ill effects of former opposition.
Anyway their consent had been startlingly facile. They heeded birth
more than wealth: Stella, with her own legacy and Theodore's, was
not unportioned, and an Underwood of Vale Leston had such undeniable
county blood that they never connected the younger Charles's ravings
with the alarms that had elicited their consent to the elder Charles's
expatriation fourteen years ago. Moreover Lady Liddesdale, who had
been the young man's confidante, had promised to be a mother to his
bride. She had just married off her last daughter, and wanted a young
companion, and she offered rooms at the Embassy, and whatever Charlie
could wish for his wife in the way of help and kindness.
So here was the young gentleman in tempestuous ecstasy, announcing that
there could be no delay, for he was wanted at the Embassy by the middle
of February.
The elder brothers and sisters expected to see their nestling
distracted by the summons to a distant home in a strange land, but her
equanimity amazed them all. She was Charlie's property, and it was only
natural to be claimed. 'Every one did,' she said, and she would have
been quite as contented to go with him to a City lodging or to the
Australian bush as to the splendours of the Embassy.
Wilmet thought her too young to realize what it all meant, and held
that she ought to wait a year or two; but Felix would hear of this as
little as the captain, having no doubt that the calm, self-contained,
thoughtful nature would be equal to whatever it might be called on
to meet; and though Charlie was the younger in character, he was a
thoroughly good, trustworthy fellow, nor would they begin with an
independent home. Besides, was not Lady Liddesdale own sister to
'Sister Constance'?
The announcement of this splendid engagement mollified Marilda, who
wrote heartily, and offered services either of hospitality or of
choice of wedding clothes. Stella could not bear to leave home, but
she was overruled. It was due to the Ambassadress that her outfit
should neither be countrified nor left to Marilda's taste; so Wilmet
took her to London for a week, and by Felix's desire expended the
child's own original inheritance from her father in garments that might
not disgrace the suite; the chief difficulty being that Stella had
made Charlie consent to her completing her year of mourning for her
brothers--a terrible grievance to Mrs. Underwood. Wilmet was meantime
the recipient of all Marilda's views as to the folly of Felix's
rejection of her offer to Gerald, over whom she absolutely seemed to
yearn--and she caught at the invitation to the wedding as at least
affording her a chance of seeing him, if not of bringing his uncle to
hear reason.
The marriage was to take place on New Year's Day, and as soon as the
bustle was over, 'Sister Constance' was actually coming to Vale Leston
to arrange for the branch of the St Faith's Sisterhood which was to be
established in connection with the future Church of the Comforter at
East Ewmouth. She was to choose among houses to let the temporary abode
of the sisters, but in the first place was to have a few days for the
young friends, who now ranked as old, and on Charles Audley the elder.
The oculist's verdict had not been hopeless, but it had obliged him
to give up all prospect of a return to a climate so noxious to the
eyes as that of Western Australia. His visit to his home had made it
evident that his place was no longer there. His parents were old and
self-occupied, and had little in common with him, chiefly depending on
their daughter-in-law, a complete woman of the world, thoroughly alien
to the clergyman who had spent his strength on wild 'black fellows'
and rude convicts. He was more trouble than pleasure to any of the
party, and deemed it inadvisable to endure the penance of idleness and
uncongeniality in their stately halls, since they gave him no opening
for being of use to them; and his brother, who would not leave him,
was always miserable there. Once the pet at home, 'poor Charles' was
mourned over for his peculiarities, and coughed down if he endeavoured
to explain them.
So as Clement was in the usual case of country Vicars, curate-hunting
in vain, Mr. Audley proffered himself as a 'demi-semi-assistant,'
able to do a good deal without book, and thankful for a refuge from
total inefficiency. Clement was rather shocked at finding himself in
such relations towards his old Guardian, almost a Bishop elect, but
rejoiced in the counsel and support of his experience even more than
in the actual aid, which indeed he greatly needed. And to Felix, the
intercourse with his first friend was the greatest delight, while there
was a rally in his health in the autumn that made even those who knew
the worst hope the evil was averted, and every one else viewed him as
recovering.
Perhaps he ventured a little too much in the greater sense of strength,
for Lady Hammond being unable to go out, and warmly anxious to see
the young couple, he took the long drive thither with them, and a few
days later went to a public meeting. There was an attack upon Church
influence in the Ewmouth hospital, and he went late, expecting only to
have to give his vote, but he found a storm raging such as he did not
expect, and his side of the question so inefficiently defended by its
few lay representatives, that he stood up and spoke for nearly an hour
with all his remarkable force and facility.
'I don't agree with you, Underwood,' said Mr. Walsh, as Felix, flushed
and panting, waited till the rush to the door was over to get to his
carriage, 'but you ought to be in the House; and that's much for a man
to say when you've just been the means of beating him. You are one of
the few who can make any life or sense out of the old cause.'
Clement was far from knowing whether to be glad or sorry, as Felix
made answer with very little more than a languid smile. The speech
certainly had, as the saying is, 'taken a great deal out of him,' and
was Cherry's 'cheval de bataille' whenever any of the wedding guests
found fault with his appearance.
There was a grand family gathering, bringing together all the surviving
brothers and sisters, for the unexceptionable baronet connection had
even induced Sir Adrian Vanderkist to bring his wife and two eldest
children, who were to act bridesmaids, together with Robina and Angela,
Gertrude May and Miss Audley. Geraldine and Marilda had paired off
on the score of age, and little Mary Harewood was to wear a modified
edition of the bridesmaid's white cashmere and stars of Bethlehem,
whose green leaves gave the only colour the little bride would permit.
The calmly decided manner in which she obtained her own way against
fashion and conventionality amused everybody. Felix had hoped to have
brought Ferdinand Travis and Marilda together on this occasion, but
as soon as he found that Alda was coming, he had thought it better to
abstain, and was rather relieved when the clerk at Peter Brown's sent
information that Mr. Travis had left Barcelona, it was not known for
what place, and so that his letter could not yet be forwarded.
The Vanderkists arrived late on the Monday, and the next morning
Bernard conducted Sir Adrian to the covers he had been nursing up for
this great occasion, Fulbert stalking along with him, thinking how
hardly pressed stay-at-home people must be for something to do, if
this were a sort of duty.
That last day of the old year was that on which Felix attained
his object of signing away the lay rectory. The action was so
unprecedented, and involved so many complications, that his strenuous
efforts had only succeeded in getting the needful documents brought
down from London with the marriage-settlements.
'Let me witness that,' said Mr. Audley: 'I am glad to have eyes enough
at least for such a sight.'
Felix's face was calmly happy as he wrote the 'Felix Chester
Underwood,' laid his finger on the seal, and spoke the 'I deliver
this as my act and deed,' by which the Rectory returned to be Church
property.
'It is a great load off my mind,' he said, handing the pen to Mr.
Audley and William Harewood, who said nothing to him, but merrily shook
hands with the new Rector, joking him on the additional substance and
consequence the title called for, jests the readier because they all
knew them to be empty, since East Ewmouth carried off the surplus
tithe, and he only obtained the title and the power over his Chancel.
Then Felix required their witness and the lawyer's to the will which
the numerous recent changes had necessitated, and they afterwards
carried the lawyer off to see the buildings, while Felix might rest
till the arrival of the other parties to the marriage-settlements.
However, they had not been gone long before a gentle knock came to the
door. 'Alda, my dear, are you come to pay me a visit?' and Felix met
her affectionately, and drew a chair for her close to his own.
'I thought I might come when your business was over,' she said. 'I have
scarcely seen you.'
'Have you been over the house? You remembered it! You have seen your
little girls in our own cribs at last.'
'Yes, I have so often wished to come, ever since you have been here.
You quite understand that I should have been so glad, only journeys are
so expensive, and we are so many.'
'I see.'
'That is one of the few ways in which I can save,' she said. 'It is
such an anxiety to have so many daughters.'
'Seven now?'
'Seven! Adrian says it makes us ridiculous. Poor children! That's what
I came to speak to you about, Felix. I want you to talk to Adrian.'
'About what?' asked Felix, not sanguine of either talking the daughters
into sons, or their father into preference of the sex.
'About some provision for them,' said the mother; and there ensued
an explanation that nothing was secured to the children but her own
portion from uncle Tom, while as to the estate, so long as there was
no male heir, Sir Adrian could do as he pleased with it, and at the
rate of his present expenditure there would be little left for his
successors; and Alda, with some vague idea of Felix's helpfulness, had
come to beg him to persuade her husband to insure his life, contract
his expenses, or do something that might secure her children from
dire poverty. She began with a wife's natural reticence and a guarded
voice, but gradually, as the home sense of being with the brotherly
protector of earlier days wrought upon her, she dropped her caution,
and disclosed the harass of her life. Her husband, it seemed, was more
and more devoted to the turf, and the display he thought needful to
his position, but while he grudged his wife every outlay needful to
maintain that ostentation, he was still more unwilling to allow her the
requisites for the health, comfort, and education of the children.
'He thinks anything will do for them,' said Alda, with a dismal
sharpness in her voice; 'he can't bear spending on anything but
himself.'
'No, no, Alda, it is hardly well to put such things into words.'
'I would not except to you, Felix; but indeed it does me good to have
it out. I get so disheartened, I would let everything take its chance,
but for my poor little girls. There is a wrangle over every cheque! If
I try to save in the housekeeping, he is angry about the dinners, and I
can't ask for money to pay bills without being blamed for extravagance.
Indeed, whether I get it or not, he is always cross with me all the
rest of the day. I'm ashamed to see all here in black, but he would not
let me do more than just wear a little slight mourning myself, and that
for a short time. He would not hear of it for the children. Felix, when
I see your peaceful faces and unruffled ways, I feel as if this were a
world of peace.'
'You must contribute gentleness yourself, my poor Alda.'
She had never answered him so humbly. 'Indeed I am obliged to try, but
you know I never was the good-tempered one at home, and it is very,
very hard when one is never very well, and always harassed and anxious.
I don't think, in the worst of times, Wilmet had to spend more thought
on pinching here and there to make both ends meet than I have, and at
least she had the comfort of keeping out of debt, and was thanked and
not despised! Will you speak to Adrian, Felix; of course not letting
him guess I told you, but beginning as if of yourself about the
children?'
'My dear, I can hardly promise, but whatever I can do for you I will.
Your little maidens seem to be sweet little, well-trained children, and
if they grow up united and affectionate they may be happier on small
means than you suppose.'
'The dinner of herbs and stalled ox,' said Alda; 'I have thought of
Mettie's rice stews many a time when I have sat quaking because there
were no truffles in the soup. Dear children, I am so glad they seem
nice to you. I do believe they have the good tempers of our family;
there are never any quarrels, and their grandmamma is so fond of them.
I do try to keep them good, and'--there were tears in her eyes--'it
does make one think more about things to have those little ones round
one.'
'That is the blessing little Gerald brought to poor Edgar,' said Felix,
pressing the hand she had laid upon his knees. 'The greatest of all.'
'When I see you I know it is,' said poor Alda; 'but sometimes I think
if I had not been brought up religiously I should be happier, I should
not think things so bad; and then Adrian is never so cross as if he
thinks me wanting to be serious, or to make the children so. It makes
him dislike our being with his mother, though nothing is such a comfort
to me.'
'My dear, comfort will grow if you go on striving to submit meekly; do
your best with your children, and look beyond.'
He was really more hopeful about Alda than he had ever been. Just then
she said: 'One thing more. Mary and Sophy are old enough to need a
governess. I have managed so far with a bonne, but I have neither
time, spirits, nor ability to teach, and Adrian would be furious if I
asked him for a proper salary. Do you think Robina would come to us--to
live of course as my sister, on an equality? The delight and comfort it
would be----'
To poor Alda, thought Felix, but Robina ought not to be sacrificed. 'It
would not be right to ask her, remembering her engagement.'
'What engagement?'
'To Will Harewood.'
'My dear Felix, you don't mean that you have consented to anything so
foolish! How are they to live?'
'They have been for the last four years endeavouring to save. He makes
a good deal by his pupils, and by his writings, besides his fellowship,
and she adds something from her salary. They mean to get 5000 together
between them--her salary, and his fellowship, pupils and books--and
then take either a parish or a mastership at a school.'
'It seems to me sheer imprudence,' said the old Alda, half peevish
at the opposition; 'I did think she might have been glad to leave
strangers for the sake of her sister, and her natural position.'
'You forget the difference the salary makes to her prospects. She
has 150 a year, and it would not be right to ask her to give it up,
considering----'
'I can't see why my children should be sacrificed to William Harewood!'
'Perhaps not, but Robina might. No, Alda, it will not do. The De la
Poers have made her so happy that she feels Repworth another home, and
I should not like to ask her to leave it till she marries.'
'It is hard,' sighed Alda, in a tone not unlike those heard over the
shop of Bexley; but then followed another question: 'I want to know
what you think about Marilda?'
'About Marilda? You know she is coming this evening.'
'Yes, but about her intentions.'
'I did not know she had any intentions.'
'You see it is plain she will never marry now, and I used to be nearer
to her than any one. Don't look so amazed, Felix! I know she is only of
my age, and of course it is not so much with any immediate expectations
as for the sake of the influence there might be on Adrian. We used to
see a good deal of her at one time, but I believe he tried to borrow
money of her, and she spoke out in her rough way, so that he grew
angry, and made me hold aloof; but now I am sure he wants to make it up
with her again, he was so much put out about that little boy.'
'Little Gerald? How or why?'
'For fear she should want to adopt him, or make him her heir. Oh!
Felix, you will do nothing to promote that. Remember, my poor little
girls are just as near to you.'
'There's no fear of my promoting anything of the kind,' said Felix,
coldly; 'Gerald is provided for. No one here will scheme for him.'
'Don't be displeased with me, Felix,' she said, more meekly. 'Only if
Marilda should say anything----'
'The child whom dear Edgar expressly left to us we should not give up
to any one.'
'I thought not; only if anything should pass, do turn her mind to us.
It is not, of course, for the sake of the property, but if she just
showed that sort of interest, it would give her weight with Adrian, and
then if she suggests anything about the children he would be sure to
attend. I can't say it, but you might.'
The motive was, after all, not so blameworthy; but before any answer
could be given to this strange mixture of tokens of the long-dormant
good seed, and the choking weeds of worldly care, the door was softly
opened, a pretty glowing face peeped in, and was retreating with 'Oh!
I didn't know,' but the morrow's bride might interrupt anything, and
she was called back. 'Stella, my sweet Fair-Star, come in! Why, what
have you got there? How it sparkles! What is it?'
'Eh!' exclaimed Alda, 'I declare it is a bouquet of diamond flowers and
emerald leaves! I never saw anything more splendid. Where did it come
from?'
'Out of Aladdin's cave? or is it dewdrops fixed by star-light?' said
Felix, as the sparkles flashed on him. 'Stella, how did you come by it?
It is not Audley family jewels, eh?'
'The Audleys never had--' but Alda checked what would have been spite,
though Stella would not have minded it.
'Oh no,' she said. 'Cherry said you would guess.'
'Ferdinand Travis?' said Felix. 'Did he send it?'
'Charlie rowed him up in the skiff an hour ago, and ever since he has
been showing us how to put it together, for it was all in separate
velvet cases. It is all brooches and bracelets and necklaces, and a
thing for one's head--a complete set really, you see,' said Stella,
'but it is just like a puzzle putting it up like this, and it is much
prettier so.'
'Are you going to carry it as your bouquet to-morrow?'
'Oh no, that would never do!' interposed Alda.
'Oh no, I should not like that,' said Stella. 'Charlie has got me my
bouquet, and that's best.'
'Much better taste,' said Alda; 'but this is truly magnificent. You
will be prepared for the occasion, little Stella, even if you end as an
ambassadress. The cost must have been enormous.' And she sighed.
'I am afraid so,' said Stella, a little oppressed; 'but Charlie is so
pleased.'
'Yes, and Fernan can not only afford it, but must have thoroughly
enjoyed doing it, my Star; so you need not scruple; he has robbed
nothing he ought to benefit, you may be sure; so you may take lawful
pleasure in it, little one, and "rejoice in your jewels as a bride
doth."'
She smiled, but gravely. 'It is too beautiful,' she said. 'Isn't
it a pomp?' she whispered into her brother's ear, as he turned the
glittering thing about, enjoying the magic flashes of many-coloured
rays.
'It might be,' he said, 'but it is not yet. It is the gift of a true
and grateful spirit, and for itself--I never knew how beauteous these
things were. Nay, Stella,' speaking low, as he laid a hand on her arm,
and looked up into the sweet, thoughtful face, 'recollect that such are
in the walls of the City above, and yet they are but the same stuff as
earthly clay after all, showing us how dust can be sublimated. Look,
the mysterious glory of those diamond lights may help us to dwell on
the glories that eye hath not seen nor ear heard, and you know the
rainbow round about the Throne is in sight like unto an emerald.'
'You've consecrated them, brother,' she said, with a sweet smile on her
pensive face. 'When I think of that, it will keep them from being a
temptation.'
He played silently with the flashing gleams a little longer, as if
continuing the strain of thought, then said, 'Did you say he was here?'
'Yes; he only came back from Spain yesterday, and came down to bring
this, though he did not know it was to be so soon.'
'Take your fairy bouquet, Princess Fair-Star, I'll come to him in a
minute.'
'O yes, brother! There's the carriage coming down the drive!' and the
voice was rather awe-struck.
'We will come too and help you through the introduction, little one,'
said Felix, 'though I think you have self-possession to meet it.'
The little bride sprang away, and while Felix was slowly lifting
himself up, he heard Alda murmur, 'Ferdinand Travis gave that! I wonder
how many hundreds it cost.'
Certainly it was a contrast to the pinching and anxiety she had
described. If she had but known, as Mrs. Underwood had said! Felix
paused in the doubt whether to take any notice of the predicament,
and said, 'He had gone to Barcelona, and I did not expect him to have
returned by this time.'
'He has purchased a welcome,' said Alda, but her face glowed, and at
the same moment the carriage crashed up to the door, containing the
Audley party, who had all arrived at the Captain's the day before,
except old Lady Margaret, who never left home.
'Thank you, Felix,' said Lady Vanderkist, as they repaired to the
drawing-room in readiness for the reception. 'You have done me good.'
He could not quite see how, but no doubt there had been much in his
look and manner of listening.
Sir Robert Audley was a pompous, formal old gentleman, tremendously
condescending and courtly, and his first bow, his first tone showed
Geraldine what a trial he must be to his sons--indeed the elder looked
more bored than she had ever seen him.
'And where is the sweet young lady I am so soon to hail as my
granddaughter?'
'Here she is, sir,' said Charlie, about to pull her forward, but she,
by some intuition, advanced with a beautiful courtesy, perfect in grace
but full of modesty and respect. Sir Robert was delighted, met her with
a gracious gesture and kiss, and presented her to his daughter-in-law,
Mrs. Somerville Audley--a dame stiff and fashionable-looking, and to
Miss Audley, small, dark, and reminding Cherry of the old word 'modish.'
Alda was a great help, and so were the wedding presents. Ferdinand
Travis had fled to Major Harewood's, but his bouquet evoked raptures
from the ladies, though Cherry doubted whether the baronet were equally
delighted that the Audley jewels he had produced for the bride of
the heir presumptive should be eclipsed, for he kept on impressing
on the young couple that these last were family relics, and must not
be exposed to any risk, until Stella was ready to suggest that it
would be wiser not to take them abroad, and was only withheld by the
fear of seeming to slight them. Her habitual silence and observation
had fostered a remarkable amount of simple tact, and this, together
with her unusual loveliness, rendered her a great success; but the
ceremonious speeches and grand politeness rendered the visit very
fatiguing, and when the settlements had been duly signed, and the other
high contracting power had bowed himself off, Felix looked so worn out
that every one acquiesced in his shutting himself into his study. No
one saw him again till the late dinner with which Sir Adrian must be
regaled.
It was strictly a family party, and only the Harewoods, Vanderkists,
and Mr. Travis, besides the whole eleven who still bore the name of
Underwood, were assembled in the drawing-room. Marilda was there,
hearty and good-natured as ever, but better looking at two-and-thirty
than at two-and-twenty, for she had somewhat fined down, and actual
work in business and charity had given meaning to her countenance, and
energy instead of temper to her manner. She was assiduously courting
little Gerald, and he backing out of her way into the more congenial
society of Mary and Sophy Vanderkist. Cherry could not help thinking it
an odd turn of the wheel of fortune that Alda should have so much nicer
and better-regulated children than Wilmet. To be sure, Christopher and
Edward were perfectly satisfactory to their parents, and obeyed them at
a word, but the licence they enjoyed was a continual contrast to the
strict rule Wilmet had maintained over her former charge, and did not
render them agreeable company to their uncles and aunts. Moreover, the
ruddy locks and freckles of the Harewoods had mastered the Underwood
blonde complexion, while the two Vanderkists reproduced the elder twins
at the same age, and were exemplary little maids, taught meekness by
difficulties and yielding by seniority, grateful for notice from their
uncles, and enchanted to find a boy so unlike their notions of the
species. On the other hand, Gerald watched them like fairies, laid
himself at their feet with precocious devotion, and mourned that he
could not marry them both on the spot.
The grown-up party looked each other over rather as they had done on
meeting fifteen years before at their mother's funeral--the years that
had made their baby the fair little bride who was nestling as close as
she could to her eldest brother that she might feel his hand on her
shoulder. Those years had brought the 'little ones' of those days to
be 'the tall ones' of the present, Bernard exceeding all the rest in
stature, even Fulbert and Clement, with regular features, brilliant
complexion, and glossy light-brown hair and moustache, but without
as yet any particular expression except good-humoured complacency in
his own appearance and deportment, being persuaded that Charlie would
have to-morrow a true best man, unrivalled in looks and equipments;
and without a regret, save that Felix was courteously deaf to all Sir
Adrian's strictures on the scandalous state of his covers. Whatever
those years had done for Bernard's outer man, his mind, or perhaps more
properly his will, had not grown much older.
This could not be said of Angela, who sat so still and meek that Alda
was meditating on transferring the governess proposal to her, but
with a latent energy in the corner of the down-cast eye and firmly
closed mouth, and the most anxious watchfulness of Felix's slightest
movement. The change was comparatively small in sober Robina, whose
steady equable nature had been early moulded, and who sat at the window
curtain, with Will hovering over her, both trying not to contrast
other people's love affairs with their own. The three brothers whose
bickerings had then been so troublesome were now the most inseparable.
If their paths had severed them, they liked each other better now, as
they stood all in a row, with their backs against the mantel-piece, the
big, bearded, sunburnt Australian, the close-shaven, alert clergyman,
and the little bright-eyed, thin-faced, moustached tradesman, all
eagerly talking in under tones of old Bexley pranks and comrades,
laughing as they never did but in such a trio, and yet each bearing
tokens of toil with the full might of vigorous manhood, unlike as was
their work.
Geraldine's little bending figure had chiefly altered for the better.
The mixture of arch lively grace and pathetic depth which gave her
peculiar charm had increased rather than lessened, and though she had
gained in dignity and confidence, anxieties and perplexities made her
cheeks glow and her eyes wander restlessly as she tried to make talk
for Sir Adrian.
The twin sisters were together on the sofa, both in black velvet.
Wilmet had a bad cold, and indeed had never looked her best since the
shock at Whitsuntide, so that Alda had regained the palm of beauty;
but it was matronly content that had plumped the chiselled contour of
feature, and if the colouring showed less clear and flower-like, it was
by contrast with Alda's defined, over-transparent white and carnation,
and the wasted look that threw out the perfection of the delicate
moulding. One gave the notion of comfortable, peaceful motherliness,
the other of constant anxious wear and tear; and the blue eye, so much
larger and more hollow than the soft, calm one, rather weighed down by
the cold, no doubt were rendered additionally restless by the presence
of the man she had not seen since she had cast him off like a worn-out
glove.
It was she who had married, but upon which had the impression lasted
most painfully? There was a nervous quiver of her nostril, and a
sullen scowl in her husband's eye, when, after the casual greeting,
Ferdinand sat down among the children, took Gerald on his knee, and
made friends with the little girls. He was indisputably the wealthiest
man present, and the handsomest, except perhaps Bernard, whose good
looks were merely the fair, scarcely developed graces of early youth,
while his was the matured nobleness of countenance stamped on naturally
fine outlines by a life of brave, unselfish activity and dutifulness.
It was a calm, serious, dignified face, less melancholy than in his
younger days, for the liquid wistfulness of the dark eyes had given
place to vigilance and authority, and though there was still a want of
susceptibility and animation, the dark colouring and statuesque outline
did not need them.
'And he the chieftain of them all,' as Cherry liked to call her
Squire--he was leaning back in the easy-chair by the fire, with a
weary, placid smile on his face, and his fingers clasped lightly into
one another, as his elbows rested on the arms of his chair. There was a
strange monumental fixity of repose about him as if he were only half
attending to the talk that passed by him, and cared more to gaze than
to speak. However, on the announcement of dinner, he roused himself,
gave his arm to Lady Vanderkist, and talked cheerily to her through the
soup and fish, but while carving the turkey, he paused, a flush and
then a whiteness came over his face, and saying to Alda, 'I'm afraid I
must go, this is too much for me,' he rose, while Clement pushed back
his chair and hastily followed.
Startled looks went round, and--'A tiring day'--'He has not done
so much for a long time'--'That stuck-up old bore might do for
anybody'--but in a few moments Clement came back, and said, while
taking the seat at the bottom of the table, 'He is better now,' then
tried to divert Alda's anxious inquiries whether using the arm had
renewed the strain. Geraldine put on a defiant brightness, appealing
to John whether Sir Robert were not enough to account for any fatigue,
and with questionable taste in her excitement, giving Sir Adrian a
sarcastic account of his compliments. Luckily, Stella was out of
hearing, but John detected the ring of anxiety in every ironical word.
Knowing that a crowd coming after him was always oppressive to Felix,
no one followed Wilmet when on leaving the drawing-room she went at
once to the study door. She found Felix on the Squire's chair in its
most couch-like form, looking even in the firelight exceedingly pale,
but greeting her with a smile of welcome.
'Yes, I am better,' he said, in answer to her enquiry. 'I'll come into
the drawing-room presently.'
'You had better not, you are overtired.'
'I like to look at them all,' was the answer.
They both sat silent awhile; there was something in the stillness that
forbade Wilmet even to feel in her pocket for her tatting; but at last
Felix surprised her by saying:
'I have been thinking about Jacob.'
'Jacob Lightfoot?'
'No, Israel. I think I enter a little into his surprise and gratitude.
I look back--don't you, Wilmet?--to a shivering sense of loneliness and
responsibility when we first realized the task before us.'
'I don't think I ever did,' said Wilmet; 'I never thought of mamma's
not getting well, till I had grown quite used to it. It never occurred
to me that our position was unusual till I heard people talking of it.'
'So much the better; but I recollect one cold winter day, soon after my
father's death, reading Jacob's vow at Bethel to devote his best, if
God would only give him bread to eat and raiment to wear, and longing
for some assurance that we should have it--I felt so helpless, and the
future so vague--and when I see how richly blessings and prosperity
have flowed in on us, and look at those fine, happy, strong creatures,
it seems to me like his return across the Jordan, or as if I could say,
as he did at last, "The God that led me all my life through, the Angel
that redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads."' And as the firelight
shone upon his face, Wilmet recollected another saying about Jacob, and
how the 'Angels of God met him,' but her answer sounded flat. 'Yes, it
is a great comfort to see so many launched and doing well.'
'And, Wilmet, how much was owing to you! If you had not been the girl
you were, we must have broken up; it could not have been done at all.
Do you remember our councils over that spotted account book on Saturday
nights, and our misery when Fulbert spoilt a new pair of boots in the
river?'
'And your new coats! They used to weigh on my mind for months. I used
to look at your elbows every evening, and reckon whether they would
hold out till I had saved enough for the next.'
'Ah!' added Felix, laughing a little, 'do you remember my worst offence
of all? No? My having my hair cut at Slater's--instead of letting you
do it. I believe you had designs on the shilling, and that you thought
me corrupted by the vanities of this world!'
'Yes, I was very hard and narrow then. John has shown it to me.'
'It could not be otherwise--you had to live in a continual state of
resistance.'
'But how many mistakes we made!'
'It is those very mistakes that make me so thankful; that they should
have been so many, and yet for the most part remedied, and that those
boys and girls should have come out so sound-hearted, right-minded,
and affectionate as all of them are, is to me as wonderful as it is
merciful.'
'They could not well help it. John says it shows the force of
example--that not one for whom you were responsible has gone wrong.'
'Of prayer--of being the children of the righteous, more likely,' said
Felix; 'and there is a coming home, you know; I see the dawnings in
Alda, poor child, though there is much to smother it. I am happier
about her than ever before.'
'Poor Alda,' said Wilmet, 'I hope she will be happy in her children,
though I should not like mine to be so stiff and prim, poor little
dears!'
One by one Felix dwelt lovingly on the good points of each of the
brothers and sisters on whom he had been gazing--speaking with an
enjoyment that made Wilmet loth to leave him even for the sake of
making the most of her brief time with her twin sister. When at last
he recollected Alda and bade Wilmet return, blaming himself for
having detained her so long, he said as she rose, 'Give me one kiss
first, my Wilmet, for the sake of the old times when we worked and
struggled together, and I think we tasted of the special promise to the
fatherless.'
Wilmet, somewhat surprised, bent over him and gave the kiss. He held
her a moment, saying, 'May God bless you, and return it into your bosom
in your children.' The solemnity startled her, but the blessing was a
joy to her for the rest of her life.
The sound of music drew him back to the drawing-room ere long. Alda had
never heard Lance since his chorister's alto had passed from him, and
everyone, even Fulbert, called for some old echo of the old times over
the cracked piano. Sir Adrian had musical taste enough to be tamed and
kept amiable by the domestic concert; and even Angela did her part,
controlled by the resolution not to vex Felix. He indeed could take
no share, except that of evident delight, and now and then his low
voice chimed into one or other of his best loved choruses, but he told
Alda when she regretted the lack of his tones, 'Lance was better worth
hearing.'
'Let us have "Lead, kindly Light" again to-night, Clem,' said Felix, as
they moved towards the Oratory. 'Little Stella will not think it a sad
farewell.'
'No, indeed,' she said, holding his hand. 'I am sure we want the kindly
Light; going so far away, and so young!'
The hymn sounded even more sweetly than on the first arrival, so sweet
that Sir Adrian said to his wife, 'If all family prayers were like
that, they would not be such a bore.'
Wilmet went home by the bridge in the carriage, taking Marilda with
her, but Will and Ferdinand returned by boat. It was a splendid frosty
night, and Felix came out with them as far as the terrace. Lance, who
had gone down to the river, on returning found him still gazing at the
glories of the stars--Sirius flashing with most dazzling brightness,
and the Pleiades twinkling with their silvery mystery, and Aldebaran
gazing down like a great eye.
'Still out, Fee; don't get a chill.'
'Everything is so goodly--so good--without and within doors,' he
answered, 'that one hardly knows how to leave it. I wonder whether we
shall recognise what our foretastes have been!'
Lance recollected how strangely that word 'foretaste' had fallen on
his ear by Tranquillity Bridge as he sat in the solitude of his heavy
trance of disappointment; and as his brother's face came again into the
lights of the hall, something in it struck him with a sense that even
then he had been far from knowing what sorrow could be.
Of course the wedding morning was a scramble, though no one beyond the
family was invited, except that Dr. May brought his daughter Gertrude
to act as bridesmaid. Felix, who had since the hospital meeting ceased
to leave his room before breakfast, sent word that he should keep quiet
till Stella was dressed, and then that she would find him in the study.
How lovely the little white Star looked may be imagined. She was quite
calm and self-possessed, softly tender and loving, but too gravely
serious to be excited or agitated as she went, in deep, trustful love,
to meet the great unknown life, carrying about with her a certain hush
of sweet gentle awe.
So in her snowy robe and veil and wreathed brow, with her modest head
still bearing the long shining curls, she floated down the dark oak
stair, and crossed the hall, without casting a look on those who were
watching her, and knocked at the study door.
'Come in.' Felix rose to greet her, taking both her hands and kissing
her through her veil. 'My Star of the East, my happy gift!' he said.
'Stella, eighteen years ago father put you two freshly christened
babies into my arms. I gave dear little Theodore in his innocence back
to him last Whitsuntide. I am thankful to be allowed to give you in
your bridal white to the home that is to cherish you for the better
Home.'
She looked up in his face, which a flush of rosy colour was restoring
to something of its old self. 'Oh! brother,' she said, 'I am so glad
you spoke of dear Theodore. Charlie says we may take him my flowers as
soon as it is over. I wonder if he knows.'
'It may be, better than if he were here,' said Felix. 'Then it would
have been a sad day for him.'
'I could not have done it,' said Stella, and lowering her voice, 'I
don't know how I can have done it now. Oh, brother, nothing ever can be
like you!'
'It is one of my great comforts that you have done it, my Star, my own
especial child. I am glad you are the one I give away. Are they all
ready?'
'I think so.' And just then Geraldine knocked to intimate that the
Audley party were known to be arrived at the church, and that the
clergy and choir were ready. So Stella took the arm, not clinging, lest
she should hurt him, but lightly resting her fingers on it, and they
came forth, he with that youthful flush of colour on his cheek, with
all his scrupulous grace of attire, and with a white camellia in his
coat, but with that far-away look in his eyes; and she with bent head,
and deep concentrated spirit, never lifting her eyes from the ground.
The bridesmaids fell in behind, first the three small nieces, Mary
Harewood trotting between the other two, then the two sisters--Robina
in her sedate reserve, and Angela, flushing, quivering and trembling,
and never taking her eyes from Felix; and next the ill-matched pair
Gertrude May and Margaret Audley, the former thrilling at the smile
and clasp of the hand she had exchanged with Felix, the latter's
little black eyes taking note of everything not accordant with Audley
conventionalities.
Then came the rest in due order, Geraldine upon Ferdinand's arm, glad
it was so strong and friendly; for this, the first home wedding, made
her shiver with nervous excitement.
The elder Charles Audley, who had assisted in the twins' baptism by
their dying father, and had stood as their sponsor, was standing robed
at the inner archway of the tower, with Clement and William on either
side, while behind were the choir, Lance leading them.
Of course the whole parish was in the seats, Miss Isabella herself,
unable to help feeling that the marriage was infinitely more solemn,
and full of real praise and prayer, than those whose 'simplicity' she
had been wont to uphold.
No one ever forgot the quietly loving gesture with which the fatherly
brother put his fair young sister into the hands of the Church to be
'given to this man,' and the movement after the trothplight up to the
festally decked chancel was an exceedingly beautiful sight in itself.
Mr. Audley took the licence of giving a short but beautiful address of
his own on the significance and glory of holy wedlock, and then the
union was crowned and sealed by the hallowed Feast; for it had not been
thought fit to hurry it over out of sight beforehand, out of deference
to the two baronets, who, like the children and idler gazers, left the
church, and loitered outside, observing that 'this was too strong.'
After this, the signatures were to be made in the north transept that
served as vestry, and it was while the movement in consequence was
going on that Bernard felt a convulsive grasp on his arm, and the
whispered words, 'Help me home,' were so full of suffering that he
was not surprised to see his eldest brother's face deadly pale, and
contracted by pain.
Ere they had moved five steps, Fulbert too was supporting Felix, and
not without need, and Dr. May and Wilmet were following.
Consternation communicated itself to those around the little table.
'Felix ill!' The last Underwood that Stella Eudora ever signed herself
showed her start of dismay, and Clement, who was presiding over the
register book, turned pale, and gave a groan.
'God in His mercy help us! It is come!'
'I knew! I knew,' cried Angela--darting away.
'You apprehended'--began the amazed bridegroom.
'He was in some pain in the early part of the night, but slept towards
morning, and was resolved to go through with it. Stay--you must write
here while we know what we are about; this can't be left half done.'
The blow was known to all that sad wedding party as, instead of making
a joyous procession to the great door, they found their way through
the cloister to the house. The crisis that Felix had been led to
expect would steal on him by slow degrees, and with full warning, had
come suddenly on, accompanied with acute inflammation, producing pain
so terrible to witness that the great strong Fulbert came downstairs
sobbing like a child at the sight, and Geraldine was taken by both
hands by Bernard and dragged away to the painting-room, with almost
angry orders not to come near that door. The poor boy held her tight
by her wrists, as if he feared she would disobey, reiterating, 'He
said--he said you mustn't come.' Fain would John Harewood have used
equally decisive measures with his wife; but neither he nor Dr. May
could prevail on her to relinquish her place as foremost in the
attempts at alleviation.
No one could be allowed to come even to the door who had not nerve to
endure the sight of severer anguish than most of them had ever deemed
possible. Clement and Angela were doing their utmost under Dr. May's
directions, but Mr. Audley found himself less needed there than by
poor Cherry, whom he let loose from Bernard's grip, and after sending
the boy for a cordial for her, gave them both a clearer explanation of
the state of the case than they had yet understood. At first she felt
it hard to have been in ignorance all this time, but when Mr. Audley
had helped them both to pray, she fastened upon the hope that the very
suddenness and violence of the attack proved that the evil would the
sooner be over and leave no ill effect.
A report was circulated that Dr. May had given some such hope, and
therewith that there was some respite in the paroxysms of suffering.
There was a little movement among the crushed and dismayed party who
had at first straggled up to the hall and drawing-room, and sat, or
stood about, as if a thunderbolt had descended among them.
Alda was the first to make any sort of move, impelled by the fear of
her husband's impatience, and recollecting the guests. Sir Robert
and his daughter-in-law were stiff and uncomfortable, wondering that
things should have been allowed to go so far, and wishing themselves
away. Alda looked about for her sisters, but could only find Robina,
who assisted in proposing that the strangers should come and eat. Sir
Robert, on this, uttered polite condolences, begging that his carriage
might be sent for, but consenting to come into the dining-room.
Where were the bridal pair? Poor young things, they were found in one
of the hall window seats, where they could catch sounds from the sick
room, all crushed up together, his arms round her, and her head, with
wreath and veil pushed aside, on his shoulder, as if she were passively
submitting to such support as he strove to afford.
'My dear children,' began Sir Robert, as they stood up startled, 'it
is indeed a mournful turn that this festive occasion has taken, but
I am relieved to hear that the patient is somewhat relieved, and you
will, as Lady Vanderkist suggests, assume your places at the table. Or
perhaps our bride will first change her dress, as it may be better to
hasten your departure.'
'I can't go away.'
But Sir Robert with his conventionalities, Mrs. Audley with her
proprieties, nay the Captain with his morbid horror of everything
painful, all came round, declaring that Charlie was bound to take
his bride away; they need not go far; they might wait where their
rooms were engaged, but go they must; and appeals were made to both
Vanderkists on the necessity.
There however quiet, gentle Stella became wild, nay almost frantic. She
broke away from her husband, whose 'You shall do exactly as you please'
was drowned in the authoritative commands of his grandfather. 'No!
No!' she cried,' I will not go! No one can take me, while my brother
is so ill,' and she burst into an irrepressible passion of weeping,
leaning against the tall post of balusters, and pushing Charlie away
when he would have taken her hand. 'No, no, don't, I don't want any
one. I won't go away from my brother,' and she flung her arm round the
post as if she fancied she would be forcibly dragged away, and not so
much as hearing, 'This is very amiable feeling,' from Sir Robert, or
if she did, it distracted her the more, while Charlie stood in utter
perplexity, for it was of no use to protest that he did not mean to
take her away, when it only on the one side made his grandfather order
him the more decidedly, and Stella cling the more desperately whenever
he tried to approach, scarcely restraining her screams as her agitation
became uncontrollable. 'No, no, let me alone, trouble only comes with
me--I want no one but my brother!'
A step on the stairs startled her into breathless silence. It was
Clement. 'Hush, Stella,' he said, sternly and shortly. 'Felix wants you
and Charlie.'
'He heard,' some one said reproachfully.
'Yes. Don't detain her,' he added, as Alda would have modified her
dishevelment by removing the wreath and veil. 'I don't know how long
this interval may last.'
Stella, instantly controlled by the home voice, and ashamed and grieved
at having disturbed her brother, made no resistance to Charlie's taking
her trembling hand as Clement preceded them to the room, all silent
now save for the constrained breathing which showed the interval to be
far from painless. The ashy face of suppressed suffering recalled to
Stella her watch by that same spot during the suspense about Theodore,
and she dropped on her knees, trying to hide her tears and stifle her
sobs in the bed-clothes. Felix after laying his hand on the poor little
head held it out to Charlie, and evidently commanding his voice with
great difficulty said, 'I did not think this would have come till you
had her safe away, Charlie.'
'I am very sorry,' was all the poor bridegroom could say.
'I am very sorry,' repeated Felix, his hand resting on her hair again,
'but as it can't be helped, I think it will come harder to her if she
is taken away just now. This can't go on long as it is now. Ask Dr.
May. And when you see--'
He paused from inability to achieve a steady tone, and Charlie
answered, 'I never meant to go. I'll stay till you are better, as long
as ever she likes, indeed I will, my sweet--' but again she seemed to
shiver away from him with a sort of repugnance, which Felix perceived.
More faintly he said, 'You'll be his happy gift, my child, I'm so glad
to leave you to--Oh! go now!'
The fingers grew rigid and seemed to push her away. Wilmet half lifted,
half thrust her into Charlie's arms. He almost carried her, pressing
her face against him that she might not catch a glimpse of those
spasms and uncontrollable writhings of anguish that were returning.
The door was shut, and the young creatures cowered in the gallery in
one another's arms, catching the sad sounds that neither patience nor
resolute will could prevent. Stella slid down on her knees, and Charlie
was fain to do the same, thankful that she let him hold her in his arm
instead of repelling him.
'There! it is all quiet. He must be better again,' he whispered
after a time, and this was confirmed by Angela coming to send out
a prescription of the doctor's. The chill look of her white dress
suggested to Charlie to say, 'You will be as cold as ice in that
whiteness, my Star. Suppose you took it off, while I go and tell Sir
Robert that nothing shall move us till he is all right again. You
couldn't think me such a brute.'
Poor little Stella held up her tear-stained face for a kiss with a
vague sense of having been naughty and wanting forgiveness.
'You'll come back to me when you have dressed! I'll come and wait up
here again.'
'Do. I'll be quick. They can't send us away, can they?'
'I'll see them shot first,' then repenting the schoolboy defiance of
the words: 'No, Stella, I'm your husband, you know, and can guard you.
I had no intention of going, not a bit. Only they can't see when one is
a man, and they frightened you with the noise, poor little thing! If I
tell them he wishes it, no one can say a word. Don't be long.'
He nearly walked over a pair sitting on the stairs, too dejected to
heed anything, namely, Lance and Gertrude, drawn together by the fellow
feeling of being both too unhappy to speak or be spoken to, yet finding
a sort of companionship in wretchedness as they listened and caught
fragmentary tidings from above.
Charlie showed his manhood in quiet self-assertion. He told his
grandfather that it would not be right to take his wife away, and that
her brother wished them to stay; and though this was viewed as very
ill-judged, there was no gainsaying it, especially as his uncle had
come down decidedly of the same opinion.
Geraldine had likewise descended. The sanguine view she had contrived
to take up had given her strength to take up her necessary part as
mistress of the house making farewells and excuses. Marilda had, she
found, swept off all the children to the Harewoods' house, including
Gerald, who had allowed Ferdinand to carry him away, and in the present
state of things she could only be thankful he was beyond hearing and
questioning.
As the hours passed, and winter twilight gave way to early night, there
was something of a lull. The alleviations had not been entirely without
effect, and Dr. May felt obliged to go home, promising that he or his
son, or both, would come early on the morrow. When Felix understood
this, he asked whether Gertrude were still in the house, and hearing
that she was, begged for her presence for a moment.
'Most certainly,' said her father. 'Where is she?'
'She has been sitting on the stairs all day with Lance,' Angela
answered.
'With Lance?' Felix nearly smiled.
Dark as were the stairs, there they still were. Lance had executed
numerous errands, and had made Gertrude swallow some tea, but they had
not spoken ten words to one another. There Dr. May found his daughter,
and, with a word or two of warning and preparation, led her in. She
could not see much, for the light was shielded from the face, and only
threw up the shadow of the cross and the angel's hovering wings on the
ceiling above. The hand that lay on the sheet, curved, but not with
repose, closed on hers with a 'krampfhaft' pressure. 'You have been
comforting Lance,' said Felix. 'Thank you.'
'I couldn't,' she faltered, more overcome by voice than look, it was so
thin and weak.
'You prayed! You will pray! "Each on his cross still let us hang
awhile." Pray that I may not let go. "Suffer us not at our last hour,"'
his lips moved on--'Pray that for me.'
'Indeed! indeed I will!'
'Thank you; it will be your greatest kindness. And one day remember
that wish--that one wish. I wanted to wish you good-bye. God bless you.
Kiss me once, my sister Gertrude.'
She could not have staid a moment longer than to give and receive that
kiss. She almost fled into the room where her wraps were, and there
cried as if her heart would break, feeling scarcely able to bear it
when Robina came to see whether she had warm things enough.
But Gertrude had a twelve miles' drive with her father, and in it
she experienced as never before, the depths of his tenderness and
delicacy of his sympathy, and he found what were his once wilful petted
child's yearnings towards that lofty noble character just out of
reach, yearnings by his own forbearance just not stirred into active
conscious love, such as would have left her heart entirely widowed. For
in reply to the questions she scarce durst utter, the Doctor declared
plainly that his own hope was small, though there still remained the
possibility of a turn for the better, and Tom's more modern science
might have further resources.
This was what he had left with the family, and most of them turned 'not
hopeless' into hopeful, more especially as the most distressing form of
suffering had not recurred, though even now Felix begged that Cherry
might not see him, and feebly tried to send Wilmet home, but nothing
would induce her to leave him. Her whole self seemed bound up in the
single thought of ministering to him, and she was almost incapable of
attending to remonstrance from husband or doctor on the special risks
in her case, as if her strong will had mastered her very understanding,
and they feared that to insist might do her more harm than to let her
have her way. Clement kept equally close at hand, resolved that she
should never be alone with the patient to bear the first brunt of those
appalling attacks of suffering, and Angela was never further off than
the next room, with the door open.
Those downstairs achieved a conventional cheerfulness. Stella was there
in her ordinary black dress, and it was not easy to realize that she
was Mrs. Audley, while Charley hung over her, petting her, though very
anxious to be useful.
The chief use to which Geraldine wanted to put him or any one else,
was to entertain Adrian, who looked as if he thought the illness of
the master of the house a special injury and act of inhospitality to
himself, and was, besides, much disposed to be rude to Ferdinand.
'Can't you take him into the long room and play billiards?' she asked
Bernard.
'You'd hear the balls up in Felix's room. I never saw such a selfish
brute.'
Bernard had found his Helot at last. 'Best way would be to get Fulbert
to take him somewhere to smoke. I don't suppose he'll go for me.'
The somewhere was Sibby's sitting-room, and when Sir Adrian was carried
off, Alda, Geraldine, Ferdinand, and Marilda had rather a comfortable
talk over old St Oswald's Buildings days, in which Mr. Audley presently
joined them.
The calm lasted, so that every one except the three actual nurses
went to bed peacefully; but before the morning broke there was worse
distress than ever. The worst attacks there had been at all set in,
lasting longer, and with far less power of mitigation from the remedial
measures, which seemed to be losing more effect every time, till the
watchers scarcely durst wish to see the sufferer begin to revive only
to undergo fresh torture.
That terrible morning broke Wilmet down. She had gone through all with
unremitting energy and unflinching courage, but when Professor May had
arrived, and brought some new ansthetic, so that there was some relief
and the strain slackened, she just crept into the next room with
Angela and fainted away, only reviving to swoon again as soon as she
tried to move.
The doctors were unanimous in sending her away, even while scarcely
yet conscious, to her own house, and she was too faint to make any
resistance or remonstrance. About an hour later, Ferdinand and Marilda,
who were waiting in the billiard-room for the report of Professor May's
opinion, were auditors of the following conversation, evidently the end
of something that had been going on all the way from Major Harewood's
house:
'Adrian! it is absolute cruelty! Why cannot you go alone, and send home
the children?'
'Oh I daresay, and leave you to sentiment with that nigger fellow.'
'You need not have insulted me;' and her silk rustled upstairs, his
steps following.
Marilda's eyes flashed and gave utterance to a fierce whisper. 'The
cowardly ruffian! Can't you horsewhip him?' clenching her fist as she
spoke.
But Ferdinand's dark face had indeed reddened, and his nostrils
quivered, though not at the personal offence, as he muttered under his
breath: 'To shoot him were the only cure for her! God forgive me for
the thought, but to think of any woman in such hands, and to be the
person most entirely unable to defend her!'
'I forgot! Of course you could only make it worse, but poor dear
Alda!--It drives one out of one's senses;' and tears of anger were in
her eyes.
'It stirs the devil within, and makes me wish I had never forgiven
him,' said Ferdinand between his teeth.
'You need not forgive him this! I don't.'
After a few moments' pause Fernan said, 'The only service I can do her
is to go away. Would that make him consent to her remaining?'
'Oh! we can't spare you. What shall I do with Gerald without you or
Mary Vanderkist? He is always whining for Cherry!'
'Of course I can't bear to be away, but if I excite this idiotical
jealousy, what can I do but take myself off? I'll go to London, and you
can telegraph every hour. Go up and tell Alda--Lady Vanderkist, I mean.
Casually ask what I can do for her.'
'That would stir him up again. And I don't think it would be of any
use. He doesn't want to stay here, and means spite.'
'Then she could insist on staying.'
'She would be afraid. You see when people have used one another as they
used you, it can't help rankling.'
'I ought not to have come here, but of course I thought the whole thing
as utterly gone by with them as with myself.'
Marilda looked up with a curious expression of blushing gladness that
made him exclaim,' How like you are to what you were when first I saw
you!'
She blushed still more.
'That time!' he said, musing. 'Did you ever think I used you wrongly?'
he suddenly added.
'I never did. I knew the difference between myself and Alda.'
'Nay, let me tell you, I never should have seen how beautiful she was,
unless--I suppose it wasn't true, now--'
'What wasn't true?'
'That you and Felix--'
'Felix! No indeed! He is far too independent and disinterested. Who
could have told you? You won't say? Not Edgar?'
'No. It was that poor lady herself.'
'Well,' said Marilda, infinitely shocked, 'I do call that wicked!' and
as her mind glanced back to all the pain of those two years, she added,
'What did she say? Don't mind telling me. I'm old enough now.'
'Are you?' he said, with a quick glance of his dark eyes that made her
glow again, and he continued: 'She gave me to understand that there was
an old inclination between you and him, and that your father had such
a regard for him as to be likely to yield if nothing more advantageous
came in his way.'
'If you had only asked poor Edgar! Well! perhaps she flattered herself
it was so! Yet, what could have put it into her head.'
'You know the rest, and how I was dazzled both by her beauty and the
charm of her connection, but for years past the sense of my huge
mistake has been upon me; yet till Felix came into possession here, I
still thought it was his punctilious feeling alone that kept you apart.'
'As if he had ever cared for me except in a cousinly, brotherly sort of
way! Did you think that was what made me hush up poor Edgar's affair,
though indeed I never felt so thankful to any one as to you for having
saved that secret.'
'Do you know what your generosity made me wish, though I never durst
speak it before? That you would forget all these mistakes and forgive
me, and come back to what things were before that misunderstanding.'
'Oh!' cried Marilda, with a long breath, 'you can't really mean it.'
'What else should I mean? If you will only forgive and overlook.'
'Don't talk in that way,' cried Marilda. 'Why I never cared for anyone
else, and always have--but'--breaking off in the midst--'hark, there
are wheels. That poor thing will be gone.'
'You had better go up and tell her.'
'Not this--I can't. It would only make him more savage; besides at
such a time.'
'True. No--only let them know I'll go. I'm gone. No, I can't leave the
place till I've heard his opinion--but I'll go over to Ewmouth. I'll
see you again and settle--only don't let her be dragged away.'
Marilda was obliged to go up, with the vaguest ideas as to what to
say, in a case that even she felt to be delicate, but on coming to the
scene of action, she found that the words she had overheard amounted
to no more than an ebullition of temper. Sir Adrian did not wish to
leave behind him a character for brutality, and since he could plead
an appointment and escape from the house of mourning, he could endure
leaving his wife to it; and an excuse for yielding was afforded by the
maid who, coming up with the two little girls, brought word that Mrs.
Harewood was asking for my Lady.
So Mary and Sophy were sent back to Ironbeam, their father went to meet
his pheasants, and their mother hurried back to her twin, all that
old tenderness reviving instinctively so as to render the sisterly
contact the greatest comfort then possible to either. Ferdinand had
taken care to inform the departing Sir Adrian that he was about to
leave Vale Leston, and was in fact only waiting for the opinion of the
London doctor who had seen Felix before, and for whom, with Tom May's
sanction, he had telegraphed.
Gratitude to him for having devised this, and trust to further advice
buoyed Cherry up, as she watched in the painting-room, giving orders,
answering inquiries, and never swerving from hope and that intense
prayer for her brother's restoration, which no one could discourage,
nor even qualify in vehemence. Why should not a life so valuable be
given back to her entreaties and those of many another suppliant? Yet
Mr. Audley, going backwards and forwards between her and the patient,
could not but be struck by observing that Felix himself rather allowed
than demanded the supplications for recovery, and though extremity of
pain often wrung from him cries for relief and sobs for mercy, yet
in the calmer periods these became sighs for the power of enduring
his cross better, and of not loosening his hold on his Saviour, and
sometimes even the moan had more of praise than of plaint. He was still
quite sensible, but the intervals between the paroxysms were so far
from painless that he never showed any wish to see or speak to any but
those immediately about him, namely, Clement and Angela, with Lance and
Robina as supplementary helpers, and Mr. Audley, when he could bear it.
Tom May waited all day, doing his best till his London friend came, and
could do nothing but confirm his treatment, and agree that the shadow
of hope was not yet absolutely impossible, though human means were
unavailing. However, between exhaustion and a fresh form of anodyne, a
sort of stupor was induced towards the evening, and this was again a
relief, at least to those who durst call it sleep.
Ferdinand profited by it to tear himself away according to his promise,
and Marilda betook herself and her much aggrieved maid to the Rood,
carrying the children with her, to spend the day, though there was
no room to lodge them at night; poor Gerald submitting passively, as
the fresh misfortune of losing both Fernan and Mary Vanderkist fell
on him. Marilda's quarters were left to Sister Constance, who arrived
at the appointed time, to find herself less needed at the Priory than
the cottage, where the greeting she received from the sorrowful and
anxious Lady Vanderkist was no small contrast to the manner in which
Alda Underwood had requited her services.
The beneficent torpor lasted far into the night, and in some way or
other all, save Clement and Angela, consented to take a certain amount
of rest. Even Angela, though refusing to lie down, must have dozed in
her chair by the fire, for as her perception gradually returned to her,
she heard broken tones from Felix, and saw Clement standing over him.
The first words that fully met her ear were the conclusion of what had
gone before. 'There! stained, weak, failing, erring, more than I can
say--more than I can recollect--I can only trust all to the washing in
my Saviour's precious blood. Let me hear His message.'
The deep, thankful intensity of the gaze, looking far beyond Clement
standing over him and pronouncing the Absolution, impressed Angela with
strange awe.
Full of the past, all shuddering twilight,
Man waits his hour with upward eye,
The golden keys in love are brought,
That he may hold by them and die.
It was a face of love, eagerness, absorption, that no one could ever
forget, as the voice of pardon was listened to with folded hands.
She dared not move till there was again need of her assistance. When
she could utter a word to Clement, it was: 'Is not he better?' but
Clement shook his head. Still the last doctor's advice had enabled the
worst part of the suffering to be so far kept in abeyance, that before
that morning's dawn the Feast could be held in the sick chamber, among
those whom Clement ventured to call together for it. The greater calm
much encouraged Cherry, and she went away cheered by the face that
could still give her a smile, declaring that Felix did not look worse
than when he was bloodless after the accident.
Both she and Bernard hugged their hope. Even when, before the day was
out, all the family knew of Tom May's verdict that those symptoms had
set in which extinguished all chance of recovery without a miracle;
still those two upheld one another in shutting their eyes to the
inference, and continued to rejoice in the comparative relief from the
heartrending spasms of the previous days, while others knew but too
well that this was only the token that the struggle of the constitution
was over.
Other forms of suffering had set in, but attention was sometimes
free. Ferdinand and Marilda, though ashamed of having fallen into
their engagement at such a time, could not help believing that to him
at least it would give pleasure, and it had been breathed into Mr.
Audley's ear. In one of these pauses of tranquillity Felix was told of
it, and said with a smile, 'That is well. God is giving me every wish
of my heart--"Grant thee thy heart's desire--"'
For his words had a tendency to flow into psalms and prayers, which
the others took up and finished; but he was generally quite sensible,
though sometimes restless and sometimes torpid. He asked for Wilmet,
and hearing she had gone home, and that Alda was with her, seemed
satisfied. He murmured something about Sir Adrian, and on learning
his departure, said, 'I meant to have spoken to him--I don't suppose
I could--some one tell him--he must be kind to Alda and the little
ones--poor Alda!'
The day passed in this manner, and when at its close the familiar
sounds indicated shutting up for the night, he showed an expectation of
good nights. Geraldine came, and was charmed with the calmed, soothed
countenance; she kissed him and told him he was better, and would
sleep. He answered, 'Thank God, yes; thank God for you, my Chrie.'
Clement was afraid to let her agitate herself or him, and led her away
to her own door, appealing to him all the way whether the worst were
not over. He trusted that it was.
To Stella Felix gave only a blessing and good-night, but he thanked
Charlie again for letting her remain, and to Bernard he said what the
lad at the moment thought wandering, 'You'll swim for yourself now your
plank is gone.'
There were no such positive farewells to those immediately about him.
He depended most for aid both bodily and spiritual on Clement, but he
took the most notice of Angela, often thanking her, with some tender
name, even while he seemed continually drifting further and further out
of reach.
Life is strongly bound into a frame scarcely at the midway of age,
and the change came so slowly that Cherry had begun to say that when
the Epiphany was past, the day of his father's death, she was sure
the corner would be turned. He was very weak, but he had been as weak
before.
Weak? Yes. The mind was failing now, not the soul. The ears still
opened to prayer, the lips joined in it, the speech was of another
world. "The hours of the cross--when will it be over?" Or the
wedding might guide the thought to "the Bride prepared." "The white
array"--"the diamonds--the jewels He will make up--the emerald rainbow
round about the Throne."
Falterings very feeble ensued, as if he were talking to his father:
'Indeed I tried. I think they are all coming. Father, may I come now?
Isn't it done?'
That was the last word they caught distinctly, except fragments of
prayer, before the long hour when he lay on Clement's breast, each
long labouring breath heaving up as though the last. Lance had fetched
Cherry, telling her Felix was going. He had had to change the word to
dying, actually dying, before she could understand its force. Then she
stood, gripping his arm, at the foot of the bed, while nothing was
heard but those gasps, and the continued prayer of Mr. Audley, until
the moment came when he bade the Christian soul depart into the hands
of the Father of Spirits.
That was just as the winter night was darkening on the Saturday
evening.
CHAPTER XLVIII.
SHATTERED PILLARS.
'The heart which like a staff was one,
For mine to lean and rest upon,
The strongest on the longest day,
With steadfast love, is caught away,
And yet my days go on, go on.'
E. Barrett Browning.
In the darkness before the winter dawn, William slowly put the little
skiff across the river, and went up to the Priory, where only one
or two upper windows showed a pale light behind the blinds. All was
intensely still, as the garden-door yielded to his hand, and he crossed
the dark hall, then mounted the stairs, which creaked under his tread,
and, pausing in the gallery, seemed drawn irresistibly to the door of
the room which had been the centre of all their thoughts and cares.
His cautious touch of the lock was responded to from within. There was
enough light in the room to show the carved Angel, and beneath it the
silent face that seemed to be watching in hope for the trumpet.
Not much less white and set was Clement's face as, laying a cold set
of fingers on William's arm, he drew him into his own room where they
stood for some minutes, neither knowing how to speak, till the church
clock striking broke the silence, and Will said:
'Clement, I have taken upon me to silence the knell--on Wilmet's
account. John would not let you hear how alarmed we were last night,
thinking you had gone through enough, but they say such a shock as
that bell would be, might do all the harm imaginable. Sister Constance
thinks she will pull through, but she has been fancying Felix was
calling her, and poor John was quite overpowered.'
'Our other pillar!' said Clement, dreamily.
'She is better,' repeated Will. 'Sister Constance would not let her
give way--told her not to fancy. She only wanted to prevent that sound.'
'Right,' murmured Clement in the same tone.
'And I will take the service.'
'Thank you, I am coming, but I don't know whether I have voice.'
'You ought to be in bed. Have you had any sleep?' For Clement had never
attempted to rest from that Wednesday morning to Saturday night.
'I don't know,' he answered, passing his hand over his face. 'I've
been a great many hours in bed, but there's no getting away from the
sense for a moment,' said he, thawing under Will's sympathy, shown
more in gesture than word. 'I don't seem able to care at this moment
even for poor Wilmet and John. Everything seems swallowed up in this
one. I've known these six months it was coming, and discussed it with
himself, yet it comes to me as stupendous and appalling as if I had
never thought of it before. The one that there was no doing, no living
without! There seems no standing up against it.'
'You have stood more bravely than any, and you will.'
'I must,' said Clement. 'Of course it is faithless selfishness, and
one cannot but rejoice that all that torture is over, and rest begun,
but consternation and helplessness will come foremost, without him,
brother, father, everything for all these eighteen years. Poor Cherry!
what is to become of her!'
'How is she?'
'There it is! I don't know. I staid to help Sibby, and by that time I
was so done up, that it seems a perfect blank. I must have frightened
Sibby, for I remember her scared eyes, and then I fancy Fulbert and
Lance were dosing me with soup, or wine, or something, and I went to
bed; but what they said about any one, I can't recollect. I'll ask
Lance.'
Lance sat up in bed, after a sleep he had fallen into towards the
morning. Poor Cherry! he said, he had led her back to her room
perfectly passive, and put her in her chair, but she seemed turned to
stone. Mr. Audley had come and taken her hand, but it lay passively;
she did not seem to hear his words, and her eyes had a stony mechanical
glare like paralysis. The suddenness was practically as great to her as
if Felix had been drowned at once. Mr. Audley had advised them to give
her time to recover from her stunned condition, and she had been left
to Stella, who had last reported that her stupefaction had passed into
heavy slumber as soon as her head was on the pillow.
Robina had been entirely taken up with Angela, whose fatigue was almost
as great as Clement's, and who had besides caught a bad cold and
toothache on the wedding-day. Her prostration had taken the form of
violent weeping, which Lance had heard half the night, and now, though
all was quiet, the brothers durst not run the risk of waking her.
Indeed, when Mr. Page looked in with a somewhat more cheery account of
Mrs. Harewood, he advised that no attempt should be made to disturb
either sister, but that, in especial, Geraldine's room should be
darkened, and she should be allowed to lie and doze, without being
roused, under peril of mischief to brain or nerves.
As to Angela, she awoke soon enough, and then nothing would keep her
from getting up and wandering about in restless misery and much bodily
discomfort, almost engrossing Robina, while Stella guarded Cherry.
Very thankful were all for the presence and aid of that little bride,
whose names, the gift of her dying father, had never fitted her better,
for she was the household star, the happy gift through those mournful
hours. The loss to her was as of a parent, and no father could have
been more beloved than her "Brother," but the change in her life had
made it just not the utter desolation it was to the home sisters, and
the strength of the new bond, and the soothing bliss of her husband's
caresses, lifted her up enough to make her sympathy a support. She had
never been a childish girl, and the last remnant of childishness seemed
to have passed away in that struggle on the stairs. Her brightness had
always been pensive and subdued, and in the time of distress there was
a kind of lamp-light lustre in her looks, words, and ways that relieved
dejection wherever she went, while either her powers were greatly
developed or only had full scope when she and Robina had to share all
the feminine cares of the stricken family.
That leaden state of Geraldine's continued the next morning, though
she rang her bell mechanically for Sibby at her usual hour, came down,
poured out breakfast, and ordered dinner as usual, then returned to
her painting-room. If addressed, she gave a vacant look and a brief
matter-of-fact reply, and volunteered nothing, nor attempted any
employment. She seemed neither to care nor comprehend when told that
Wilmet had had a quiet night, sat mazed and unhearing when Clement
read, Angela roamed in and out like an unquiet spirit, as her brothers
and sisters consulted in her presence, all feeling what it was to see
her for the first time devoid of her own peculiar comforter.
Stella watched over her incessantly, and sat writing letters in the
painting-room. Poor little bride--what letters they were to bear the
date of her eighteenth birthday and her first Stella Eudora Audley's!
About one o'clock, however, there was a shuffling sound of feet, a
rattling of the lock, and little Gerald came breathlessly stumbling
into the room, and in a moment was clasping his arms round Geraldine,
'Chrie, Chrie! you aren't gone too. Keep me, keep me!'
'My Gerald, my boy, my own!' He was on her lap, in her arms, and they
were kissing each other with passionate fervour. 'Oh! Chrie, my back
does ache so. I came all the way and up the stairs. Oh! my back.'
'My dear little man! There,' and Stella helped to place him on his
couch, where she hung over him, the dumb spell broken by force of the
little hands that clutched her fast.
'Don't let them have me again.'
'No, no, never, never,' cried Cherry, 'you are mine! my own all that is
dearest, my boy, his boy.'
'Oh! please don't cry, Chrie, please,' and he stroked her face, while
Stella was only too glad to see the tears. 'My back is better now, and
I don't care, if you won't go away like my Daddy.'
'Not now, my child, don't be afraid.'
Then in an undertone 'Is he?' and at her look and gesture, he again
clung to her, burying his face on her neck, 'O Chrie, Chrie, why do
people die? I wish it had been Kester.'
'O hush, Gerry,' and just then manly steps came along the gallery,
causing the child almost to choke her in his grasp, as trembling all
over, he implored her not to let him be taken away.
'Is Gerald here?' asked Clement, opening the door, 'ah! yes, John, here
he is!'
'No, no one is going to take you! Oh! Clem! John, is this a fit! my
darling! Speak to him.'
'My dear,' said John, 'no one wants to take you away, I am only
thankful you are here! Don't be afraid.'
The grasp, which had for a moment had something convulsive in it,
slackened, but the poor child panted out 'Hold me! hold me, don't let
me go.'
'No indeed, Gerald,' said Clement in his sweet voice, as he smoothed
the tumbled hair, and as the boy did not recoil, took him on his strong
arm and knee, 'no one can take you from us. You are our child, Chrie's
and mine, the treasure trusted to us.'
Cherry looked up to her brother with an exquisite pathos of gratitude,
and the child lay back, long shudderings still heaving up through his
little frame, and drawing deep sobbing breaths, but his brown eyes
showing his exceeding repose and confidence in his tall uncle's arms,
and with Chrie's hand in his.
'I am most glad to have found him here,' said Major Harewood. 'Gerald,
dear boy, I fear you have been very miserable. Marilda undertook the
care of the children at the Rood, but she could not get on with them.
Was that why you came home, Gerald?'
'It was all so horrible when Mary and Sophy were gone,' said Gerald.
'I am afraid Kester and Edward have been very naughty,' said John.
'Gerald, what have they been doing to you?'
The child hid his face on his uncle's breast. Timid and nervous as
he was, he was precocious enough to be too honourable for personal
accusations, and Major Harewood respected him. 'No, my dear, I will not
vex you with questions. I am exceedingly grieved at the treatment you
have had in my house. I must go, for there is much alarm.'
'Not Wilmet?'
'O no, poor dear, she takes their voices for those of her own little
brothers, and asks them not to wake your father. Alda seems to have
carried her back to her old days, but she is really better this morning
and quite calm. I must hasten back.'
He was very pale and worn, but had a look of relief, as he wrung
Cherry's hand without trusting himself to another word. Clement
followed him to exchange a few more sentences on the blessing the
child's return had been in rousing Cherry, but he was thoroughly
angered and vexed at the usage his sons had evidently inflicted on
their guest.
Poor child, he would have been far better off taking his chance amid
all the home distress than dragged off to the tender mercies of his
natural enemies. Marilda had received him as a sort of prey of her
own, and resolved to win his heart while doing a real service by
undertaking the care of the children, but the three boys were all of
genera new to her. Kester openly defied her and led his little brother,
and she grated on Gerald just as she had once grated on his aunt. As
she had seized him officiously without asking counsel, she had not
been cautioned on the peculiar treatment he required, and Ferdinand
never thought of her not understanding it by sympathy like the aunts.
However, as long as the kind almost motherly Mary Vanderkist was there,
the child was tolerably happy, but when she was gone, and Fernan in his
voluntary exile, he had no protector, and matters became far worse when
Marilda had removed to the Rood, intending the children to spend the
days there with her.
The first day had disgusted Kester and Edward with her parlour and her
babyish games, and they refused to go thither again, or else rushed
home as soon as her bonbons failed. Gerald could not walk so far, and
no one remembered to take him, while Marilda, hurt at her ill success
with the ungrateful boys, absorbed in tidings from the Priory, and in
sending them on to her mother and Fernan, and provided with a very
different object of life from the adoption of Edgar's boy, was more
relieved than disappointed at their non-appearance. The cottage and
nursery were disorganized by the mother's illness, and the two boys
exercised unlimited tyranny over their victim. Kester, two years
older than Gerald, and with twice his strength, could inflict all the
cruelties by which the young male animal delights to test his power.
The little wretch had Harewood wit enough for the invention of horrid
bugbears, frightful to the nervous temperament he deemed cowardice.
Between these, and the torment of being pushed, pinched, drummed, and
hunted with ruthless violence, together with a mind confused as to
whether all he loved, Felix, Chrie, Lance and all, had not vanished
like his father, poor Gerald had come to such misery that, on being
told that cousin Marilda had sent for a great new Locomotive, named
Fiery Dragon, to carry him away right in the boiler, he could bear it
no longer. He had certified himself from the window that the Priory
at least still existed, had struggled down that giddy horror the
stairs (where indeed Kester had once already goaded him down with a
broomstick), and when once alone, awakening to his prairie resources,
had made his way to the road, on seeing no means of passing the river
to the garden, and had crept along, sitting down to rest, till seeing
a carter boy with his sleek horses on the road, he had coaxed him to
give him a ride on the broad back of one, and thus had arrived at the
garden gate, made his way in, again achieved the staircase, and found
his refuge at last in his Chrie's arms, not, however, till his system
had received shocks enough to throw him sadly back. He was stiff in
every limb, and wearied to excess, but slightly fevered, and haunted
with terrors none the less miserable because imaginary. Nothing soothed
him, but to have his aunt hanging over him caressing, talking, reading,
nay even playing with him with a lump like lead in her heart, but her
child's necessities preventing it from rising up to crush her.
Major Harewood might permit licence, but he was thoroughly master, and
presently he brought up his culprits, shame-faced and tear-stained
after their first castigation, and dictated their sobbing but sullen
apology. The benefit to them, and to all whom they might have bullied
in the future, might be great, but the scene was dreadful to the
sufferer, who shook from head to foot, and when bidden to shake hands,
held out his little white fingers with tremor that grieved more than
it surprised the Major after the confession he had extorted, of hair
pulled to make the scar bleed, of ambushes in dark corners, of the
stimulus of the gig whip to quicken the steps.
He sent Mr. Page to inspect the victim, who was pronounced to be on the
verge of nervous fever, so that Cherry and Lance had to devote their
whole selves to him for the next few days, watching even when he dozed,
since he would sometimes scream himself awake in a renewal of the real
or imaginary horrors.
Was it a burthen? It might seem one, but such anxiety was the best
distraction, the child's improvement the best earthly solace of which
the sick and laden heart was susceptible.
The unmarried woman seldom escapes a widowhood of the spirit There is
sure to be some one, parent, brother, sister, friend, more comfortable
to her than the day, with whom her life is so entwined that the wrench
of parting leaves a torn void never entirely healed or filled, and
this is above all the case when the separation is untimely, and the
desolation is where lifelong hopes and dependence have been gathered up.
Thus it was with Geraldine. Her brother had been the medium through
which earth had love, joy, or interest for her. He was gone, and after
her first annihilation, she mourned less externally than some of the
others, because she knew she should mourn for life.
She did not weep nor bewail herself, but when not engrossed by her
boy, she sat silent, inert, crushed. However she responded to all
kindness, sadly but gratefully, and Mr. Audley soon found that the
fittest way to cheer her was to lead her to the dear reminiscences of
her brother's past life, of which happily Gerald was pleased to hear.
He might not enter into all, but he would lie gazing with his soft dark
eyes, and sleepily listening, soothed by the low calm voices in which
the dear old days were called up, and Mr. Audley was told the details
of Felix's doings and sayings in the years of his absence. And out of
such memories seemed to rise upon the sister strength, serenity, and a
sense of unbroken love, as though Felix were still her chief comforter,
even as when he used to rock his baby. The sorrow was unappeasable, and
external words even of the highest comfort fell cold on her ear, though
she tried to accept them, but to recall the thoughts and promises
through her brother's value for them gave them life, and quickened her
into the endeavour to attend to all he would have wished to be done for
the others.
Angela, unwell with a heavy feverish cold and pain in the face, could
by no means be kept still, wandering about like a perturbed spirit,
trying all sorts of occupations, but never pursuing them for five
minutes together. When her Hepburn friends came to see her, she sent
down for answer a fierce impatient 'I can't,' which Robina of course
translated more civilly. The good ladies were greatly moved and full of
sympathy, eager to tell of the exceeding sorrow of the whole parish,
and in the midst, Angela, in her aimless changes of purpose, came into
the room. Miss Isabella's kind arms were held out, but she backed out
of them, and when after some more kind expressions the visitor added,
'certainly, whatever differences existed, we all feel that your dear
brother was truly one of the elect,' Angela startled her with a sort of
shriek--'Miss Isa, don't go on! I won't have it! You don't know what a
ten thousand times better Christian than any of us you are patronizing.
You and your--your--your (Robina was afraid she said cant) have gone
and set up a barrier between me and the very dearest of brothers. Oh!
my brother. Oh!'
She fled in a passion of tears, Miss Isabella looked inexpressibly
shocked, and Robina tried to plead ungovernable grief that knew not
what it uttered. The kind ladies excused readily, only begging to be
sent for in case her mind should turn towards them, a contingency
just now most unlikely; for of all names poor Angela seemed to loathe
none so much as Hepburn, and she absolutely gave way to a fretful fit
of scolding when Clement gratefully mentioned their consideration in
undertaking some of the parish Christmas business.
For several days Sister Constance had never ventured to leave Wilmet,
but on the last evening when it was possible to look on Felix's face,
Major Harewood released her from the bedside, and bade his brother
ferry her over to spend an hour at the Priory.
After a solemn interval spent in the infinite peace of the Oratory,
William conducted her to the painting-room. It was twilight, Geraldine
was sitting by the fire with little Gerald on her lap, murmuring some
story to him, and Robina was stamping a pile of black-edged letters,
while notes of the organ, Lance's chief solace, came ever and anon in
from the church. As the Sister advanced something long and black reared
itself out of a dark corner, and clasped her round the waist, crying
out, 'Sister Constance! Sister, take me! Why was not I always with you!
Oh! I must come.'
It was enough to startle any timid person, sobbed out as the words
were. 'Gently, Angel, gently,' said Cherry, and Robina was prepared
to unfasten her like a wild creature, but Sister Constance, tenderly
kissing the hot forehead, said, 'Softly, my poor child, we will see
about it.'
'Don't see about it!' cried Angela, in the childish phrase of
impatience. 'It is my only refuge! I'm not fit to be in the world.'
'Let go, Angela,' said Robina, 'you don't know what you are doing!'
'Promise! promise!' repeated Angela, only the more passionately.
'I have no power to promise,' said the voice, so soothing in its
authority. 'You know you have given up your claim.'
'Oh! I was misled! I was blind! I did not know! I was mad; but you'll
forgive--you will let me come.'
'Only our Mother Superior and the chaplain can judge whether you can
be taken back. Nothing can be done in this sudden way. We will talk it
over quietly by-and-by. Now, my dear, let me speak to your sisters.'
Subdued by her tone, Angela stood aside, and after the greeting, Robina
collected her letters and went away to her Willie.
Sister Constance was little changed since she had come in among the
desolate children eighteen years ago. That which had taken away her
youth and sunshine had been long previous, and there was little
noticeable alteration except that each year which carried her further
from the agitation of grief confirmed her habits, strengthened her
hope, and added to her serenity and sweetness. As she sat down, Angela
dropped on the floor, leaning against her black serge dress, while
her gentle stroking hand on the coils of hair must have been almost
magnetic, for it was long since the girl had spent so many minutes in
tranquillity, as while the Sister and Cherry talked over her head.
First as to Wilmet, who was rallying the forces of her sound health and
constitution. Throughout, Sister Constance said the presence of her
twin sister had done more good than anything else. When nothing was so
needed as quiet and sleep, Alda had lain down by her side and stroked
and fondled her, and she had forgotten all that had passed since the
two fair heads had last rested beside one another, laid the invincible
weight of sorrow on her, to the account of the earliest sorrow of
her life, and when disturbed by her boys' voices, called them by the
names of her brothers, and yet she had never failed in recognition of
her husband. She was now quite herself, only so weak that she shrank
from thought or speech, and merely rested in Alda's presence. Cherry
had hardly hitherto comprehended how nearly both their pillars of
the house had gone together, and she could now feel thankful, though
more for John's sake than with the sense that any loss could make
much difference to herself, and much more did she care to hear Sister
Constance express her admiration of the calm victorious beauty of the
brow she had first seen on that dark confused winter evening when the
task was just beginning which was at last laid down. She had been
struck by the identity of the countenance. The man of four-and-thirty
had lost none of the candour and purity of the boy; the lad of sixteen
had already much of the grave steadfast sweetness of the man. She
thought they would know him in the Resurrection by that look.
The talk came only too soon to an end. With the precision of a woman
living under discipline, the Sister watched the clock, and rose up five
minutes before it struck, saying that her time would be up by the time
she was put across the river. Geraldine kissed her in acquiescence, but
Angela pursued her into the gallery, and tried to drag her to her own
room, 'I must talk to you, I want to tell you how I came to send back
my medal!'
'My dear, I cannot stay. Major Harewood must be set free to go to his
dinner.'
'Only five seconds, to beg you to manage! I must confess to Father
Willoughby.'
'Angela, you know enough of us to know that it is not allowable to
linger over an appointed time.'
'Oh! I know I am undisciplined.'
'Submit to discipline, then.'
'I wanted to explain,' following her downstairs.
'Hush!' said the Sister, gravely signing towards the curtains that hung
over the archway leading to the long room and the oratory beyond. Awed
by this ruthless silencing, she could only follow spaniel-like to the
drawing-room, where William had told Sister Constance she would find
him, and he was standing over the fire talking to Robina.
Allowing them a moment for their farewells, Sister Constance put her
arm round Angela. 'Poor child,' she said, 'when I can, we will talk.
Meantime this is the best I can say to you: "Commune with your own
heart, and in your chamber, and be still."'
Poor Angel! The religion that had consisted partly in music, flowers,
and excitement, and the rest in mechanical party-spirit, had been
totally unreal and unpractical, though with a sound theology and
fitful aspirations for better things when she should have had her swing.
When religion such as she had made it proved wholly inadequate to
her need, her friend's influence led her to the central Verity where
alone rest could be found. Then having brought herself to the sense
of individual pardon through faith, she discarded all besides, hotly
revenging herself on what she took for impediments, and striving to
stir up that assurance of forgiveness which was all feeling by all
external means. The discovery of the inconsistency of her guides,
and the knowledge of Felix's condition had come upon her at the same
time, and the latter had blotted out everything else. During the
ensuing weeks everything was lost in the sight of her brother's fatal
suffering, all through her own ungovernable levity. The sting she had
smothered in the vague en masse repentance which made an unsorted
heap of her sins, and lavished hard names on it, now came forth with a
barb of poisoned acuteness. For those two months devoted attendance on
her brother had been her whole religion, but there was that about him
which always made the endeavour to please him no small training, how
much more when he was on the verge of the River.
He did not preach or argue, he was simply himself, and the constant
endeavour to ascertain his doings and understand his expression
revealed to her much of his mind, all the more perhaps because she
never spoke, she hardly thought, she only received impressions.
And above all, that upward look with which he met that last full
absolution, that expression of intense acceptance and gratitude
of sight rather than faith, had dwelt on her ever since, not
merely casting out the memory of the pain-wrung features, but even
overmastering the image of the grand monumental placidity which had
settled down on the countenance at rest from its labours.
That absolution! She had heard it before, perhaps too early, certainly
too much as a matter of course, for actions whose faultiness was
visible enough, but which involved no true contrition. So little had
it touched her innermost soul, or so little innermost was there to
be touched, that its familiarity had made her spurn it as an empty
insufficient delusion in her despair in the summer, and catch at
the notion which condemned its utterance by a mere man as vain and
presumptuous. Her careless touch had turned the Golden Key to lead, and
only when she saw it held to the faithful did the gold shine out once
more.
There was no pause to think till the mortal struggle was over, but then
came the revulsion, and the peace she had seen so real in her brother
brought her back to the wildest longing to experience the same, through
the same means, and yet the reluctance to turn to the ordinary helps
before her still made her hang back from her brother Clement, or Mr.
Fulmort. They would look, if not say, 'So here you are at last.' If
their principles were right, as Felix's acceptance proved, of course
it was their own fault that she had not been more good. They shared in
her intolerable loathing for whatever was around her, her madness to
be out of sight of everything and everybody, and wretched feeling of
impatience. The sight of Sister Constance suddenly gave this longing
an object. Her old love of St Faith's revived, and therewith the
desire to find a spiritual healer in Mr. Willoughby, the chaplain,
who was comparatively a stranger to her, though Mr. Audley had left
Cherry under his care, and he had of late become a good deal noted
as a director. This was what she wanted to say! Could she but have
talked to Sister Constance, and shown the peculiarity of her case, the
insufficiency of her guides, the really tragic nature of her troubles,
she must have obtained the object she had become set upon in these
few minutes, namely, leaving the dreariness of home by hurrying to St
Faith's and Mr. Willoughby, when Lance should return to his business on
Monday.
Cruel Sister, to have postponed such misery to John Harewood's dinner!
'Commune with your own heart.' A fine way of refusing confidence! Yet
Angela was nurse enough to know the need of punctuality in relieving
guard, and Sister Constance could not have been spared much longer.
Wilmet knew it was Alda's last evening, and must not be allowed to
dwell on the thought. For poor Alda durst not ask for a respite. She
must go away with her husband as soon as the funeral was over, for she
believed Ferdinand Travis was still at hand, and durst not inquire. She
was still conscious. Nay, most poignant grief of all was the sense that
the dark noble countenance was dearer to her than when she had raved
about its beauty, and that it could still make her heart throb wildly.
It was a humiliating, involuntary sin, the outcome of the voluntary sin
of past years, of those blind heartless manoeuvres to which she looked
back in amazement as she contrasted her actual life with that which she
had thrown away, while watching unconscious manifestations of devoted
conjugal affection, such as she had never before missed because she
had never conceived them. Avoidance was all that was possible to her.
Her little girls must be her refuge! Was not the man still single, and
could she help feeling a certain satisfaction in the thought?
Poor Alda! She was up in her sister's room that afternoon when Marilda
and Miss Martha Hepburn encountered one another on their daily visit of
inquiry in the cottage drawing-room, and Miss Martha had ventured on
congratulating Miss Underwood.
'Who told you?' bluntly exclaimed Marilda.
'I beg your pardon! Indeed--I thought--We heard it on good
authority--Shall we contradict it?'
'Say nothing about it! We particularly wish it not to be mentioned,'
almost growled the heiress, 'I would have given anything that it should
not have been known at such a time.'
Miss Martha was dismayed, and retreated amid showers of promises of
secrecy, but with the elation of having confirmed the fact.
Marilda exclaimed, 'How horrid! Who can have gossiped? Now, John, do me
a kindness! You tell Alda! I can't!'
'I am afraid I must ask the other half----'
'Can't you tell? No wonder. He is so much too good for me.'
'That's uncle Bill,' broke out the unsuspected Eddie, with his mouth
full of her chocolate creams. 'He's worth ever so much more than you.'
'I have a better guess,' said his father, unable to help laughing,
'Travis? I heartily congratulate you. Never was there a nobler fellow!'
'It ought not to have been now,' said Marilda, 'but we could not
help it. It had all been one long, long misunderstanding, and it came
right of itself as soon as we began to talk to one another. Fernan says
poor Edgar wished it, and dear Felix knew it, and sent us a blessing
through Mr. Audley, but we meant no one to know for a month, or till I
had gone home. It seems so unfeeling.'
'I do not think it will seem so here,' said John. 'You know Charlie's
proposal rose almost out of Stella's grief for Theodore,' and as
Marilda was trying to guess who had spread the report, he added, 'Never
mind. Of course we know such things are in the very air.'
'It is Alda that concerns me,' said she, her face on fire, 'I would not
have her hear it indirectly.'
So John, who had first known Alda and Fernan as the senior lovers,
while he was still in suspense, undertook the communication and made it
when Alda was pouring out his tea that evening. Her hand was steady,
but her lips drew together as she said, 'Riches to riches.'
'True, but hardly just.'
'No. She likes him,' and the emphasis was bitter. 'Can a woman be
fair towards the man who once loved her?' thought John, but restrained
his speech.
'How long has this been?' asked Alda, presently.
'I cannot tell. Quite recently, no doubt, but long enough to give
pleasure to your dear brother.'
'Felix knew?'
'So she says.'
He did not understand her look of pain as she thought of Felix's cry
of indignation on her light avowal of the insinuation which had parted
those two, securing the one for herself and casting the other over to
him, but her womanly instinct strove to hide the pang or excuse it with
a half truth.
'I can't help thinking of my husband's disappointment. He reckoned on
her as the benevolent genius of our family.'
'I have little faith in benevolent genii.'
'Not equal to three per cents, as he would say. You are wealthy enough
to be shocked at the worldliness of those who have to live up to a
position. However, there is no reason to regret it! They have more in
common than appears at first sight.'
And she soon escaped. Three lines of truly kind congratulation lay on
Marilda's toilette table the next morning. Alda attempted no more--hers
was a grief that would not brook the light.
So morning dawned on the day when the Church was to give the brothers
and sisters voice for their farewells to that beloved and honoured head
of their orphaned home.
So far as depended on them, and by Felix's own express written desire,
all was far plainer than in the case of their parents, when he had been
in bondage to Thomas Underwood's views of propriety. Now--so far from
the seventy-five yards of black cloth bedecking the church, it had not
lost one holly wreath, one ivy streamer: the scarlet and white flowers
were fresh, the star of Bethlehem in pale bright everlasting flowers
still stood prominent, and in letters of golden straw the Epiphany
promise:
'The sun shall no more be thy light by day,
Neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee,
But the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light,
And thy God thy glory.'
No pauper funeral there was simpler, for the same purple velvet pall
with the red cross stretching its arms over the coffin in protection
was used for the poorest; the plain oak only bore the name and date,
and the brothers and friends bedizened themselves with no foolish
gloomy streamers or scarfs, as they drew together to follow the
farm-labourers who bore what remained of Felix from the steps of the
hall door where, four years and a half before, he had spoken forth his
purpose to live there to the glory of God and the good of his neighbour.
So he passed from the home he had never coveted, though he had loved it
better than aught save the home beyond.
The Bishop of the diocese had desired to testify his esteem by
welcoming him to the Rest of those who die in the Lord, and Clement
was thus one of the eight brothers and sisters who followed first. The
nearest of all was tacitly allowed to be Geraldine, upon his arm, while
he led Gerald. Not only was the child his uncle's heir and head of the
name, but Cherry and Lance found that to see and know all was best for
him. Poor Edgar's wish that people could be sublimated away had been
in a measure fulfilled in his case as regarded his little son, and the
consequence had been a vague horror and mystery that had haunted him
till he was led to gaze at and kiss his uncle's calm white face, and
then, after long dreamy thought, he had said in a voice of comfort,
'Then Daddy was like that.' Kester was there, too, in his father's
hand, awed but sharply observant. And besides these, and the nearest
connections and friends, there was all the parish, farmers, tenants,
labourers and all! Scarcely a cottage but rang with the lament, 'We,
shall never have such another Squire;' almost every woman was sobbing
with the infectious agitation of that class; the big lads, whom he had
taught on many a Sunday and winter evening, were even more unrestrained
in their grief, and many a rugged old labourer echoed the elegy, 'Well
now I did reckon never to have seen the last of he, but the likes of
him was too good for we. I never had a beast out of the ordinar but it
was sure to go the first!'
Not only Vale Leston was there but almost all the gentry and
fellow-magistrates, Sir Vesey Hammond's white head conspicuously, also
a whole company of familiar Bexley faces. They had given no notice lest
the family should put themselves to inconvenience, but there they all
were, the Mayor, Mr. Bruce, Mr. Jones, Mr. Prothero, and many another
also come with old Mr. Harewood and Ernest Lamb, who, poor fellow,
looked as if the foundations of the earth had given way with him. The
late Rector had written his excuses on the score of health, but Doctor
Ryder was present, and Mr. Audley had been called out to speak to his
old colleague Mowbray Smith, who had come many miles to testify his
gratitude to 'the best friend and truest I ever met, though I was
such a fool as not to know it at the time.' Of course the Vicar of
St Matthew's had come early enough to join the family in the morning
Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and as Robina moved on in the confused maze
of sorrowful faces, she recognised the familiar head of Lord Ernest. It
was as if Felix had left such a mark on all who came in contact with
him, that none could abstain from testifying honour and gratitude, and
yet it had been a very simple life. As he had said himself, he had done
nothing but what he felt obliged to do. There was nothing however to
which he had set his hand that was not in a better state than when he
had taken it up.
So 'his works did follow him,' so had he 'served God in his
generation'--as happy a fate as man can have, and those who were older
than the bereaved brothers and sisters had learnt that however sad it
seems to be cut off in the prime of life, with schemes of good all
unfulfilled, yet it is like a general dying in the moment of victory,
with the cup of tedium, failure, disappointment, and decadence all
untasted.
It was a long procession that was met by the Bishop and his clergy,
with the present Rector of Bexley and Mr. Colman of Ewmouth, and not
only the Vale Leston choir, but many of those from St Oswald's. Well
might Felix thus be greeted. Very few were the Sundays, since his
father first had robed him in his little surplice and told him of
Samuel, that he had not sung his part, he had not even had any long
interval of broken voice, and had been retained during that time for
the sake of his influence. Like everything else, his musical talent had
been used primarily for the glory of his Maker.
What with the sweet sounds, the evergreen wreaths, the festal
colouring, and the flowery crosses and wreaths carried by so many,
there was more of grave joy than of grief and wailing apparent after
the service once began. Sorrow without hope it could not be, solemn as
it was when, as Felix himself had bidden, looking up to his Angel with
the trumpet, it was the awful Dies Irae that heralded his way to the
open grave beside his little Theodore, under the leafless willow-tree,
which recalled the effort that had cost them all so dear.
Yes, Felix had laid down his charge, and gone to rest from his labours,
and as 'Safe home' finally closed the service, did not Geraldine think
of her fleet of boats and long for safety in the haven, whither her
flag-ship had now attained? Yearningly she bent forward, aided by
Clement, for her last sight of the coffin and the dear name 'Felix
Chester Underwood,' never again to be a household call. She hung so
long over it that Clement would fain have drawn her back, and as she
resisted, was trying to find voice to bid her remember that 'he is not
here,' when little Gerald, struck perhaps by the words of the hymn, and
connecting it with the earth he had seen and heard dropping in, reached
out of Lance's arms, where he had been lifted, touched her and said,
'Was not that baptizing him again for the Resurrection of the dead?'
She heard, and her boy was her best comforter again, bringing back the
trust to see 'that countenance pure again,' and to look up instead of
down.
So her brothers led her away, but there was no quiet time yet The
Bishop had considerately refused to come to the house, but Clement must
of course go and speak to him, thank him, and bear the expression of
his warm feeling for the family and reverence and gratitude to the man
who had so changed his parish.
Geraldine had to go to the drawing-room with her sisters, Marilda, and
Gertrude May, whose right to be present all had felt. Her eyes were
dim, her colouring paled, she looked as if she had been weeping ever
since they had last met, and she only tried to avoid obtruding her
presence or her grief. Her father soon came for her. He took Cherry's
hand, saying, 'My dear, trust an old man. You can't feel it now, but
our jewels become dearer in the diadem, and when our hearts go after
them, there is rest.'
Cherry tried to smile thanks but was too sad to take home the comfort.
She wanted her jewel now!
Food must be eaten, for Marilda and the two married sisters were going
away, but before the move to depart, Clement said, 'There are so many
of us that we think all should hear about the property together before
there is any break-up.'
So Major Harewood, with a draft of the will in his hand, explained.
Land, house, furniture, everything at Vale Leston of course, descended
to Gerald Felix Underwood under the trusteeship of Clement, John
Harewood, and Ferdinand Travis. The personal guardianship was reserved
to Geraldine with 500 a year until the heir should be of age. If he
should die without children, the succession would of course go to
Clement, and after him it was entailed on the brothers, or their heirs
in due order. Besides this the estate was charged with 500 a year,
as an income for each of the sisters who might remain single. On her
marriage each would have 500 down, the annuity of the others remaining
untouched, unless one entered a sisterhood, when 50 per annum should
be paid for her. To Lancelot was left unreservedly the whole of the
acquisitions at Bexley, house, shares in the business, stock, and
Pursuivant. There was an annuity of 30 to Sybilla Macnamara, a legacy
to Martha, and to the old foreman, and that was all. John and Lancelot
were executors.
The first feeling was of surprise that Bernard was only mentioned as
last in the entail. Cherry and Lance both turned to him. 'It shall be
all the same, Bernard; he means us to do it.'
'No, he doesn't,' gruffly answered Bernard.
'Of course we can manage for you,' added Clement; 'as long as you work,
there can be no difficulty.'
No thanks, no reply, indeed, followed, and Sir Adrian bade Alda hasten
if she wished to take leave of her sister. Major Harewood would take
her across at once, and she would be called for at the cottage on
the way to the station. Wilmet was reported to have lain very still,
shedding a good many soft tears, but not seeming the worse.
Alda held Geraldine closer than she had ever done before, and
entreated, 'Write often, and let me know about you all. I wish we had
been more together.'
Marilda was going to London with her, Sir Adrian was still in ignorance
of the coming blow, and there was nothing in the farewell to Ferdinand
to make him expect it, so his scowl at his wife's hand-shake was on the
old score. Poor Alda, at least she had her children.
Their sweet Princess Fair Star! Yes, she must go! Captain Audley was
waiting to drive the young couple to meet the express. They were to
take a fortnight's quiet in the Isle of Wight, and then enter on their
new world. It was time Charlie should have his wife to himself after
all the patience, unselfishness, consideration, and helpfulness that
had sealed him as a true brother, and endeared him the more from the
contrast not only to Alda's husband but to his own father.
Clement had to be the parental brother to lead the bride to the
carriage. He kissed and blessed her in the porch, saying, 'Little one,
you have had a sad beginning, but I am glad you were still one with us.
We know you all the more.'
'We are glad,' said Stella. 'This is worth more than weeks of
happiness.'
'She is right,' said Charlie. 'We would not but have staid for worlds!
We ought always to be the better for it. It has made the world look so
different to us!'
'But that difference is not gloom,' said his uncle; and the 'Oh no' on
his lips, and the bright crystal tears in Stella's eyes were no more
gloomy than her diamonds when Felix was musing over them.
So the others turned back into the house that felt so large and
empty, and they so few. Clement tendered an arm to help Geraldine
upstairs. Somehow, long as it was since she had leant on Felix, this
action brought a great sense of change. Clement's aid was the careful
bending tenderness of a very tall man towards a small woman; Felix
had been more nearly on her level; and merry old boasts on this score
came piteously to the minds of both. The brother, who had borne up so
strongly through all these days of sorrow and suffering, and months of
pain and suspense, found his effort at cheering turn to a sob as he
said, 'Ah, Cherry, you must make the best of me. I will try to be all I
can, but never, never----'
'You are not your own self?' said Cherry, just then the braver. 'Have
not we two always hung together, Clem?'
'You are very good to say so,' he faltered.
'Good! when I just feel it,' and she pulled his arm round her. 'Dear
Clem, don't you remember the time when our pillars were away before,
and all you did for me then, when I was cross and ill? He is only gone
for a little time, you know, and he never did tell you and me to take
care of each other, because he knew it would come naturally. Dear, dear
Clem, if you weren't Clem already, should not I love you for having
been so much the nearest and most helpful to him all this time?'
'The joy of my life!' murmured Clement in a choked voice, most unlike
joy, as he leant against the door-post quite overcome.
'You'll tell me all in our long evenings. We will live with him a great
deal still, and keep him before the eyes of our dear little boy--our
charge.'
'Charge! Everything is a charge!' said Clement, wearily. 'How to act
or decide without that clear, cool, wise head! To fill his place is
impossible!' Then rousing himself, 'I beg your pardon, Cherry, I
thought I was going to do something to comfort you, instead of making a
fool of myself.'
'Making a fool of yourself makes you a great deal dearer and nicer than
if you set up for comforting,' said Cherry. 'You know as well as I do
that nobody can ever do that. Poor, dear old Clem, you are quite worn
out, and no wonder, everything has come harder on you than on any one
else. Sit down and rest;' and as she seated herself she tried to pull
him down on the sofa beside her, but he resisted. 'I wish I could,
Cherry,' he said wistfully, 'but I ought to go up to the Rood to thank
the mayor and all the rest.'
'Kind friends!' said Cherry; 'but can't Lance do it, when he goes back?'
'Less gracious; and I sent word by Lamb I was coming. There's no good
in shrinking!' said Clement, resolutely rearing himself up, but coming
back to kneel on one knee, take another embrace, and say, 'O Cherry, I
am so sorry for you, and you are so good to me!'
The humility touched her deeply. 'Not good,' she said; 'I want you, you
are my own home brother,' and he allowed his wearied head to repose for
a few moments on her shoulder as she threw her arm round him. 'Just
tell me,' she said, as he stirred again, 'does Mr. Fulmort stay?'
'Yes, over Sunday.'
'That is well. I thought so,'
'Why?'
'Because you never dare to give way but when he is at hand. Dear Clem,
I did not mean to vex you. Where should we have been if you had not
been brave and strong?'
'I can't say much for that now, Cherry,' he said, 'I must not stay. I
shall not be fit for what has still to be done.'
She heard him walk across to that untenanted room, and her love for
him was quickened. Trust in his highly principled kindness she had
always had, but to find him crushed, oppressed, overwhelmed, gave her a
fellow-feeling for him as she felt him leaning on her; and this was not
indeed consolation, but something not entirely removed from it.
His resolute, evenly-balanced manner, guarding jealously against
whatever could unnerve him, had however been kept up all along to all
the rest, as perhaps was needed by the exigencies of his situation, and
perhaps it helped to actuate Robina in the conversation she was holding
as she paced the cloister with William.
'Should you very much mind my not earning that last two hundred?'
'I? You speak as if I had ever asked you to earn anything.'
'For don't you think it seems my duty to stay and look after poor
Cherry? If Stella were left I should not mind, but no one can tell
whether Angel may not be worse than nobody; or she might yet go to St.
Faith's.'
'The best place for her.'
'So I cannot bear to leave Cherry alone with Clement and the child.
There will be Wilmet when she gets about again; but as long as her boys
are such little ruffians----'
'Not worse than we used to be to the little trebles.'
'The little trebles were not like Gerald, I should hope, and Cherry
must not have everything thrust on her at once--she who has been always
petted and made his darling. Clement will be substantially kind, but
he has no petting in him, and no mercy on his tools for parish work.
He will be attentive, but all in a grand grave way, not spontaneously,
because he can't help it, and she will pine. That she will do any way,
poor dear, but it ought not to be without a sister.'
'Precisely. I am very glad.' Which he sincerely was to see affection
triumph over prudence.
'So I think of writing to Lady de la Poer and telling her not to wait
for me. Indeed, I know who would suit her. I can go and wish them all
good-bye when Wilmet is better, but I must give notice; so of course I
told you first, and I suppose I must speak to Clement.'
'He will be very thankful. He is very anxious and unhappy about Cherry.'
'And the unhappier he is, the sterner.'
'You hardly do Clement justice,' said William, gravely. 'Think of the
knowledge he has silently borne these six months. Both as brother and
as priest, he has gone further down with Felix into the valley of the
shadow of death than any one else could do, and if the chill of it has
stiffened him, it may be that only so could he serve as a support. I
assure you, Robina, I watched and wondered all last long vacation. I
saw he was unhappy and uneasy about your brother, but only now that
I understand it all do I fully appreciate his self-control and energy
through it all.'
'Self-control and energy,' said Robina. 'Yes that's just what I mean.
Don't look at me so, Willie. He is a model clergyman, I know, but I
fancy that very perfection hinders him from being the brother poor
Cherry needs. There! we are not going, of all things in the world, to
quarrel about Clement.'
'Certainly not,' said Will, smiling, 'especially as this conviction of
yours leads you in the very direction I wish, and will cure itself.'
'I know him so little,' added Robina, in excuse for herself, as she
saw how she had wounded Will's enthusiastic admiration of the very
qualities in which he felt himself the most deficient. 'You know I have
never spent three months together at home since I was seven years old,
so it is full time I learnt home-life.'
'To be domesticated,' said Will; 'but look here--why should not I go in
for the curacy, and then----'
'That's the way I am to devote myself to Cherry, eh? No, Bill, we
must be all the more staunch. Mind, the question is not whether you
and I can be content in poverty, but whether we will be a drag on our
brothers, and you a less efficient clergyman. Recollect my father.'
'I only recollect worn-out Dons.'
'Dons minus brains! You always wanted to do it all, and now you have
your way. Two years more, and I really think we shall do!' (For Robina
kept the account of the investments.)
'You miser! At least I shall know you are safe here, and of that I am
heartily glad. I never could forgive the Repworth folk for being your
masters.'
'Very ungrateful!' said Robina. 'I don't know how to think of not going
back to my dear little girls, and their mother!'--and tears came to her
eyes, for she could not but feel that home had lost all its brightness
and much of its sweetness.
'I think,' said Bill, musingly, 'it is wonderful how, with such a set
of strong wills as you Underwoods have, you should have all preserved
such perfect union.'
'Have we such strong wills?'
'Do you ask a poor victim like me, whose only chance is in some slight
confusion on your part which your own Will may be? Look at Clement,
like a piece of iron when his mind is made up; look at Wilmet; look
at Angel; look at Lance. Why, his power of resistance had changed the
whole tone of us choir boys before he was thirteen. In fact, I believe
it is that strength of character that keeps you harmonious. You don't
worry about straws, or clash, or pother, but know when and to whom to
give way with a good grace.'
'We did,' sighed Robina. 'We could not help it then. Ah! here comes
Clement. I had better have it out with him at once.'
She was touched, perceiving the tokens of tears, and still more by his
gratitude when he learnt her intention. 'Thank you,' he warmly said. 'I
durst not ask it of you, but it is an immense relief to me on our dear
Cherry's account.'
'Have you been with her? How is she?'
'Braver and sweeter than I dared hope,' he said, his eyes filling
again. 'Surely the Communion of saints is beginning to bring her
refreshment and strength! She put me so much in mind of him--'
He passed on, for he was on his way to the Rood, but meant to calm
himself by a few moments in the Church. There, however, he was
surprised by a low sound of voices, and noiselessly following it up, he
beheld, unseen himself, Mr. Fulmort and Angela in the Lady Chapel, and
went on his way with a heart disburthened of one of its loads.
Yes. This had been the effect of Sister Constance's words: 'Commune
with your own heart.' In the hope, nay, purpose, of at least going
to Bexley with Lance on the Monday, and laying her case before Mr.
Willoughby, Angela had gone to her room to prepare her confession,
using the methods of self-examination taught her in old times, and in
a mood to enhance rather than slur over anything she detected. Behold,
as she tried herself by the questions so long laid aside, they assumed
new force and meaning! The once blunted probes had acquired a sharpness
they had never had before, and among her many discoveries was that her
extreme dislike to having recourse to the Vicar of St Matthew's was,
first, because it was Clement's desire, secondly, because, instead of
an interesting penitent with a tragic crime on her hands, she should
only come as the naughty girl he had known all her life; and thirdly,
not because of his mismanagement, but because he understood her all too
well, and had warned her of the very errors that had eaten into her
life. It was only pride and love of excitement that impelled her to
seek a fresh director; and it was the turning point of her life that
when the conviction dawned on her she did not turn her back on it, but
it so wrought with her as to take her to the Lady Chapel with her first
and most parental spiritual guide on that winter afternoon of mourning.
At the end of the long interview, as the young moon shone into the
twilight church, while Angela knelt on, humbled, softened, the turbid
waters of her spirit quelled, and a more peaceful sorrow than she had
ever known resting on her, there stole along the aisles the notes of--
'Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and say unto her,
That her warfare is accomplished,
That her iniquity is pardoned.'
It was like a welcome from the heavenly choir to the one sinner that
repenteth.
Of course it was Lance, after his duty by his fellow-mourners had been
done, and he had seen them off to Bexley. He had no one to pace the
cloister with, and the organ had been the chief solace and exponent of
his sorrows and his yearnings. Poor Lance, who must henceforth work for
himself instead of his brother, and turn out Pursuivants, for which
at present he only cared because any deterioration therein would be
treason to that Editor who had worked at them with loving conscientious
might. The whole bequest, so justly earned as all felt it to be, was
heartless and distasteful; he was disgusted to find himself a man of
substance, and not only his fellow-citizens, but Fulbert had distressed
him by congratulations. Fulbert had employed his time at Bexley in
falling in love with Lizzie Bruce, and had therefore kept close to her
father all this time, and finally driven him to the station in the
dog-cart; and it was rather an effort to Lance to listen amiably to
the raptures of prosperous love; above all, when he had just missed
the glance, hand-pressure and farewell, which however mournful and
indifferent this would have probably been, his heart and soul hungered
and thirsted after. He had fancied Dr. May and his daughter would stay
for luncheon, and had missed their departure by exhibiting little
Gerald to some of Edgar's old friends, and the loss of the one moment
he had anticipated with a throb of pleasure depressed him more than was
reasonable. And yet!--There was nothing for it but to try to soothe his
spirit with the harmonies that often seemed to him all he cared to live
for, and fortunately there was a musical pupil teacher always looking
about in the hope that Mr. Lancelot would want his services to blow for
him.
He played till the bell began for even-song, and, one after another,
an unusually full congregation began to drop in, including even two
of the Miss Hepburns. The service was shared between old Mr. Harewood
and Mr. Fulmort, only glad to relieve the three overwrought clergy
who had borne the brunt of this Epiphany tide. Clement's paleness and
depression were evident enough now, though still against his will.
'Angela, my dear,' he said, overtaking her in the hall, as she was
going upstairs, 'Wilmet has asked for you to come and help Sister
Constance in Alda's place. If you can fetch what you want at once, I
will put you over.'
'O, thank you!' she cried, flushing with colour at the unexpected
boon, as well as at the soft gentleness of his tone, which had of late
in their hours of nursing been apt to be quick, stern, and decisive
towards her, partly from his own repressed grief, partly from her habit
of repelling his advances.
'You had better let me,' said Lance, as she ran upstairs. 'You are
pretty well what Gerald calls used up.'
'Thank you, I wish to do this,' said Clement. 'O Lance, Dr. May and
his daughter asked especially after you, and told me to give you their
good-byes. And here,' lowering his voice, 'here is something I was
bidden to give you.'
Lance looked at the address, and carried it quickly upstairs. It was
one of Felix's neat envelopes with the crest and motto, and the address
to L.O. Underwood Esq., in the familiar writing, just such as those
which he had been wont to receive by hundreds. Within was a note with a
still fragrant spray of dried myrtle. The contents were:
August 20th, 1872.
MY DEAREST LANCEY BOY,
I do not want to make the business a burthen and a tie to you.
You have slaved enough at uncongenial and solitary drudgery for
my sake. I would not ask you to go on with it on any account.
I only beg you to wait one half year, and if by that time you
see no prospect of what would sweeten your labours, then do as
you judge best about disposing of it, and using the proceeds as
you please. I know you will provide against my poor Pur falling
into hands that might sully or pervert such testimony as it
is able to bear. For the rest, let it be as your judgment and
wishes guide you. But be patient and not discouraged. I have
ascertained that there will be no opposition from the father,
and I am mistaken if you do not succeed at last. I dare not
pray for any earthly boon, the sense of ignorance in asking
becomes so much deepened, but if I prayed for anything definite
it would be for that reward for you. As it is, I venture only
to ask that joys and blessings the highest and the sweetest
may be showered on you, my very dear brother; you who came to
help me in the time of greatest need, and whose whole life has
been a continual sacrifice of taste, enterprise, and ambition
for my sake. If Clement is my chief aid in this present pass,
it is you to whom I have owed the most through life, and I
cannot believe I shall ever become insensible to it. Perhaps
there will be no leave-taking. If not, take this as mine, and
believe, as I do, that we shall still join our voices with
Angels and Archangels, and all the company of Heaven; and look
on to the day when for the sake of the Lamb who was slain our
praise may be perfected. God bless you, my dear Lance, and
bring us both to meet in that everlasting Home where there is
no parting.
My love to dear old Mrs. Froggatt.
Give your Daisy this myrtle spray when she is yours, and with
it a brother's love from me.
Believe me ever
Your grateful and loving brother,
F.C. UNDERWOOD.
And while Lance stood in his room, drinking in with his eyes these
words of affection, Angela upon the moonlit river was craving Clement's
pardon for all her manifold transgressions against him.
'My dear,' he answered in a deep, sad, but sweet voice, 'I have quite
as many errors against you for which to reproach myself.'
Then as they landed on the narrow sward, he put his arm round her and
kissed her, and she found his tears raining on her face.
'My child, I have not done well by you,' he said, 'but I believe our
dear brother has turned your face right again, and I am thankful for
it. I think we shall begin a new life towards one another now. Good
night, and may His blessing be with you.'
CHAPTER XLIX.
THE RIVAL OWLS.
'Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
The moping owl doth to the moon complain
Of such as, wandering near her haunted tower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.'
Gray.
'Poor caterpillars, with our web broken, trying to gather it close
round us,' said Geraldine, with a sort of playful melancholy, when old
Squire Underwood's little table was produced, that so vast and sad a
tract of table-cloth might not divide the four who met at meals.
For Sister Constance and Mr. Fulmort had won back for Angela permission
to make a visit at St Faith's, certainly during Lent, and probably for
a longer time, that she might be regularly instructed in nursing. The
wild spirit craved for discipline as by a sort of instinct, and this
the orphaned family had never been able to supply, and her affections
had really been wounded enough to render nothing so welcome as shelter
and protection against herself. Fulbert's English visit soon came to
an end. Australia was his element, he was weary of the old country;
declared there was no room to move, and having been refused by Lizzie
Bruce, only wanted to get back as soon as he could. He looked Bernard
all over, and pronounced that there were too many of his sort out there
already, and he had rather help him to the University.
Bernard might in fact have been sent thither by subscription from the
family, but he surprised them all by showing Cherry his letter to
accept an under-clerkship in the house of Kedge and Underwood. It was
the consequence of a consultation with Mr. Travis on means of living,
though the lad had kept his own counsel till all was settled, and, he
added, 'I know I've been an idle dog, but I do mean to work now;' the
hitherto obstinately childish face showed manhood and self-reliance.
Felix had done quite right to knock all his supports away, and that
he knew it was shown by his acting at once instead of grumbling. The
fate of many a comrade had taught him to rejoice that his post was
not the prize of a competitive examination, and if his features and
bearing perilously reminded Spooner of his brother Edgar, the absence
of Edgar's tastes and talents exempted him from some of the same
temptations; nor did Miss Underwood show any symptoms of spoiling
him, only settling him in respectable lodgings, and making her house
no more than a friendly cousinly resort. His public school-life had
likewise given him a less dangerous set of acquaintance than Edgar's
had been, and there were wholesome opportunities of gratifying his
love of athletics. Lady Caergwent, too, on coming to town for the
Session, did not forget the solitary Vale Lestonite, but requited his
botanical exertions with friendly invitations for gay evenings and for
quiet Sundays, both of which did much to keep up what was good, both
outwardly and inwardly, in the youth.
'Kedge and Underwood' in all its branches was intensely elated at
its approaching union with the great Mr. Travis of Peter Brown and
Co., who was to take the style and arms of Underwood, well pleased to
appropriate the rood, and bear the name of those whom he had always
regarded with a true family love. The wedding was to be soon after
Easter, and the pair were then to go out and make arrangements for the
future welfare of the American property. Ferdinand had in jest asked
Gerald if he would go back, and the child had drawn back into his
aunt's arms, and answered, 'Not without Chrie.'
Wilmet had soon come downstairs again, but with the first visible signs
of departing youth, the first dimming of the freshness of complexion,
the first marring of the perfect oval contour of face, and with a
heart heavy as much for the living sister as for the dead brother, and
with the sad grieving which only mothers know for the babe whom she
had never seen. John was anxious to take her from home. The last old
Miss Oglandby had died suddenly during her recovery, and as all three
had left him half their portions, he was now a man of considerable
means, rather disproportioned to his cottage at Vale Leston. There
however he meant to remain, for the sake of attending to the estate,
but he hastened the preliminary business in order to proceed to that in
Buckinghamshire, so soon as Wilmet should be capable of the journey.
And he found the less to do, that never man had set his house in order
more thoroughly than Felix. Every paper and letter was sorted, and
so marked that there was not an instant's doubt whether it concerned
the estate or the business; every account was clearly brought down to
Christmas, and nothing left that could complicate or perplex: in many
cases, especially with regard to the farms and Blackstone Gulley, there
were notes of conversations, promises, or intentions. The executors had
little but formal work to do.
Wilmet was only once able to come to the Priory before she left home,
and she could hardly bear it, breaking down with showers of tears, as
if the grief were fresh; while Geraldine went about, calm, dry-eyed,
occupied, attending to Gerald, receiving callers, writing letters,
and consulting with her brothers, or even helping Lance with work for
the Pursuivant, but all as if the taste and flavour had gone out of
her life, and nothing could interest her, except Gerald and one other
employment.
She had copied her miniature of Felix for Stella, and the wistful
admiration of some of the others had made her volunteer to give one to
each of the family, and she spent many hours over the square open brow,
clear, fearless, stedfast, well-opened grey eyes and firm sweet mouth.
Wilmet, discovering what she was about, thought it so bad for her as to
call for a scolding to Clement and Robina for having permitted her to
undertake what must injure her eyes and feed her sorrow.
'No, don't stop me, Mettie,' said Cherry, 'I can do them now, perhaps
I could not later.'
'You need not do them. Photographs would do quite as well, and save
you.'
'I don't want to be saved. It is my great pleasure.'
'A morbid pleasure, I fear, my dear. At any rate I will not be the
cause of your hurting yourself. I will have a photograph.'
'Don't take it now at least,' implored Cherry as the white resolute
fingers closed on the original. 'Please! I cannot quite bear to let him
go. Besides,' with a smile of entreaty, 'I don't think you perceive.
It is not morbid. It does me good. It is like getting Clement to talk
in the evening. I go over those dear lines and curves, and every touch
brings back some look or word, so that it is living with him, and
learning him over again, and I get to giving thanks for him best that
way.'
'Well! I couldn't,' said Wilmet, not even able to look at the picture,
and cautioning Robina to interfere at the first symptom of damage to
eyes or spirits.
No one could be more tenderly cherished and watched over than
Geraldine. Clement's devotion was more genuine and less dutiful, more
loving and less compassionate than Robina had expected, for it had
that essential though involuntary quality of dependence. Never before
had his life given him the personal experience of affliction, and it
had softened him into gentleness. He had almost erected Cherry into
the place of Felix as well as her own, and leant on her for advice and
sympathy. Whatever approaches to relaxation or amusement he allowed
himself were to lure her to be pleased, and if she tried to be lured,
it was only because she thought he needed the relief.
Robina meantime was highly effective. She took Gerald's lessons, made
herself acceptable in cottages, worked hard at the schools, and got on
well with Clan Hepburn, who were unusually conformable, and thoroughly
considerate. Moreover, if Robin could not be the idol of the lads,
she took in hand the farmers' daughters. She allured them with a
German class, got up some Mission working parties--and great victory
of all--persuaded a selection not only to teach in the Sunday School
but to meet beforehand to have instruction for this purpose from the
Rector, without imputing to them the full extent of their ignorance.
Clement might well own that Lent that there were some things Robina did
better than anyone else.
He had a very youthful Curate at last, lodged at the farm, and he was
also assisted by Mr. Audley, who was still living with his brother,
frequently going up to his oculist, but devoting himself chiefly to the
care of his future district at East Ewmouth. He had accepted the offer
of the incumbency willingly, for between his private income and the
endowment he would be able to keep up such a staff of Curates as would
compensate for his defect of eyesight, and the Mission work of the
little post needed an experienced head more than good eyes.
After a few weeks it became known that on his refusal of the Bishopric
of Albertstown, the offer had been transferred to the Vicar of St.
Matthew's, Whittingtonia, probably at his suggestion, for he was very
anxious for its acceptance, and Clement listened to him with a divided
mind, for St Matthew's was still the young Rector's first love, and
he loved it a good deal more than either settlers or black fellows at
the antipodes. As he mournfully observed to Cherry, they would go and
get some married man who would not live at the clergy-house, and would
spoil the whole spirit of the place. It scarcely consoled him to be
reminded that Mr. Fulmort having founded and endowed the living, had
the patronage, and that being elected by the Synod in Australia, would
not have to leave the appointment to the Crown.
'Ah! the Vicar!' he proclaimed as he unlocked the post-bag, and
distributed the letters at the breakfast-table in the austere sunshine
of March.
Next came a sort of gasping grunt.
'Well?' said Cherry.
No answer, but to lay down the letter and begin cutting bread, but
in an absent way, going on as if instead of four he had the original
number to cut for.
The sisters saw that no more questions were to be asked in the
publicity of the breakfast-table, limited as it was. Self-contained
man! Any one of his brothers would have had it out in that gasp.
Robina, aware that the world consisted of herself and Gerald, would
have removed it quickly, but that Gerald prolonged the consumption of
his egg so unreasonably that his uncle had time to eat, drink, and look
over the letter again, open the others, and even grow impatient enough
to say, 'We can't wait for you all the morning, Gerald.' Then he said
Grace, gave an arm to Cherry, with 'Can you spare me a few minutes?'
and took her into the library.
'Does he go?'
'He says he hardly can, unless I will take St Matthew's.'
'You!'
'I can't understand it; but he says none of our old set are available.
Don't be frightened, Cherry, I am not going to do anything to overthrow
such comfort as is left you.'
'You can't mean that!'
'I do. This is not the kind of call that should disturb the claims of
what is closest to me on earth. Nor have you been forgotten, as you
will see,' as he gave her the letter.
The first thing she remarked was how differently the six years' priest
was rated from the deacon who had been hunted down to the country
parish. Mr. Fulmort reviewed the difficulty of finding a successor,
for his most trustworthy lves were all either engaged elsewhere,
or else ineligible on account of health, voice, or families. Fred
Somers was admirable as senior curate, but could not take the lead
where both familiarity with the place was needed and experience of
parsonic authority. Thus Clement Underwood, loving Whittingtonia and
beloved there, full of ardour and devotion, gifted with a fine voice,
facility of preaching, and musical talent, as well as a growing dignity
of presence and address, together with a strong and resolute temper,
powers of judgment trained under his brother, and a constitution
matured in pure country air to a considerable capacity and aptitude
for work, seemed to combine most of the requisites for a City parish.
'More especially,' wrote the Vicar, 'if your sister could be induced to
come with you. Her quickness, ready judgment, and especially her sense
of the absurd, are just what would be valuable. Mind, I don't think of
her as a worker, only as an Egeria to the clergy-house, and I can even
provide her with a grove, where my dear old friend Miss Charlecote, as
you may remember, did the like for us.'
He explained that Miss Charlecote now entirely resided at Hiltonbury
with his sister and her husband, and had made over her beautiful old
house to his disposal, not to be sold or broken up, but used as a
residence for some of the clergy or Church helpers. Was it possible
that Miss Underwood would come and live there with her brother, while
Fred Somers would act as prior to the clergy-house? Mr. Fulmort however
was most guarded in not pressing his plan, and aware of the possibility
of strong objections, marking his desire that Clement should not feel
himself bound by what must only be considered as a feeler, since his
work at Vale Leston was thoroughly valuable. Mr. Fulmort added that the
endowment of St. Matthew's, with four curates and sixteen choir boys
always in the clergy-house, was 600,[1] whereas the Rectory of Vale
Leston, needing only one assistant at the utmost, was now reckoned as
above 800.
'What do you wish, Clement?'
'Don't talk of what I wish.'
'Then what do you think right?'
'What is best for you and Gerald?' he answered, with the hardness of
tone that was only pain; 'you are my trust.'
'Never so as to fetter a priest from higher duties,' said Cherry.
'Suppose this was Albertstown.'
Somehow her odd tone of consternation was a pleasure to Clement; he
smiled and said, 'Never mind, that's not the question; though I suppose
this is a more perplexing one, as it leaves a choice, or the semblance
of one,' and he sighed.
'You know Dr. May said Gerald ought to have constant attention from a
London surgeon. Would the house be healthy for him? Do you know it?'
'O yes! We choir boys used often to be entertained there. We could play
at cricket in the garden, and thought it paradise. It is an island
of the old London before the fire, in a quiet street all warehouses;
nothing newer than Queen Anne's time; delightful to us, but I don't
know how it would seem to you after this place.'
'This place! I liked it when he was here, but now it is only a vast
desolation. Everything is that indeed; but you see, I never had roots
here, like him. What should you do with it?'
'I don't see why Bill Harewood should not take the living. He is
older than I was when first I came here; he makes good way with the
people--better than I do with many--and he ought to have a parish that
would leave him a margin of leisure--besides Robina.'
Cherry clapped her hands. 'Well done, Bobbie! She has actually earned
her promotion. Even you, reluctantly as it came out, allow that she is
cut out for a clergyman's wife.'
He smiled. 'Well, I allow that she is worth the most to the parish of
all of you, and that it would be a cruel pity to take her away.'
'And Bill will be twice the man, and half the March hare, with her,
instead of without her.'
'Yes. Granting married clergy, they are the very people for it.'
'That's right! Dear Bob! Good old Will! It is enough to decide us at
once after all their patience! They would have the Rectory, but how
about this house?'
'Probably John would rent it. What?'
'Only naughtiness! A little jealousy of Kester running rampant over
poor Gerald's house as if he were master and more.'
'Gerald will find out who is master only too soon.'
'Ah! he sometimes asks who this and that belongs to, poor boy, and why
they call him the young Squire. It may be well for him not to hear too
much of that, or to begin to lord it.'
'Besides, you would bring him down in summer, and if he spends his
holidays here, he would see as much of the place as boys ever do of
home.'
'Ah!' cried Cherry eagerly. 'We can have poor Bear to live with us. How
delightful!'
'A great consideration,' said Clement 'You really think you can stand
the City?'
'As well as any place! Oh, Clem! as long as you don't want to leave us
behind I am glad.'
'I was so much afraid of your sending me away alone that I begin to
fear you are making home too dear.'
'Nay,' with a sobbing laugh, 'if your Vicar told you to bring me, you
need not mind. I do believe those dingy streets are more to you than
all that cloister and river.'
'I can't help it, Cherry. I came here solely because my brother
wanted me, and am heartily thankful for it; but, as you say, I have
not rooted. We could not have his love from old association, and
comparatively only cared for it through him. No doubt there is much
that I love and prize, and any cure of souls must be most important;
but now that East Ewmouth is to be separated and Blackstone Gulley is
in a manner tamed, I can't get rid of the sense that it is too highly
paid and too easy a life for a strong man of thirty, good for nothing
but sheer work. Nor would he think it desertion. He told me on that
last day, when the Rectory was transferred, that the purpose was
fulfilled, and I need not be hindered.'
'Too little work! Yet you are often on the point of being overdone.'
'I have been, but that was from East Ewmouth and other things that are
over now. A curate there must be, because one can't be in two places
at once, but except at special times of pressure, the work is hardly
enough for two. It is just the thing for a man who has a brain and a
pen like Will's. I never saw anything more telling than his pamphlet on
godless education.'
'So we leave it to them.'
'Not so fast. I must be sure this consent is not the restlessness
of grief, Cherry. Besides, we must ascertain that John approves on
Gerald's account, and in the meantime, we had better say nothing to
Robina.'
The proposal was too advantageous to his family for John not to look
at it on all sides, indeed he would scarcely hear of it till he had
met Clement and Mr. Fulmort in Whittingtonia, and looked over the
house; but the inspection made him listen more favourably, and so did
an interview with Gerald's doctor, and a correspondence with Cherry.
Taking into account the child's incapacity for out-door sports, and
Cherry's artistic and literary tastes, he saw advantages in the
scheme. The Priory was too large for the reduced numbers, and all its
interests and enjoyments had hinged on its loving master; but Cherry's
London associations were disconnected from him, and the inducements
to cultivate her art would save it from being dropped for want of the
stimulus he had given; nor was the benefit of the family home for
Bernard to be by any means forgotten. To be sure, Wilmet believed that
Cherry could never be well or happy there, but then her rooms should
be kept intact for her return when Clement might betake himself to his
congeners in the clergy-house, and Wilmet was secular woman enough to
think 800 a year wasted on him and his subscriptions, when it might be
making Will and Robina happy.
So one spring afternoon, as Robina was trudging homewards, basket in
hand, from a distant hamlet, pausing on the topmost point of the bridge
to look at the swelling of the river, and the swirling eddies that
rushed out of sight, she heard herself hailed, and on the Ewmouth road
beheld a broad clerical undress hat, surmounting a black figure, with a
bag over his shoulder. To run down the bridge and meet in the middle of
a miry pool was the work of a very few seconds.
'Willie! How delightful! You're come for Easter?'
'I thought you were looking out for me.'
'Do you think I always am? for I didn't expect you. You said you were
going home first.'
'So I thought till yesterday evening, but I thought--here, give me
that.'
'You haven't a hand, unless you prefer it to me,' said Robina. 'No, you
can't sling it up with your bag. You aren't to be trusted. There's a
basin in it.'
'A regular goody basket. Eh, Bobbie, ain't you a born parson's wife?
You've never asked what brought me.'
'You've not heard of a school.'
'No. What do you think of a living?'
'Oh, Willie! And is it enough?'
'That's as people may think.'
'How much is it?'
'Nearly 800.'
'Bill! You don't mean it. There must be some drawback. Who offers it?'
'Oh! just a friend.'
'A Christchurch friend? A pupil?'
'The reverse. He's a Cambridge man, and has rather been my master.'
'Your master? Not the Dean of Minsterham. Didn't I hear something about
a chapter living?'
'Nothing that concerns us.'
'Do tell me, Will. You've got me on the tenterhooks. I'm sure there's
something against it. It's not St Matthew's.'
'St. Matthew's! They would about as soon give it to the Walrus and the
Carpenter.'
'I'm glad it is not that. What sort of a place is it? In the country?'
'Beautiful country, splendid church, freshly done up, tip-top schools
and all the rest of it, that a lazy dog like me might never have
hatched, but he may just manage to keep stirring.'
'Nonsense! you know better than that. What population?'
'Six hundred, or thereabouts.'
'Just the same as this. It is too good to be true. There must be some
great drawback to come. Let me hear it.'
'Well, if you will have it,' said William, with appalling gravity,
'it is much the same drawback as exists in the Russian Church, where
preferment goes by the petticoat. The fellow offers it to me on an
understanding you mayn't approve.'
'What?'
'That I should marry his sister.'
'Oh!' with equal gravity, 'did he really make that stipulation?'
'Not in so many words, but there's such a thing as an honourable
understanding.'
'And pray, what does the sister say?'
'That remains to be proved. What does she say? Come, darling Bird, had
you really no notion?'
'I knew Mr. Fulmort wanted Clement to take St Matthew's, but I did not
think he would.'
'He said he left me to tell you, but I did not think he could have kept
it so entirely back.'
'But what is to become of Cherry?'
Will told her the designs as far as they had been unfolded to him, and
her eyes glistened with tears.
'Dear Willie,' she said, 'it is not that I am not thankful and glad,
but it comes so suddenly after all these long years, and it is so like
turning them out.'
'Not if we set up in the Vicarage--Rectory--I beg its pardon. Besides,
they'll be down here pretty often, and I shall never feel like anything
but Clement's curate. It is the most wholesome thing for me, that his
mode of coming up to breathe will be running down here to take note of
my shortcomings.'
'As if you meant to short come.'
'I don't mean, but I shall--if ever man needed whipper-in. So you see
I've taken care to provide myself. Seriously, I don't think I should
ever have worked up this place as Clement has done, but having worked
under him, and with you all about me, I trust not to let it down. It is
too good for me, that's a fact; but then it is not too good for you.'
Robina was forced to hear, though she viewed her Will as far superior
to Clement, as indeed he was in intellect and largeness of mind, though
not in energy and power of work.
Earnestness and devotion were, as she well knew, deep and true in him,
though native indolence and carelessness were at continual strife with
them, and he was a man fitter for a small parish than a large one,
since study was his happiness, and he could make the results beneficial
to a wide circle, while Clement had no natural turn for books, or for
anything but downright practical ministerial labour.
The change could not be made quickly, William could not resign his
tutorship till the long vacation and Clement was to retain the
incumbency till the new church at East Ewmouth was consecrated and the
district separate, while an answer from Albertstown to Mr. Fulmort's
acceptance of the diocese must precede his resignation of St Matthew's.
So if restlessness had prompted Cherry's assent, she had time to find
it out. The outlook however seemed to lessen her sense of dreariness,
since it made her go through each sweet spring pleasure as if storing
up precious memories of him who had prized them all, and as if this
restored the power of feeling all things new. She talked freely and
affectionately of Robina's prospects, encouraging the girl who felt her
happiness rising out of the family sorrow, and grew quite shame-faced
about taking the measurements of the Rectory, which she was to have the
pleasure of furnishing out of her own savings. Little had been heard of
Lance since he had seen Fulbert off on his second voyage. Postal cards
and hurried notes kept up intercourse with Cherry and the Harewoods,
but chiefly on the Pursuivant's behoof, and when he had met John in
London, about the executorship, he was reported looking thin but well,
and intensely busy.
In effect, he had set himself to master and estimate his business,
sadly enough, but there had been hope in his brother's farewell letter,
and to patient Lance a very small spark sufficed for a long time.
He found himself fully capable of maintaining the level of the
Pursuivant. Not only did both Harewoods supply him with able writings,
but payment and circulation were such as to attract and secure other
contributors, and he, though he might not write fully up to the mark
of his more scholarly and better-read brother, had all the requisites
of an excellent editor, in trained facility, sagacity, common sense,
humour and power of arrangement. The paper showed no tokens of
declension, and the business flourished, Lance still spending part of
the day in the shop, and enjoying the intercourse with his friendly
customers all the more for the strong feeling they had shown for his
brother. His place as gentleman had long been established, and he could
always have had more society than he had time for. He was invited to
fill his brother's place in almost all his capacities as citizen of
Bexley, but to what could bind him permanently, he showed some doubt
about immediately pledging himself. Moreover, Mrs. Froggatt was anxious
to give up Marshlands to him 'whenever he should settle.'
By Lady-day he was able to make an estimate of his situation and
prospects, and having done this, he wrote to Dr. May, laying the
statement before him, and begging to be told whether there were any
insuperable objection to his presuming to declare his attachment to
Miss Gertrude May. The letter was just in the formal style for which
Felix used to laugh at himself, but as the Doctor said, when showing
it to Ethel, it was thoroughly manly and straightforward, without the
least palaver about his position.
'No, I think he feels that his brother has ennobled it, so that he
would be ashamed to apologize for it.'
'What will the child say? She has been drooping ever since poor Felix's
death.'
'Long before! She flags the moment you are out of sight. I hate to see
her without her little spirts of naughtiness, and my heart aches to
think I ever wished to see her softened.'
'Poor Daisy-bud! It says much for her that her heart should have gone
out to such a man as that. Heigh-ho! those were good old times, when
one disposed of one's daughters without so much as saying, "by your
leave, miss."'
'Should you ever have done it?'
'Well,' said the Doctor, not choosing to answer the question, 'you may
tell him to come for Easter. I suppose that is his only time. He would
have been wiser to wait a bit longer--may be till this foreign trip is
over--that is if the child goes, and I don't believe she will.'
The Mays themselves had had a winter of sorrow. That living death--for
it had long hardly been life--of poor little Margaret Rivers had come
to an end in February. It was scarcely to be mourned. The poor girl
had, since her conscience had awakened, grieved so bitterly over
every outbreak of her own unhappy temper, and had suffered so sadly
from depression of spirits, that the peace of her final decay had been
an untold blessing. Even her mother, when she thought of the dreary
lot of a sickly, suffering, almost deformed heiress, could not but
resign herself to feel that 'it was well with the child.' Her father,
however, who had been spared much realisation of the distress of body
and mind, was restlessly unhappy at the loss, and fancied he should
cure his wife's sore heart by taking her to Switzerland and the Tyrol;
and Flora, in the desire to make the journey a pleasure to somebody,
and noticing Gertrude's pale cheeks, proposed to take her. That whole
last year, ever since her Christmas at Vale Leston, Gertrude's whole
treatment of her poor little niece had been reversed; and she had
changed from the somewhat hard deportment to which young aunts are
prone, to a kindness which, being a late and unexpected boon, had been
valued by poor capricious Margaret beyond all the steady tenderness of
her grandfather and elder aunt. It had endeared Gertrude greatly to
Flora, and the benefit to the girl's spirits influenced her quite as
much as the advantage it would be to George to have some one to conduct
to the sights, which for his own part he did not care for.
Daisy herself gave no consent. 'To be lionised by George! Rather worse
than an excursion of Cook's,' she said; 'and fancy the evenings!'
'It would be a kindness to George and Flora,' said Ethel.
'You horrid creature! That's to set my conscience worrying.'
'At least, there would be the coming home again.'
'That's the way you look on travelling!' said Gertrude, laughing a
little, but returning to her weary attitude, and Ethel abstained from
persuasion. She had not sufficient experience of change of scene to
believe greatly in its advantages, and though she was in favour of the
project, it was rather with a view to the fresh start it would make
for her sister at home than with the belief that either pictures or
mountains could be enjoyed under George Rivers's lumbering escort. She
expected that poor Lancelot Underwood's attempt would precipitate the
decision, when, in answer to her brief note of invitation, he replied
that he would arrive on Easter Eve.
'That's all right,' quoth the Doctor. 'He knows better than to come
a-courting on Good Friday.'
The day was not, however, exempt from a visitor; Dr. and Mrs. Cheviot
were away for the holidays, and the Mays were the more surprised to
see Mr. Rupert Cheviot, with his dapper little umbrella, issue from
the professor's door to join them on their way to church. Except that
they would have preferred not to talk at all on such a day, there
was no fault to find with him; he was subdued and proper behaved,
and had a good deal to say about Ammergau. He had not been so much
at Stoneborough within the last few months, and Ethel suspected
that he had been warned by Tom to give his sister time to recover
from her winter's grief. To her, he was amusing, he was a candid,
lively, pleasant person, and rated her more highly than she was used
to from her sister's lovers, and seldom came in her way without
holding a lively tournament in the language of jest, but with a good
deal of earnest in it, and she saw enough stuff in him to make his
self-complacency not so obnoxious to her as it was to her juniors.
She was not sorry that Gertrude's aversion to him was so strong, but
she thought it rather instinctive than reasonable. He was a man whose
opinions and disposition would right themselves in process of time,
but the having Daisy bound to him during the process was quite another
thing.
So when Gertrude proposed walking to Abbotstoke Church in the afternoon
she readily agreed, perceiving that it was far more because Cocksmoor
was too obvious a resort than for the sake either of Flora, flowers for
decoration, or even of Dickie, who could not be refused to his uncle
for this sorrowful holiday.
And when George Rivers returned to the charge, and again promised
to show the Alps through the Mont Cenis tunnel, Gertrude
accepted--accepted definitively! Yes, she would go, and she talked fast
and eagerly of the pleasures she anticipated.
But when walking home with Ethel, she did not utter one voluntary word.
'What time did you say young Underwood was coming?' asked the Doctor at
breakfast next morning.
'He did not say the time,' said Ethel.
'Which?' asked Gertrude.
'Lancelot,' said Ethel, who had put off the announcement in hopes of
doing it naturally till she had grown absolutely nervous about it.
'Not for advice?' in a startled voice.
'Can no one come here but for advice?'
'He was ill last year.'
'Aye,' muttered the Doctor, 'and got advice that he has taken pretty
effectually.'
Whereupon Ethel, feeling horribly and ridiculously conscious, jumped up
and talked of Cocksmoor decorations. Gertrude had insisted on making
them up at Cocksmoor instead of at home. It would be a little further
out of reach of 'the enemy,' and in the parsonage the sisters and
Richard worked unmolested all the morning, but in the afternoon, while
they were putting up their wreaths, there drove up to the lych-gate
Mrs. Thomas May in her donkey chair, bringing her choice manufacture
of crosses and devices, escorted by her sister Ella Ward and Rupert
Cheviot. It was too cold and damp for her to venture into church, but
Richard hastened out to beguile her into his parlour, and refresh her
with tea, while Mr. Cheviot helped to carry in her contributions, the
very crown and glory of the whole, looking about with the critical
suggestive patronage of a man who had seen the world, and making
recommendations which Ella eagerly seconded, and Ethel did not
disapprove, but Gertrude combatted vehemently: 'It had never been so!
Richard would not like it!' and out she hurried to appeal to him and
call him to the rescue.
Rupert Cheviot moved to the door, perhaps in hopes of mitigating her,
but as she reached the lych-gate, a young man in deep black came up on
the other side, and their hands met with something in the manner that
made Mr. Cheviot turn to Ella Ward and ask, 'Who is that fellow?'
'That? Oh! one of the Underwoods. The one in the business.'
'What business?'
'Oh! he's a printer, a bookseller rather. Those Underwoods pretend to
be county people, but they are nothing really but tradesmen.'
'Mr. Cheviot is not so behindhand with the world as to think that a
reproach,' said Ethel, as she caught the words, while coming forward,
and over her spectacles she gave Ella one of the repressive glances
which the young lady felt in her backbone. She was not at all a bad
sort of girl, but the ingrain likeness to her brother Henry grew with
her growth, and she had just come to the age when to get any sort of
notice from any young gentleman was the prime object of her desires.
Rupert Cheviot, of course, at Ethel's words went forward, and on being
introduced to Mr. Lancelot Underwood, shook hands with him with rather
unnecessary empressement.
Gertrude at once appealed to Lance's taste, 'Was it not the thing to
have the festoons hanging loose and natural, not in stiff lines?'
'It is our way at St. Oswald's,' said Lance, 'but at Vale Leston
Clement holds to following the architectural lines.'
'Ah! Vale Leston. Is not that a remarkable specimen of the later Early
Pointed? I must run over some day and see it.'
'It is a very fine tower. Aren't there plenty of owls' nests in it?'
said Gertrude, with a perfectly grave voice, but which brought an odd
thrill of mingled amusement, pleasure, and pain, as the conviction
crossed him that this was the rival owl of the academy, and he
recognised the likeness to the photograph. Perhaps Gertrude was only
too strongly reminded of Cherry's sketch of himself, for between grief,
hard work, and anxiety, he was very thin-cheeked and large eyed, and
she was by no means clear that he had not come to consult her father
professionally, and that the odd answer she had received in the morning
had not been an evasion.
Richard came in with a casting vote in favour of the architectural
style, at which Gertrude shrugged her shoulders but submitted. Ere long
a messenger appeared with the candlesticks adorned by Mrs. May, and a
message that she could not stay later; and Richard, going to see after
her, brought back her urgent desire that Gertrude would return at the
same time. Tom said she had not been strong, and must not be out after
sunset.
'O, I dare say,' said Gertrude.
'There's no more than I can easily finish alone,' said Richard.
'Indeed! Look at the font!'
'The wreaths are all ready. She really ought not to stay,' he added
to Ethel; 'you know there is always a sudden chill when you come down
the hill late, and as Ave says, the child is not in health to take
liberties.'
Ethel went up to Gertrude and whispered, 'We must give in, Daisy, we
shall have a fuss if we don't.'
She had almost said she did not care, but it was in church, and she
abstained, only adding, 'You'll come too.'
Ethel assented, though it was the ruin of the quiet Easter Eventide
walk her father must have meant them to have when he sent Lance to
meet them there. All that could be done was to keep together. In
general Rupert Cheviot was content to get up a discussion with the
elder sister, but he must have scented a rival, for whether Gertrude
walked fast or slow, she still found him by her side, preventing all
the inquiries she was burning to make about Geraldine, and the reported
changes, things that could not brook discussion before a stranger. She
did manage, while Rupert was tucking in a loosened fold of Averil's
cloak, to say, 'I suppose Geraldine has no picture for the exhibition
this year. She has not finished her Academies.'
'No. They are nearly done, but she has not touched them for a long
time now. There is a very pretty little group of some of the village
children that she did last summer, but I don't think she will send it
up.'
'What became of the Maid of Lorn?'
'Of course, Lady Caergwent bought it.'
There Rupert Cheviot swooped down. 'Are you any relation of Miss
Underwood who painted that capital likeness of Lady Caergwent? Then
I congratulate you. But is it not a great pity she does not paint in
oils? There is so much more satisfaction in them.'
And no more was possible than walking five abreast, close in the rear
of the donkey chair; a desultory, almost mechanical skirmish going on
between Ethel and Rupert Cheviot, interspersed with occasional pert
remarks from Ella and tart ones from Gertrude.
When presently Rupert began to talk of some lectures which were to be
given in May, she made quick answer, 'I shan't be here. I am going
abroad with the Riverses.'
This of course started the experienced vacation tourist, an Alpine
clubbist, into all kinds of counsels and inquiries, evidently with a
view to meeting the party on their route; but though Gertrude took care
to assure him that she should be at home long before his free time, the
tidings of her intended journey were, as Ethel could hear, in his very
footsteps, reducing Lance to the brink of despair.
He had not recovered it when they came home, and was besides in the
embarrassed state of a man who had made his purpose only too well known
to the spectators; but that quality which had been audacity in his
boyish days, enabled him to revive and return free and grateful answers
to Dr. May's inquiries into the family plans and welfare.
But when the evening meals in the two houses were over there was
nothing to prevent Tom May and his friend from strolling up the garden
to the elder house, whence sounds of music were audible.
It was from the 'Messiah,' for Dr. May had asked for 'He was despised
and rejected of men,' unwitting that a Sunday evening a year and a
quarter ago it had rung on Gertrude's ears in a voice that, in such a
passage as this, Lance's reproduced with startling, thrilling exactness.
Gertrude sat in a dark corner, with streaming eyes and heaving sobs.
It was almost more than she could bear, till her tears were dried by
vexation at hearing a connoisseur kind of compliment, while Dr. May
observed, 'I did not know what an instrument it was you thought you
were losing when you asked me about it, Lance.'
'I have seldom heard it surpassed, except by first professionals!' said
Mr. Cheviot. 'May I ask what teaching you had?'
'I was a choir boy at Minsterham,' said Lance, in his straightforward
way.
'Oh! I did not know cathedrals gave such advantages. Ah! I see you have
"My Queen" here, Gertrude. May we not have it?'
It would have been an utter impossibility even if it had not been as
the Doctor said, speaking up for her. 'We do not have that style of
thing this week.'
'Quite right, sir; one forgets.'
What! was he going to patronise Dr. May? And then he began to talk of
the choruses at Ammergau.
'I do believe,' exclaimed Gertrude, as she parted with her sister at
night, 'that he has primed himself with it on purpose.'
'I think he was really impressed there, and that it has done him good.'
'I believe you have a turn for him! I should not mind if he would only
not come here bothering poor Lance. How worn he looks! Mind, Ethel,
you tell me if Papa says anything about him. I could not bear for poor
Geraldine to have any more troubles.'
'Very well,' said Ethel, 'but I do not think there is anything amiss
with his health.'
'He has with his spirits though, and spirits tell on health; his
especially. Now, Ethel, I know Rupert Cheviot always was a hero of
yours.'
'A most unjustifiable interpretation of my not hating the poor man as
much as you do,' said Ethel, much amused.
'I will say for him you are the one person he never patronizes.
But I want you to look at the contrast, Ethel, between the two
owls--simplicity and self-complacency; and when one really has such a
splendid talent.'
'Yes, a double first class man,' said Ethel, in wilful mischief,
exceedingly tickled at Lance's unconscious auxiliary, though sorry for
him.
'Who cares for a first class?' exclaimed contemptuous Daisy. 'It only
makes people intolerable.'
Nevertheless Lance did not spend by any means the happy Easter Sunday
he had figured to himself, and many times felt that he would have done
better to have deferred the crisis of his hopes and anxieties till
the great feast day was at an end. For the May family were beset by
Rupert Cheviot from morning till night, and Lance was tormented at
moments when he most desired to free himself from the whole subject, by
instinctive perception of his rivalry, and sense of the small chance
that he, the half-educated tradesman, could have beside the brilliant,
successful scholar, in a gentleman's position, and rising fast.
That Gertrude was cross was plain enough, and much more so to the Owl
of the Academy than to the Owl of the Church tower; but Lance was
sufficiently aware of the wayward nature of the damsel to ascribe
her contradictoriness to the rampant coyness of inclination, and her
civility to himself to kindness to her father's guest, Felix's brother
and a manifest inferior, like the chemist at Ewmouth. Then her foreign
tour was so often mentioned that it seemed to him that her father
must have intended it as a diversion after all the agitations she had
undergone, and that his coming had only been encouraged in order to put
an end to the whole affair, and dispose of him and his presumption as
soon as possible. So that all the kindness he received from the Doctor
and Ethel only went for compassion, and he tossed about all night--true
owl as he was for sleeplessness--meditating on the coming death-blow
to his hopes, and whether it would be better to resign them in a
conference with her father, or to put his fate to the touch in person,
since he had gone so far that he could not hang back and do nothing.
The wan heavy-eyed countenance that came down in the morning moved
the Doctor to the observation to his elder daughter, 'Daisy has got a
fellow there more finely strung than most men. I hope she will comport
herself accordingly. Tantrums won't do with that sort of organization.'
Ethel most decidedly put herself out of the way that morning, resolved
not to make the holiday serve as a plea from absenting herself from the
Monday care she bestowed on sundry charities, and declining the aid
Gertrude offered, as a refuge from possible inroads from the Cheviot.
'You had better not waste your opportunities,' said Ethel; 'I dare say
Mr. Underwood would show you the way through that thing of Mozart's
that you have been despairing over.'
'O no, Ethel,' with a glance at the pale face, but it suddenly grew
vividly bright as Lance said, 'If you are so kind as to be thinking of
my headache, I do assure you it is nothing at all--just what this would
be the best cure for.'
'Are you sure?' asked Gertrude solicitously.
'Quite,' he said, smiling. 'I should make no difference at all at home.
It is the sort that is defeated by taking no notice of them; and music,
and with you----'
'Would drive such ears as yours distracted, I should think,' said
Gertrude, nevertheless consenting. 'You see I have tried to follow
your advice, but what I have never heard, and have no one to interpret,
becomes a mere wilderness to me.'
Lance knew that in his native language of melody he should, birdlike,
win courage, but hardly was his finger on the keys before Daisy leapt
up in a kind of fury. 'There's that eternal Owl coming down the garden!
Come this way,' and she rushed away, beckoning him to follow her into
the schoolroom. 'There, the windows look out the other way! It is too
intolerable to be taken in the rear! I'll not stand it any longer! The
Moss troopers in the morning indeed!'
Both were full of that odd sort of exhilaration always inspired by
hide and seek with a visitor, and Lance looked about and recognised
the room. 'I have been here before,' he said, 'when you showed me your
aquarium.'
'Ah! the Daisiana. You were the hero of that watery adventure, though
we little thought that small boy Charlie was to come forth in such
colours! What an age ago it seems! I should like to see the Kitten's
tail again.'
'Should you? I am sure Cherry would manage it! It would be----'
'Only too full of recollections,' said Gertrude, with a little shudder.
'It was the first time I ever saw----'
Instead of answering, Lance took a miniature from his breast and put
it into her hand. She drew in her breath with a gasp. 'How beautiful!'
she said, and gazed on through one of the tear mists that can almost
convert a portrait into a presence. It was a long time before she said,
'This is better than the first.'
'Each that Cherry has finished has brought out some fresh expression.
You like it?'
'O, so much!'
'Will you keep it?'
'She was only to do one for each of you.'
'Don't you remember what he called you?'
Gertrude held the picture to her lips for a moment, wiped a tear from
the glass and said, 'That dear Cherry hasn't been doing it for me.'
'N-no, not exactly.'
'Then it is yours! Oh! that is not right. Only let me have a
photograph.'
'I had rather you kept this.'
'I could not! I must not! I ought not,' putting it from her like a
temptation.
'Nay, it is yours by every right. By that which makes it unspeakably
precious to me to give you my very best and dearest, and by a better
right of your own, of affection,' he said, eagerly.
She gave a little cry.
'Don't start,' he said. 'Perhaps I ought not to have said so, but when
one watches with feelings such as mine, one sees----.'
She leant back, hiding her face, and crying quietly but unreservedly.
'If he had been like most men,' said Lance, 'if he had not made his
whole life a sacrifice and had ever let himself out, I fully believe he
would have given you the right. I felt and knew he had never been so
near caring for any one.'
She looked up with glowing face, and moist eyes, and tried to say
something, but could only utter 'No! It would be too--too much to dare
to think so.'
And as she thought of that interview, she wept more than before, though
they were scarcely sad tears. Lance longed for the right to soothe her,
but only durst lay his hand on the back of her chair. 'If anything
could make you more dear to me,' he said, bending over her, 'it would
be this! Nobody else so revered that great heart. I thought I knew him
best, but every day at Bexley brings up so many tokens of what he was
that I seem to have only known him by half.'
'Tell me.'
And Lance told many an instance of the doings of Felix's right hand
unknown to his left, and she listened with all her soul. It was more
than half an hour before she said, 'Then are you all alone?'
'With Mrs. Froggatt for the present, but I have decided on nothing
permanently. My dear brother told me I need not hold on, nor do I think
I can without a ray of hope.'
'What would you do?' she said, a thrill or two having half but
indefinitely revealed to her his drift.
'I don't know yet! Nor care! Most likely, try what music in Germany or
Italy would do for me.'
'O, don't go!' cried Gertrude, 'don't!'
'Do you tell me not?'
'I don't know, but oh! my heart has ached, ached, ached, all this time,
and somehow it aches rather less when you are here!'
'Dearest!' he exclaimed.
'Stay,' she said, pushing back her hair, and looking scared. 'I don't
think it fair. You know I never could, if--if-----.'
'Of course not; I understand that,' said Lance; 'but is not that what I
love you ten thousand times more for?'
'But I shall always care most for him!'
'Yes, yes, I know you must; but now I know that some day you may care a
little for me, I can wait patiently, any time you please.'
'And not hate it all, nor go away?'
'Never, while you bid me stay.'
He broke off as steps came along the passage, and a maid's knock, and
'Mr. Rupert Cheviot is in the drawing-room, ma'am.'
'Miss May is out,' said Gertrude emphatically.
The maid had sentiment enough to abstain from saying he had asked for
both sisters, but the next moment she returned to say he had asked for
Miss Gertrude.
'Tell him I am particularly engaged,' she said, leaping up indignantly.
'Aye!' she exclaimed, 'I will be delivered from that prig of Tom's. He
shall never pester me more.'
'There is an effectual way of preventing that,' said Lance, with a
lurking smile.
'Well, I suppose it must come to that sooner or later, and I do trust
you not to tease and bother.'
'I will strive to make your feeling the rule, not of mine, but of my
demonstration of it,' said Lance, tingling all over with suppressed
ecstasy; 'that is, as far as I can help.'
'I can't understand your liking it! An old, dry, used-up heart!'
'But on whom? I am but too content with----'
A rapid booted tread was at the door; it was hastily opened. 'Gertrude,
what's the meaning?' said the professor. 'Oh! I beg your pardon, Mr.
Underwood.' This with withering politeness, and the door was shut
again.
'He is going to Papa,' Gertrude laughed, with her natural mischievous
triumph; then, laying her hand on Lance's arm, she exclaimed, 'Now,
whatever you do, promise me not to be bullied into giving up the shop;'
then, lowering her tone to its former tenderness, 'What he could do is
good enough for any one.'
'So I feel,' said Lance, 'though I could drop it, if you wished.
My personal share in the retail trade I mean, of course, not the
editorship, for that is my sheet-anchor.'
'The Pursuivant! I thought I never could touch it again.'
'His poor Pur,' repeated Lance. 'I must show you this note, though I
am ashamed. And he bade me give you this;' as from the depths of a
business-like pocket-book he extracted an envelope, and from it the
note and dried piece of myrtle. She greeted it with a little cry, and
fresh tears. 'Ah! he said you would remember,' said Lance.
'Remember! I should think I did! Didn't he tell you?'
'I know nothing but what he wrote here. He left this for me to have,
after it was all over.'
'I see! I see! O, I am glad you did not give it me at first. Dear, dear
thing! Now I know! That day when he came here he made me gather it for
him, and told me he had one great wish, and I was to remember it when I
saw this.'
'And that great wish?' It was an odd sort of wet-eyed smile of Lance's,
but then she had rested her head against him. 'Did you know it?'
'I don't know. It was the day I was half wild with misery and a strange
sort of gladness together, only one could not break out with his calm
eye on one--the day he came here, and Papa told him what was the matter
with him. Then he sat with me, and he said things to me that made me
feel as I had never done before. He didn't mean it, I know, for it was
all telling me how it was with him, and how, if he were well, he never
could have thought in that way of any one. It just made me feel that
his saying it to me showed----'
'Showed what might have been,' said Lance. 'Yes, it was more than
direct words would have been from any one else.'
'And he kept on mixing in things about you, and what you had been to
him, but I wouldn't see what he was driving at; for, Lance, I must
tell you now it did make me feel to love--love him really--and not be
ashamed; if he thought me worth telling all that--and it was so nice
to be able, however it was to end, that I did not want to do anything
else, and I couldn't bear the sound of your name then, though when I
remember that look, and that wish, and see the spray of myrtle, Lance,
I must have had you if you had been--as bad as Rupert Cheviot himself.'
But she actually did lift up her face with a look that allowed him
to bend down and kiss it, as he said, 'See, he only told me to give
it you, when--not on those terms. Though you are doubly precious,
because I shall ever feel you to be his gift.'
She had certainly accepted infinitely more than he could have dared to
anticipate from her outset, and now she was perhaps glad of the respite
afforded by reading the letter that he had put into her hand, and which
lasted till again came steps.
'Papa this time,' she whispered, as he opened the door, calling,
'Ethel, here's Tom in a--Hollo, I thought you were in the drawing-room.'
'Don't go,' they cried with one voice, and Gertrude, saying, 'May I? I
must!' put Felix's letter into his hand.
He pushed up his spectacles to read it, but he could not do so
dry-eyed, and Lance turned aside blushing and embarrassed.
'Dear fellow!' he exclaimed. 'Well--that's a pretty good testimonial to
bring in your hand, Lance.'
'You must not believe half of that, sir,' said Lance huskily.
'Eh, Daisy, mus'n't I? And pray what am I to say to Tom about your
shocking behaviour in denying yourself to Mary's brother-in-law? Music
lessons have been dangerous things ever since the gamut of Hortensio.'
'May I? He knows!' was Lance's eager question to Gertrude, as he took
her hand and looked up mutely, but with lustrous eyes, to the Doctor.
'So you have made it right, children. There, then, Lancelot Underwood,
you have got my youngest darling, and I can tell you I never made one
of them over with greater confidence and comfort. If we have spoilt our
most motherless one, you know what that is, and there's good stuff in
her too. Indeed, I never thought so well of the chit before.'
'I'm sure I didn't,' said the chit herself dreamily, causing them both
to smile, and Lance to mutter something inarticulately foolish and
happy, but the clang of the dinner-bell startled them, and they sprang
away to their rooms during the five minutes' law; while Ethel, coming
in from the street, met her father in the hall, smiling unutterable
things. 'No!' she exclaimed. 'You don't mean it! I didn't think she
could so soon!'
'I fancy Lance may thank Tom and his great Rupert for that.'
'He did worry her intolerably! Oh! papa, I trust it is no mistake.'
'I think not, Ethel. Once accepted, the warm living outcome of
affection cannot fail to be infinitely better than the dream she has
been brooding over so long, and as saint-worship it will hurt neither
of them. Ah well! I should have liked the other to be one of us, but
it was not to be. He was the making of our Daisy, and this one is his
equal in all but what age only can give.'
'Ah! I always wished to see Daisy in love,' said Ethel, rather as if
the wish had recoiled upon her.
'What's to be done now? There's the Grange carriage,' exclaimed the
Doctor.
Yes, Flora, George, and Dickie, all had driven in to lunch at the
early dinner, and to face those cheeks whose glow no cold water could
moderate, those eyes that shone strangely under downcast lids.
In fact, Mr. Rivers had been so much pleased by Gertrude's consent to
the Swiss expedition that he had given his wife no peace till she had
come to arrange it. Gertrude was taken aback. 'Oh dear!' she exclaimed,
'I had forgotten all about it.'
'Forgotten!' Poor Mr. Rivers looked at her with all the amazement and
reproach his lustreless black eyes could express.
'I remember now, George,' she faltered, colouring unreasonably; 'it was
very kind.'
'But you promised, Daisy,'
'We will talk it over, George,' said her father, coming to her rescue,
as in her increasing softness she looked down convicted. 'You see, I
have not been consulted.'
George took this in earnest, and lumbered into an apology, while Dickie
rather unrestrainedly laughed, and said, 'Grandpapa, when does Aunt
Daisy consult you?'
'When she has made up her mind,' said the Doctor, with a glance at her.
But Daisy would at that moment have been thankful enough to consult
him. True, the sentiment she had felt before had scarcely been love,
so repressed and undeveloped had it been; and the flood of bliss, the
wonderful sense of affection that had mastered her, was something
entirely unlike the slow, measured way in which, even at the first
moment of her half-consent, she had fancied yielding to Lance. In this
one half-hour he had acquired a place with her so entirely independent
of his being Felix's brother, nay, so substantially dearer than Felix
himself, that she was half ashamed of her present self, half shocked at
having called her former feelings by the name of love, and wholly and
foolishly in despair at the notion of a six weeks' tour away from Lance.
Thus Ethel found her, when, on the break up of the dinner, she stole a
few moments of consultation with the two young lovers before following
her father and the Riverses to the drawing-room.
'Oh! Ethel, what shall I do?' Daisy was saying with tears in her eyes.
'Isn't it a judgment on me for ever saying I would go! I only did it
because that Rupert baited me so, and I was so miserable I was ready to
go anywhere out of his way.'
'But is it not a pity you should not go?' said Lance.
'What, you?'
'You know I cannot be much away from Bexley, so it would not make much
difference that way,' he said, blushing; 'and I am afraid you will have
to lead a very humdrum life; so had you not better see a little of the
world?'
'I shall hate it all. Oh! Ethel, get me off! Things like this are acts
of oblivion, you know.'
'I certainly would if it were for your pleasure,' said Ethel,
thoughtfully; 'but you see this is the first thing that has seemed to
do poor George Rivers any good.'
'And,' said Lance, affectionately, 'surely, dearest, it can do our
happiness no harm to try to lend a little of it to others.'
'Ethel!' she cried out, 'I do believe he is going to make me good.
There! I give in; I'll go, and not be more a victim than I can help.'
'Lance,' said Ethel, 'by-the-by, I've never congratulated you. Just
tell me--suppose you were asked to go too, could you?'
He considered a moment, shutting his eyes as the brightened face looked
up to him. 'I don't like to say no,' he answered; 'it is an immense
temptation, but there is nobody to take my place on the spur of the
moment, and at this time of year too. Indeed, if I went now, besides
upsetting everything, it might hinder me from getting a holiday later,
when we might want it more,' he added, crimsoning.
'I see,' said Ethel. 'Do you know, Daisy, I've a great mind to go
instead of you.'
'O you old darling duck of an Ethel! I should as soon have thought of
asking the gate-post. But if you would! Oh! wouldn't I take good care
of Papa.'
'Yes, I think you would, Daisy, and it is my last chance, you see. I
believe I shall do as well for George to lionize.'
'And be a dozen times better for Flora--and write such letters!'
'So here goes.'
'Now, Lancelot, if you don't delight in that Ethel of mine beyond
every other creature--I suppose, for human nature's sake, I must let
Cherry come first, but if I thought you would snub her like Charles,
or patronise her like George, or even be hail fellow well met with her
like Hector, I'd never let you into the family! Now--' as signs of
clearing the dinner became evident--'I'll get my hat: there's no place
to sit in in the house.'
Ethel's proposition was received with rapture.
George and Flora had just been informed by the Doctor how the case
stood. They had been far too much absorbed in their own sorrows to mark
the course of Daisy's feelings, but Flora had seen enough at luncheon
to be prepared for the disclosure. Nobody could like his position,
and she did not pretend to do so; but she saw it was of no use to
expostulate, and abstained from letting her husband perceive, as she
did, how entirely that of a tradesman it was.
'I am sorry it was not Rupert Cheviot,' was all she said, 'and very
sorry not to take Daisy with us; but it is no use to coerce her, even
if one could. She would be no good now.'
So Ethel was the more warmly accepted. Even the Doctor was happier
that Flora should have her sister with her, and liked the notion of a
tte--tte with his Daisy ere she was transplanted; and as to Flora,
her gratitude on her own and her husband's account knew no bounds.
'Dear, dear old Ethel!' she said; 'such a life-long sister as you,
bearing with one, and forgiving one through all, is as sweet and
precious a relationship as almost any the world has to give!'
[Footnote 1: To this it had been raised from the original 250l.
partly by the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and partly by Mr. Fulmort's
brother and Miss Charlecote. (author)]
CONCLUSION.
'Now for the double wedding!' said Mother Constance, as one September
evening the Reverend Charles Audley entered the Superior's room in the
temporary daughter-house at East Ewmouth.
'What should an old blind Australian know of gay weddings?'
'Don't you know that to hear of mundane festivities is the delight of
convents?'
'The festivities were to no great extent.'
'Of course not, but you must begin at the beginning, for I lost all
knowledge of everybody and thing that had not got small-pox.'
For the malady had been raging in a town at the other end of England,
and the special hospital where she and her staff had done service had
only just closed, and quarantine was over, so that she could return.
'Which is the beginning?'
'Mine are only confused lights since Lance brought his Daisy to see me
on their way to the sands by St. Kitt's Head. What a fresh pleasant
face it is! and with a spice of originality in it, too.'
'Commend me to the elder sister's. Leonard Ward had prepared me for it,
when I met him circulating among the unhappy deported Melanesians in
Queensland. I believe she was the making of him, and a noble work he
is.'
'Come, I can't let you go back to the Antipodes. Miss May was abroad
at that time, and plans were not in the least fixed, only that Lance
should not give up the retail business.'
'No, he said very justly, that if he did so, Mrs. Lamb would never
be contented without her husband doing the same, and that would be
destruction. When I went down to the S.P.G. meeting at Bexley, I saw
a good deal how the land lay, and found that all the neighbours were
quite ready to visit Lance's wife, and she will live at Marshlands in a
very different style from the old times we remember. I am afraid Mrs.
Lamb will be a trial, but she is prepared for that.'
'It was an excellent plan to have the weddings together at
Stoneborough. They could hardly have borne another here.'
'No. There was a proposal that Will and Robina should be married at
Minsterham, but they rather shrank from that, and the De la Poers wrote
urgently to persuade her to have the wedding at Repworth, but she saw
he disliked it, and then Miss May came forward and undertook to manage
it all, "being inured to such affairs," as she put it; but there was
an old promise in an unguarded moment that all their young Ladyships
should be bridesmaids, and they held to it: so Lord and Lady De la Poer
brought a bevy of daughters to the Swan at Stoneborough, and you had
better be prepared, for they are coming to see Vale Leston to-morrow,
and probably will come on here. Nice people, exceedingly fond of
Robina. I never saw such loads of wedding presents. Lady Caergwent
gives a great Russian samovar, labelled for "school feasts."'
'I suppose Fernan--I beg his pardon, Mr. Travis Underwood--did not give
another diamond bouquet.'
'No. The common sense keeping he has got into showed itself in the
choice of all the household plate, just the same, for each of the
couples.'
'And Angela was not there, I know. Our Mother wrote to me that the poor
child was so distressed at the notion of going that as they did not
make a point of it, she thought it better not to send her. I think she
will soon be allowed to become a postulant. It seems evidently the life
she needs. But who were Miss May's bridesmaids?'
'She set her face against any but her sister and Geraldine--would hear
of no one else, though Cherry had always avoided it before. They called
themselves the elderly bridesmaids. What! does the conventual mind
require to know what they wore? Not the same as Robina's, who had white
and blue ribbons; but they were in--what do you call it?--a Frenchified
name for some kind of purple.'
'Mauve?'
'Yes, mauve with white fixings; very becoming to Cherry.'
'Who married them?'
'It was a joint performance of Mr. Wilmot, Richard May, and myself, but
we had a characteristic hitch. They gave my couple the first turn, and
when I held out the book for the ring, my bridegroom began fumbling in
his pocket and reddening up to the roots of his red hair, while poor
Robina's eyes grew rounder and rounder under her veil, and Clement rose
taller and taller behind her, looking as if just cause or impediment
had arisen, and he only wished he had not been commanded to hold his
peace.'
'Did you marry them with the key of the door?'
'Not exactly--Lance's long hand came in between with the ring in his
palm.'
'Only one between the two couples?'
'No, Bill had asked Lance to get both together, and had never claimed
his own. It was a fine incident to tease him about, but he says he has
his memory made fast to him now for ever. After all, Lance gave him the
wrong one, and the brides had to change afterwards.'
'So they were married with each other's rings?'
'Yes, and I don't think they much regret it.'
'Where are they gone?'
'To see little Stella in her glory, and the other two are bound to a
great Rhenish musical festival, and to hear the Freiburg and Lucerne
organs. They went off together in the same railway carriage, and were
only to part in London. The whole affair was as quiet as possible. I
am glad it was at Stoneborough. Dr. May filled the place that neither
Clement nor Harewood could have borne to take.'
'And you have not told me of Cherry or Clement.'
'You will see them to-morrow, and I think you will be satisfied about
Cherry. The wrench last July was dreadful; both she and Clement say
that they could never have made up their minds to it if they had known
the grief it would cause in the village, and the partings they would
undergo, but it has certainly been good for her. She looks well, and
she says that though a little while ago she felt as if she had nothing
to hope or fear, a month of Whittingtonia has shown her enough to
engross a hundred lifetimes.'
'And little Gerald?'
'He walks better, and he is exceedingly happy at Stoneborough. Dickie
May, the Archdeacon's son, you know, a fine fellow of fourteen, is so
kind to him, teaches him to make models, and I fancy has secured that
admiration little boys pay to big ones. They say the poor little fellow
will probably outgrow his weakness and do well in the end, but that he
must be kept at home for a good many years.'
'At which I suppose Cherry cannot repine.'
'No; he is her delight; and with Bernard to give the element of manhood
and spirit, I don't think he will be spoilt, for Clement is sure to
be strict enough. I never saw any one more improved than Bernard,
by-the-by; he is grown into a reasonable being, and as devoted and
attentive to Cherry as they all are. I am sure she is happier even now
than she ever thought to be again! There was as much smile as tear when
she told me that she was coming to see Felix and Theodore to-morrow,
and to admire Wilmet in the Priory. She is carrying on a gleam from the
past sunshine of her life.'
'She is learning to pleurer son Albert gament,' said Mother
Constance. 'So we must when the pillars of our joy are taken from us
here. And sooner or later we can do so, if we can believe of them that
they have become pillars that shall never be removed, with the new Name
written upon them, in the House of the Lord above.'
